















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  
CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 

(PR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND), 
Project Team Leader; Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR), Project Team Co-leader; Héctor 
Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González 
(VPC/FMP); Jose Antonio Mejía Guerra (IFD/ICS); Alejandro Quijada (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo 
Tello (VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Carolina Vera 
(CSC/CPR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 8 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................. 9 

A. Financing instruments .................................................................................. 9 
B. Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 10 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 10 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 11 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 12 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Project economic analysis 

2. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) 

3. Program Operating Regulations 

4. Census and surveys technical report 

5. Public consultation with data users and producers 

6. Public consultation with National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI) 

7. Bibliography 

8. Sociocultural analysis 

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-35
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-33
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AWP Annual work plan 
CAA Consejo Asesor Agrario [Agricultural Advisory Council] 
CAN Censo Agrario Nacional [National Agricultural Census] 
DCEA Dirección de Censos y Estadísticas Agropecuarias [Office of 

Agricultural Censuses and Statistics] 
DGEEC Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas, y Censos [Bureau of 

Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Bureau of Planning] 
DINCAP Dirección Nacional de Coordinación y Administración de Proyectos 

[National Office of Project Coordination and Administration] 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
MAG Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
OC Ordinary Capital 
ONPI  Organización Nacional de los Pueblos Indígenas [National Organization 

of Indigenous Peoples] 
PDA Personal digital assistant 
PEU Program execution unit 
SCSP Sistema de Contrataciones del Sector Público [Public Sector 

Procurement System] 
SICP  Sistema de Información de Contrataciones Públicas  

[Public Procurement Information System] 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
WAL  Weighted average life 
WCA World Programme for the Census of Agriculture 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

PARAGUAY 
PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  

CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 
(PR-L1147) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: Republic of Paraguay, acting through the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital (OC): 15 million 100% 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15 million 100% 

Weighted average life (WAL) 15.25 years(d) 

Currency of approval: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital  

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public and 
private stakeholders. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds:  

(i) The program execution unit has been established on the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, 
to the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (see paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual execution conditions: 

The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions on environmental, social, health, and safety matters identified 
in the legal requirements section of the environmental and social management report (ESMR), including Annex B. 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original WAL of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original WAL may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 
(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Agriculture is a key sector of the Paraguayan economy. In the period 2004-2016, it 
generated an annual average of 25% of GDP, and 30% of jobs. The sector has also 
grown at an average annual rate of 5.7% over that same period. Alongside this 
growth, agricultural exports have risen significantly over the last decade, 
representing 60% of the total value of exports in 2016.1  

1.2 This solid sector performance has occurred in the context of a dual productive 
structure. On the one hand, rapid growth can be observed in some areas, especially 

soybeans, which contributed 57% of agricultural GDP growth between 2004 and 
2016. Based on Paraguay’s last National Agricultural Census in 2008 (CAN 2008), 
the production of soybeans and livestock is concentrated on lands larger than 500 
hectares. By contrast, survey data show that the average annual farm income of 
family farms (under 50 hectares, accounting for 96% of at farms, according to 
CAN 2008) devoted to sesame, cassava, sugarcane, corn, and other crops, fell from 
US$3,121 in 1991 to just US$981 in 2013. (Willi, P., 1991; A-Fines and GIZ, 2014).2 
Recent studies indicate that, to maintain this solid aggregate sector performance 
and improve farming income for rural families living Paraguay, productivity needs to 
improve through actions to promote the use of better technologies among small-
scale farmers, greater diversification of production, and the introduction of 
production systems that help to better manage climate and other risks (Nin-Pratt, A. 
et al., 2016). 

1.3 These recommendations are the result of an analysis of existing official statistics. 
However, decision-makers need robust, up-to-date information that allows them to 
work more precisely when designing and/or implementing instruments for public 
policy and/or private investment. Furthermore, the impact of different interventions 
can only be measured and assessed effectively if appropriate statistics are available. 
For that reason, statistics are needed on land use, agricultural production factors, 
the predominant economic and social conditions faced by farmers, and other areas. 
Additionally, much of the income inequality seen in Latin America and the Caribbean 
can be attributed to factors such as race, place of birth, education level of parents, 
gender, and sexual orientation. Some case studies suggest that the benefits of 
having information are much greater than the costs of generating it. For example, 
Bruce Gardner reviewed the literature that quantifies the value of information on the 
agricultural market for private decision-makers, as well as for decision-makers in the 
public sector working on policy reforms relating to trade and investment in research 
and development in the U.S. (Gardner, 2004). The study confirms that the availability 
of this information has net benefits for decision-makers. 

1.4 Data requirements for the agricultural sector are extensive and include information 
on the structure and management of agricultural holdings, agricultural production 
and inputs, food consumption, household income and expenditure, gender equality, 
the work force, and agricultural prices. There is also a growing demand for basic 
agroenvironmental data on greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, to improve 
national greenhouse gas inventories. All these data could come from agricultural 

                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. 
2  See optional electronic link 7 for a full bibliography. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
censuses and sample surveys, population censuses and surveys, administrative 
records, and other sources.  

1.5 An agricultural census is a statistical operation focused on collecting, processing, 
and disseminating data on the structure of the agricultural sector of an entire country, 
or a significant part of one. The basic objectives of agricultural censuses according 
to the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) (FAO 2015) are: 
(i) to provide data on the structure of agriculture, especially for small administrative 
units, and to enable detailed cross-tabulations; (ii) to provide data to use as 
benchmarks for, and reconciliation of, current agricultural statistics; and (iii) to 
provide frames for agricultural sample surveys. 

1.6 In an integrated agricultural statistics system, an agricultural census provides: (i) an 
integrated set of data on food and agriculture, necessary for decision-making related 
to food, agriculture, and rural development; and (ii) sampling frames for the surveys, 
which are conducted more frequently to collect more detailed and timely data. It 
should also be based on the necessary quality standards and include the 
dissemination of the information, so as to meet the information demand of the public 
and private sectors. 

1.7 The “Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics” (World Bank, 
UNSD, FAO 2010) published after a consultation process that included national 
statistical institutes, agriculture ministries, recommendations from the United 
Nations Security Council, experts and academics, and online forums. In its 
recommendations, the strategy identifies and highlights limitations in the production 
of statistical data for the agricultural sector and suggests that the conceptual 
framework for agricultural and rural statistics needs be expanded, and that the scope 
and coverage of such statistics should be broadened to include, for example, 
aspects of rural populations and households, fisheries, forestry, and other 
dimensions. 

1.8 Some countries of the region, including Paraguay, therefore implemented technical 
cooperation operation ATN/OC-14750-RG, to develop a consensus-based shared 
conceptual and methodological framework for the IDB’s Regional Public Goods 
Initiative based on technical and practical criteria, to promote the production of 
agricultural and rural statistics sustainably over time. This regional public good, 
named “Development of Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural 
Statistics Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean,” began with a diagnostic 
assessment3 of the capacity to produce and disseminate agricultural and rural 
statistics, looking at the legal framework, coordination within the national statistical 
system, financial and human resources, available infrastructure and equipment, and 
the type and quality of data. It also identified national needs, along with procedures 
for generating and/or compiling data and dissemination methods.  

                                                
3  This assessment was based on responses to a self-administered standard questionnaire sent to the 

countries. The questionnaire had 233 items grouped into 23 categories under four dimensions, which 
were used to prepare a baseline country profile. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.9 The findings of the regional public good assessment put Paraguay4 in Group 2 out 

of four groups, with Group 1 being the “weakest countries,” and Group 4 being the 
“strongest countries.” Group 2, “intermediate to weak countries,” also includes 
El Salvador, Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Lucia. According to this 
diagnostic assessment, the main limiting factors for agricultural statistics in 
Paraguay are institutional weakness due to a scarcity of resources, both human 
(core training) and material (physical infrastructure), and weak methods and 
practices. Added to these are poor coordination within the national statistical system 
and unawareness of data quality5 (see details in Table 1). 

 
Table 1. Limiting Factors for Agricultural Statistics in Paraguay 

Dominant 
limitations 

• Transportation equipment for field activities 

• Sound methodology implemented for agricultural surveys 

• Development and updating of sampling frames 

Significant 
limitations 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the main offices 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the field 

• Technical skills of available statistical personnel 

• Up-to-date information technology hardware 

• Up-to-date information technology software 

• Lack of available funds for planned statistical field activities 

• Interagency coordination 

Relevant 
limitations 

• Number of support staff in the field for statistical activities 

• Office equipment (phone, Internet, office furniture) 

• Turnover of professional staff 

• Information sources exhausted 

 

1.10 Paraguay’s current regulatory framework puts responsibility for producing 
agricultural statistics on the Ministry of Agriculture,6 as is the case in other countries 
inside and outside the region such as France, Uruguay, India, and the U.S. The legal 
foundation for statistical activities is based on two main laws: Executive Order 11126 
of 1942, which reorganizes the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) and gives it the authority for “technical direction of all statistical work;” and 
Law 81 of 1992, which designates the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics 
(DCEA) as the executing agency responsible for preparing agricultural statistics and 
keeping them up to date by regularly conducting the CAN. Paraguay has also 
developed the National Strategy for Statistical Development, based on the principles 

                                                
4  On a scale of 0 to 100, Paraguay received 28 points, ahead of only Argentina (21) and Venezuela (14) in 

a group of 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries that averaged 45. The best score was obtained 
by Mexico (82), followed by Brazil (71). Among the items with the lowest score were: (i) coordination 
within the statistical system, strategic vision and planning, and trained human resources, with a score of 
0; (ii) data collection technologies, with 9; and (iii) awareness of quality, with 23. 

5  “Diagnóstico sobre las capacidades instaladas en los países de ALC para la producción y difusión de 
estadísticas agropecuarias rurales” [Diagnostic assessment of installed capacities in the LAC countries 
for the production and dissemination of rural agricultural statistics], Miguel Galmés, technical cooperation 
operation ATN/OC-14750-RG IDB. 

6  Law 81/92 of 22 December 1992 establishing the organizational and functional structure of the Ministry 
of Agricultural and Livestock (MAG). 



 - 4 - 
 
 

 
of the PARIS 21 initiative.7 Nevertheless, the statistical sector is not coordinated as 
a whole, nor is there one institution with the legal mandate to lead and coordinate 
the process of preparing statistics across sectors and institutions. 

1.11 Paraguay’s most recent agricultural census was performed in 2008 and was the fifth 
in the country’s history since 1944. A decade has passed since that census 
(CAN 2008), and the information from it no longer reflects the current conditions in 
the country. It lacks the data to assess quality (omission and nonresponse rates), 
nor is there data on information requests classified by type of user or how that 
information is used. Some users have questioned the reliability of the data, because 
of the way the field work was done, and the data processed. The data are also not 
broken down by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples. Paraguay does not 
have a system of regular, reliable surveys to monitor and follow up on trends 
occurring after the previous intercensal period (1981-2008). Data need to be 
quantified on the expansion of the land area devoted to annual crops, deforestation, 
new operators and the development of technology-based business production 
models, news ways of organizing production, and other developments. 

1.12 The Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) is the unit of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) responsible for “preparing and updating 
agricultural statistics, for which it regularly conducts the National Agricultural 
Census.”8 A preliminary assessment of the current organizational and financial 
structure of the DCEA reveals weaknesses in: (i) technical human resources, in 
terms of both number and knowledge that is sufficiently up to date to work using 
advanced technologies and statistical methods (out of 39 DCEA employees, only 
15 have university degrees, and 50% of those have low levels of training or outdated 
knowledge of census procedures); (ii) equipment and materials (100% of computer 
hardware is obsolete, and the vehicle fleet has been reduced by 80% over the last 
five years); and (iii) strategic planning for data collection based on statistical 
methods. Annual DCEA estimates of agricultural output are derived from data 
provided by authorized data reporters, which is an imprecise and unreliable type of 
information. Consequently, strengthening the DCEA both technically and 
administratively would benefit the decision-making and policy formulation process of 
the MAG, and particularly its Bureau of Planning (DGP)9 responsible for planning, 
monitoring, coordination, and assessment, as well as other public and private 
entities.  

1.13 The assessments mentioned above clearly underscore the need to strengthen 
country systems for agricultural statistics. This means not only having more 
information available, but improving the timeliness and quality of that information in 
a cost-effective manner. Adopting modern information technologies is a key factor 
in meeting these objectives, as their benefits in quality and economic efficiency have 
been proven in other countries. An example is the use of personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to conduct surveys and censuses, known as computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI), instead of pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI). Reliability, 
accuracy, timeliness, accessibility, and consistency are all quality indicators for 

                                                
7  The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS 21), established in 1999, 

promotes the better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. 
8  Law 81/92, Article 8. 
9  A MAG unit: http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias. 

http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias.


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
censuses that show improvements with the use of these new technologies (Baker 
et al, 1995; Caeyers et al., 2011; Seligson and Moreno Morales, 2015; Benstead et 
al., 2017). 

1.14 The Bank’s experience. Since 2007, the Bank has approved a series of investment 
loans to help support censuses and strengthen statistical systems. These include: 
the Program to Support the Economic Census (loan 1918/BL-PR); Program to 
Develop the National Statistical System through the 2012 Population and Housing 
Census (loan 2542/BL-PR); Project to Improve the Agricultural Statistical 
Information System and the Agricultural Information Service for Rural Development 
in Peru (loan 3272/OC-PE); and the Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 
(loan 3798/BL-GY). Public good ATN/OC-14750-RG, Development of a 
Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural Statistics Systems in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is also now in execution.  

1.15 Based on these operations, as well as the recommendations of the FAO’s World 
Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) and IDB technical note 
“Experiencias en el diseño estadístico y realización de censos nacionales del sector 
agropecuario y rural” [Experiences in the statistical design and implementation of 
national censuses of the agricultural and rural sector] (document IDB-TN-366), 
Table 2 presents the main lessons learned and the how these have been 
incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 2. Lesson Learned 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

1. The National Agricultural Census (CAN) 
must be considered part of an integrated 

national statistical system. 

The program includes the generation of integrated 
information (census and surveys) of the national 
agricultural statistics system, as input for the 
national statistical system. 

2. Pilot testing is necessary to prepare a 
high quality census questionnaire. 

The program calls for a pilot to review and adjust 
critical parameters, such as the duration of surveys 
and the data collection and analysis method. 

3. As a project activity, it is important to 
make respondents, producers, and users 
aware of the value of accurate statistical 
information and utilizing that information to 
improve the quality of public policy and 
decision-making. 

The program will finance a communication and 
dissemination plan to raise awareness in the target 
population prior to collecting information, along with 
widespread dissemination of findings through 

various sources. 

4. The extensive involvement of public 
and private sector users in designing the 
census questionnaire ensures that useful 

information is collected. 

To design the census questionnaire, the program 
calls for workshops with the participation of public 
and private sector users. 

5. Political commitment to the census at 
the highest level is important. 

The program includes joint activities with 
Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) to ensure that 
it is a political priority. 

6. Include the gender perspective in the 
design of the questionnaires. 

The program supports the incorporation of 
questions that will generate information on gender 
and diversity in census and survey forms, following 
the guidelines of the FAO’s WCA 2020.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

7. Work with advanced technologies for 
data collection. 

The program incorporates the use of PDAs for 
personal interviews and a Web-based data 
transmission system to enhance data quality and 
reduce the time required for collection and 
analysis. It also includes the use of satellite 
imagery to make land-use and production 
estimates. The use of PDAs will also facilitate the 
implementation and quality control of the census. 

8. Institution-strengthening must be 
prioritized to ensure census continuity and 
the ongoing quality and dissemination of 
statistical information. 

The program includes investments to help 
strengthen the DCEA, so that data collection, 
analysis, and dissemination actions are 
sustainable. A cooperation agreement with the 
DGEEC is also planned. 

9. Synchronized administrative 
management is necessary when 
executing a mass data collection 
operation. 

The program calls for a company or international 
agency with experience in human resource 
management to be engaged for the selection and 
hiring of census takers. 

 

1.16 The country’s sector strategy. The project is linked primarily to the principal points 
and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, as well as the MAG’s 
Agricultural Strategic Framework 2014-2018 and Institutional Strategic Plan 
2014-2018. In terms of the National Development Plan 2030 and its major areas of 
strategic focus—poverty reduction and social development, inclusive economic 
growth, and positioning Paraguay as a global player—the project will provide 
essential input to identify evidence-based actions to support farming families and 
rural populations. The program will also contribute to the MAG’s Agricultural 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018 by supporting public policy design and the adoption 
of sector development measures, as one of the objectives is to make information 
available for such purposes. The program also fits into the MAG’s Institutional 
Strategic Plan 2014-2018 by supporting the establishment of an agricultural 
information system that integrates information on climate, economics, and 
technology, as well as statistical synthesis and studies of current economic 
conditions and sector performance, to provide the different users with data for 
decision-making. 

1.17 The Bank’s country strategy. This operation is aligned with the Bank’s country 
strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the 
strategic objective to “Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008), specifically the crosscutting themes of: 
(i) institutional capacity and rule of law, as it seeks to strengthening the institutions 
that generate agricultural statistics; (ii) gender equality and diversity, as it generates 
differentiated information by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples; and 
(iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it provides reliable 
information for building a national emissions inventory. The program is also aligned 
the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) under the 
indicator, “Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery,” through the outcome 
indicator “Improvement in institutional capacity to collect and process agricultural 
statistics” in the program’s Results Matrix. It is consistent with the Dimension of 



 - 7 - 
 
 

 
Success 1 of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which advocates that agriculture in 
the region achieve high levels of productivity and proposes the modernization of 
statistics systems as an activity under its second line of action. Lastly, it is consistent 
with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document 
GN-2587-2) through support for public sector management through integrated 
information systems. 

1.19 Approximately 6% of the resources of this operation will be invested in climate 
change adaptation activities, based on the joint methodology of the multilateral 
development banks for estimating climate finance. These resources contribute to 
the IDB Group’s goal to increase the financing of climate change-related projects to 
30% of total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 The general objective of this project is to contribute to improving the availability and 
quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public 
and private stakeholders. The program has the following components: 

1.21 Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 
(US$10.32 million). This component will finance the implementation of the 
agricultural census with emphasis on guaranteeing quality, proper thematic 
coverage, and the timely and wide dissemination of the information generated. As 
an innovation, this census will adopt the use of an electronic questionnaire and data 
capture using mobile devices in the field. The census will have a crosscutting gender 
approach, to get women more involved and increase their visibility in their role as 
both producers and workers. All relevant information will also be disaggregated by 
indigenous community and will address issues of environmental conservation. The 
agricultural census process to be financed will have the following stages: 
(i) pre-census: cartographic updates and georeferencing of farms, pre-census 
survey, and development of the data capture system; (ii) census: data collection pilot 
test and field operation; and (iii) post-census: data quality analysis, post-census 
survey, and dissemination of results. To promote the quality of data collection, this 
component also envisages: (i) validations and controls in the electronic form that 
assist census takers in their work; (ii) a pilot test in the field to validate the electronic 
forms; and (iii) dissemination actions to inform and motivate the respondent 
population. An information processing and analysis system will be developed that 
encompasses everything from database consolidation and quality control to the 
generation of the primary tabulations and making the information (including 
microdata) available to users online, in as much detail as permitted by laws and 
regulations on the confidentiality of the information. As an additional layer of quality 
control for the information generated, a post-census survey is planned to validate 
the accuracy of the census itself.  

1.22 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural 
statistics system (US$3.67 million). This component will strengthen the capacity 
of the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) to generate reliable and 
up-to-date agricultural statistics. The strengthening process includes: (i) developing 
IT tools to support the adoption of best practices for agricultural censuses; 
(ii) updating knowledge of census processes in the region by sending DCEA 
technical staff abroad and hiring experts to bring DCEA technical staff up to date on 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
practices used; (iii) renovating buildings; (iv) purchasing computer hardware; 
(v) purchasing vehicles to ensure that the DCEA can operate throughout rural areas; 
(vi) developing a model for the use of satellite imagery to produce agricultural 
statistics that can be validated with census information; (vii) conducting thematic 
studies with the census information; and (viii) conducting two surveys built on the 
census sampling frame to update relevant information on the sector. The topics of 
these surveys will depend on the studies and policy priorities, but may include 
agriculture, livestock, production costs, and family farming. Agricultural statistics are 
also expected to be incorporated into the national statistical system under an 
agreement with the DGEEC. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.23 The program Results Matrix has been agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) and 
contains impact, outcome, and output indicators for the program, as well as its 
baselines and targets. In keeping with the program objective, the impact indicators 
also seek to capture the two dimensions of availability and quality of agricultural 
information. As a substitute for availability, the number of census information 
requests is used as an indicator. The indicator to evaluate the expected changes in 
the quality of information will be user ratings. At the outcome level, indicators are 
included for three different dimensions: (i) the quality of the census will be assessed 
by comparing the census results to the results of the post-census survey, omission 
rate, and nonresponse rate; (ii) the improvement in the timeliness and availability of 
agricultural information will be verified through a shorter time lag between the 
conclusion of field work and publication of the final results, as well as through a 
shorter time devoted to data collection in the field; and (iii) the improvement in 
agricultural statistical capacity will be assessed through the rating of installed 
capacities for the production and dissemination of agricultural and rural statistics.  

1.24 As an added benefit, strengthening the agricultural census makes the source of 
information used to build Paraguay’s national emissions inventory more reliable, 
enabling Paraguay to comply with current requirements under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and transparency guidelines 
under the Paris Agreement.10 It also generates information on land use (pastures, 
forests, crops), livestock, etc., that can be used to assess resilience, design public 
policies on adaptation, and makes it possible to pose specific questions on mitigation 
and/or adaptation. The program will also benefit Paraguayan farmers and ranchers 
(currently estimated at 300,000), public and private institutions, and other links in the 
agrifood chain. 

1.25 The use of mobile devices for data capture and satellite imagery are technological 
innovations that will benefit the country’s statistical capacity in the context of the 
agreement signed with the DGEEC. The program will also receive advisory support 
from the National Secretariat for Information and Communication Technologies 
(SENATICs) on the technical specifications of computer hardware and connectivity. 
These interagency agreements, along with efforts to strengthen the MAG/DCEA, 
aim to make the generation of agricultural statistics sustainable. 

                                                
10  The Paris Agreement (2015) is part of the UNFCCC, which establishes measures to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions through mitigation, adaptation, and resilience of ecosystems to the effects of global 
warming. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40491683
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_mitigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_adaptation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_resilience


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
1.26 Economic viability. The economic analysis of the program was based on the 

economic viability of the 2018 National Agricultural Census (CAN 2018), the costs 
of which represent nearly 80% of total program resources. The analysis of the 
economic viability of the census employed the least-cost methodology (a specific 
instance of cost-effectiveness analysis). This methodology is commonly used in 
interventions of this nature, when it is recognized that the benefits (statistical 
information, in this case) have a very high value, but one that is difficult to quantify. 

1.27 The anticipated costs of the agricultural census indicate that it will be cost-effective 
(See optional electronic link 1). The estimated total cost of CAN 2018 is 
US$11,627,262,11 including all aspects of the preparation, survey, processing, and 
dissemination phases. The estimated number of productive units to be enumerated 
will be around 300,000, yielding a cost per productive unit of US$39.12 This figure is 
higher than was budgeted for the agricultural censuses in Nicaragua (2011, US$23) 
and Honduras (2008, US$27), but lower than was budgeted in Brazil (2018, US$47) 
or the actual figure in Uruguay (2011, US$73). Factoring in the land area (which 
affects the cost of field work), the cost per square kilometer of CAN 2018 in 
Paraguay will be US$29, which is higher than in Uruguay (2011, US$18.5) and 
similar to Brazil (2018, US$29), but lower than in Nicaragua (2011, US$49) and 
Honduras (2008, US$71). The cost of the agricultural census will therefore be within 
the range of costs of other recent agricultural censuses performed in countries of the 
region. 

1.28 Another relevant comparison is the costs budgeted for the census using 
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) (US$11,627,262) versus the costs 
that would be expected using pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI) (US$12,330,855). 
The use of PDAs instead of paper questionnaires will save approximately 
US$700,000. This figure does not reflect the fact that CAPI offers better quality 
control than PAPI, so the financial gains of adopting CAPI are even greater. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 This project is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1) and the specific investment modality. Its total cost is 
US$15 million, to be financed totally by the Bank from the Ordinary Capital 
resources. 

                                                
11  This figure includes the amount of Component 1, plus an amount corresponding to equipment and 

management and evaluation costs for the project. 
12  All figures presented in the economic viability analysis are expressed in 2016 U.S. dollars. The sources 

of this data are the FAO, Uruguay’s Office of Agricultural Statistics (DIEA), and the DCEA (Paraguay). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Program Cost and Financing (in US$000) 

WBS Components IDB % 

1 Component 1: Design and implementation of the 
agricultural census 

10,320 69% 

2 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities 
in the agricultural statistics system 

3,670 24% 

3 Administration, audit, and evaluation 710 5% 

4 Contingencies 300 2% 

 Total: 15,000 100% 

 * These amounts include local taxes. 

2.2 The program disbursement period will be five years, running from the effective date 
of the loan contract. Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds 
(see paragraph 3.7). 

 
Table 4. Disbursement Schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,559,201 11,117,339 895,705 803,553 624,202 15,000,000 

% 10% 74% 6% 6% 4% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social safeguard risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), the Bank has analyzed the potential environmental and 
social risks of this operation and classified it as category “B,” with a moderate level 
of risk. No significant environmental or social risks have been identified in the 
sociocultural analysis prepared for this project. The identified environmental and 
social risks relate primarily to interactions between census takers and the indigenous 
population, risks faced by census takers when travelling to socially complex areas, 
and the risk that the census questionnaire may not be sensitive enough to the 
sociocultural complexity of indigenous peoples and gender issues in agriculture. The 
sociocultural analysis includes recommendations on these issues to promote the 
inclusion of vulnerable population groups like indigenous peoples and small family 
farmers, with a gender approach. 

2.4 In accordance with Operational Policy OP-703, Directive B.6, this project requires at 
least one public consultation. This requirement was met with two consultations 
conducted with key stakeholders: (i) one with public and private sector data users, 
and (ii) another with the National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI). 
Additional consultations with other social actors are also planned as part of the 
census preparation process, especially, once a draft census form is ready. More 
information on this matter is included in the annex, Environmental and social 
management report (ESMR). 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation actions are planned. 

D. Other project risks 

2.6 The following was identified as high risk: a government changeover would affect 
priority or execution time. The planned mitigation measure is to rely on political 
consensus and the sectoral private sector, as well as the mandate contained in 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
Article 8 of Law 81 of 1992, and international commitments (the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development). The following were identified as medium risks: (i) public 
administration fails to keep pace with census operation needs; (ii) no decree issued 
to conduct the census; (iii) refusal to provide information to census takers; 
(iv) political decisions not to disseminate census results; and (v) loan contract fails 
to enter into effect in 2018. The following mitigation activities were identified and 
agreed upon, supported particularly by the Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) for 
the census, made up of prominent individuals from the public and private sector, to 
back up policy-level actions at the key entities identified: (i) the CAA will take steps 
to comply with administrative time frames; (ii) work will be done directly with the 
Office of the President; (iii) an efficient communication campaign will be launched 
(local authorities and civil society); (iv) the CAA will take steps to raise awareness 
among public sector stakeholders, with IDB support; and (v) the MAG, CAA, and 
project team will work with Congress for it to take up this law for consideration. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be the 
borrower, acting through the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), which will 
be fully responsible for administration and supervision of the program. 

3.2 The program will be implemented under the direct supervision of the MAG, acting 
through the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and the National 
Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The DCEA, supported 
by a program execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving 
as principal liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will 
perform administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and 
contracting, in coordination with the PEU. 

3.3 The key positions identified for the PEU for program execution are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) Component 1 coordinator; (iii) Component 2 coordinator; 
(iv) financial and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; and 
(vi) planning and monitoring specialist. 

3.4 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan 
proceeds: (i) the program execution unit has been established on the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, to 
the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered 
into force. These conditions must be satisfied for implementation to begin. The 
program Operating Regulations establish the basic rules for the execution of the loan 
(e.g., field work, supervision, and regional coordination, information processing and 
analysis, and fiduciary considerations), as well as the responsibilities of PEU 
members.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Procurements 
financed in whole or part with IDB funds will be conducted pursuant to the Policies 
for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(document GN-2350-9). The procurement plan contains detailed information on the 
procurements to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures 
followed by the Bank for their review. Numerous low- and medium-skilled operational 
staff will be hired (approximately 5,300 people) to collect CAN information in the 
field. To do so, an international competitive bidding process will be held to engage 
a firm with experience in human resources management, or an international agency 
with such experience will be contracted. No selection processes involving single-
source selection are planned, with the exception of fuel purchases, since this product 
can be obtained from only one source13 under the fuel provision agreement between 
Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR) and the executing agency,14 and other cases 
where it is justified under policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
applicable to program execution for financial management and planning, as well as 
procurement supervision and execution. An intervention of this nature entails 
significant travel expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees 
of the MAG or other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of 
the census, as well as process and disseminate the information generated. The 
estimated expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down 
as follows: per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional 
compensation (45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line 
with expense items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of 
employees that take on additional work.15 

3.7 Disbursements. The disbursement modality will be as established in the Financial 
Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6). 
Advances will be made preferably on a six-monthly basis, once justification has been 
provided for at least 80% of the advanced amount. Accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet must be submitted as documentation.  

3.8 Audits. The PEU will deliver the audited financial statements for the program on an 
annual basis during execution on the terms required by the Bank. The project will 
require the selection of a Plus-level independent auditing firm. The audited financial 
statements will be delivered within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, and 
the closing final statement will be delivered within 120 days following the scheduled 
date for the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan agreed upon with the 
MAG. The DCEA, acting through the PEU, will be responsible for generating and 
sharing the necessary information with the Bank to track the Results Matrix 
indicators. 

3.10 Monitoring. Throughout project execution, the PEU will prepare and deliver status 
reports to the Bank within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. These 

                                                
13  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6(c). 

14  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 

15  The program does not call for counterpart support to be factored into the calculation. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40468605
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
reports will provide a detailed account of physical and financial execution of the 
project, as well as progress on all Results Matrix indicators. The reports will also 
provide a detailed account of issues encountered during project execution, and 
corrective measures taken, as well as explain any deviation from the project 
management instruments (multiyear execution plan, annual work plan (AWP), and 
procurement plan). No later than the last quarter of each year of project execution, 
the PEU will deliver the AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction, as 
well as the maintenance plan for equipment purchased with the loan proceeds and 
the plan for meeting the environmental and social requirements established in the 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). Bank staff will conduct regular 
inspection missions and meet with PEU personnel to discuss the progress of 
activities identified in the AWP, compliance with the Results Matrix indicators, the 
AWP for the following year, and the procurement plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 In addition to overall monitoring of execution, the project will incorporate several 
different measures to oversee data gathering and ensure the quality of information 
in CAN 2018 and the agricultural surveys in the two subsequent years. Firstly, a 
cartographic update will be done, to minimize the likelihood of omissions or 
duplications during data collection. Secondly, the PDAs used to collect information 
will have a built-in, automatic verification program. This way, any inconsistency in 
responses, whether contradictions or mistakes on the part of the respondent or 
errors on the part of the census taker when entering the information into the PDA, 
will be detected and corrected immediately. Thirdly, CAN 2018 will have a Web-
based data transmission system for the immediate and simultaneous application of 
controls on progress and coverage in the field, and the data registered by census 
takers. 

3.12 As established in the monitoring and evaluation plan, the project will have a midterm 
and a final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the 
date on which 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, or 50% of the 
execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first. The objective of the midterm 
evaluation will be to review the progress of all activities, examine the causes of any 
potential deviation from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. 
The final evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the date on which 95% of the 
loan proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial 
execution by subcomponent and the source of financing; (ii) progress on outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts included in the Results Matrix; (iii) compliance with the 
ESMP; (iv) summary of financial statements, procurements, disbursements, and 
internal control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. Both the 
midterm and final evaluation will be conducted by external consultants independent 
of the PEU. 

3.13 Impact assessment. The project will have a “before and after” evaluation of the 
impact indicators included in the Results Matrix, conducted as part of the final 
evaluation described above and the project completion report (PCR). 

3.14 Additionally, CAN 2018 will include a post-census survey to measure omission and 
nonresponse rates, as well as the accuracy of certain key variables included in the 
census. This will make it possible to get an exact final value for the outcome 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Significantly, there is no known experience 
with post-census surveys in the case of agricultural censuses, so this will be the only 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
census in the region to conduct such a survey. For that reason, CAN 2018 will not 
only yield benefits for Paraguay, but serve as an international benchmark. 



Annex I - PR-L1147

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy 

or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

Yes

Increase the provision of agricultural public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting.

Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison.

The objective of the project is to contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country to support the decision-making of public and private agents. To 

achieve this objective, the project will implement two components: 1) Design and implementation of the Agricultural Census; and 2) Institutional strengthening of the entities in charge of 

the agricultural statistics system.

The documentation is well structured, with a good diagnosis of the problems and main weaknesses faced by the national agricultural statistics system, including institutional weaknesses, 

inadequate methods and statistical practices used, and lack of coordination in the national statistical system. Likewise, aspects of the previous agricultural census are identified that can 

be improved upon in terms of data quality, and the dissemination and use of these data.

The proposed solution is in line with the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic. Higher-level indicators reflect 

benchmarks established in other censuses to measure data quality. The lower level indicators reflect the design of each component. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of 

impacts, results and outputs with their respective baseline values, targets, and means to collect information. Empirical evidence is provided on the utility and effectiveness of implementing 

surveys using the Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) method; however, the external validity of this evidence is not alluded to.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-effectiveness analysis. The cost per survey, and per square kilometer, is compared between this and other censuses in the region. The census 

cost is identified using the CAPI method and it is compared to the cost of the counterfactual if the PAPI (Pen-And-Paper Interviewing) method was used. The results indicate that the 

CAPI method will provide a census of better quality and at a lower cost. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on the main costs. The results indicate that the CAPI method will allow 

the country to save a significant amount of resources, which is in contrast if the census was done using the PAPI method.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes an evaluation using two methods: 1) reflexive evaluation; and 2) ex post cost-effectiveness assessment. The reflexive evaluation will use the 

results of the census and a post-census survey to measure the quality of the data in terms of omission and non-response rates. These results will provide important information, since 

there is no evidence from another agricultural census carried out in the region that undertakes a post-census survey to verify the quality of the data

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable. Risks include mitigation actions and compliance indicators.

Evaluable
9.3

3.0

3.6

2.7

1.2

6.9

2.3

4.7

10.0

4.0

2.4

1.2

1.2



Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-
making by public and private stakeholders. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base year Final target Means of verification Comments 

Impact: Improve the utilization and value of agricultural statistical information. 

Requests and 
downloads of 
information 
generated from 
the agricultural 
census 

Information 
requests and 
downloads 

110 2009 200 DCEA reports No systematic record of consultations is 
available for the 2008 agricultural 
census. There are records of 
information requests that serve as a 
basis to estimate the quantity. 

Quality rating of 
census data 
based on user 
perceptions 

Score (1-5) To be 
determined 

2017 BL * 1.25 Survey of public sector 
users of agricultural 
information 

Create a list of users of agricultural 
information. Determine consultation 
methodology and content of the rating 
form. 
Construct baseline with opinions on the 
2008 census. 
For the new census, consider one year 
after the census is published to allow for 
dissemination. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 1: Improvement in the quality of the country’s agricultural statistics 

Difference 
between the 
results of the 
post-census 
survey and the 
census 

% N/A N/A <5% Publication of the census and results 
of the post census survey 

For the main variables: land area, 
land use, and others to be 
determined when the census form 
is designed. 

Overall 
omission rate 

% N/A N/A <5% Agricultural census fact sheet Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

Nonresponse 
rate 

% N/A N/A 1% Agricultural census fact sheet and 
database 

Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

FAO Gender 
Index 

Index 0 2009 1 The FAO Gender Index is calculated 
using items 1001-1005 of the FAO 
publication “World Programme of the 
Census of Agriculture 2020,” dividing 
the number of responses that can be 
obtained based on census 
information by the total number of 
items (5) 

Gender monitoring. 

Indigenous 
population 
index 

Index 0 2009 1 The indigenous population index has 
a value of 1 if the main census 
variables can be stratified based on 
the producer’s ethnic origin, and 0 if 
the census data cannot be broken 
down by this criterion 

Ethnic monitoring. 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 2: Improvement in the timeliness and availability of agricultural information 

Time lag 
between the 
end of field 
work and 
publication of 
results 

Months 12 2009 6 Presentation of final results Construct baseline using the 2008 
census. 

Time taken for 
field work 

Months 9 2008 4 Agricultural census fact sheet DCEA report on 2008 census as 
baseline. 

Outcome 3: Improvement in institutional capacity for the collection and processing of agricultural statistics 

Rating of 
agricultural 
statistical 
capacity 

Score To be 
determined 

2017 To be 
determined 

Report with baseline and final scores Score applied using the FAO 
methodology (“Assessing Country 
Capacity to Produce Agricultural 
and Rural Statistics,” June 2014), 
surveyed by an external 
consultant, rather than self-rating. 
Use the score directly and not 
“Class.” 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Base 
year 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
target 

Means of verification Comments 

Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 

Cartographic 
update 

Cartographic 
maps of 
departments 

0 2017  17    17 Department maps, DCEA 
technical report, and GIS 
content. With technical support 
from the DGEEC. 

 

Census 
conducted 

Census 0 2017  1    1 Preliminary results published.  

Post-census 
evaluation 
survey 
conducted 

Survey 0 2017   1   1 Report on post-census survey 
results.  
Within six months following 
census field work. 

 

Results 
disseminated 

Publication N/A N/A   1   1 Dissemination includes 
publication of results with a 
methodological note and the 
primary tabulations, as well as 
Web-based microdata 
consultation system. 

 

Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural statistics system 

Agricultural 
surveys  

Surveys 0 2017    1 1 2 Publication of survey results 
within three years following the 
census. 

 

Technical staff 
trained in 
generating 
statistical 
information 

Number of 
technical 
staff 

0 2017  15    15 DCEA report identifying 
technical staff and areas in 
which they received training. 

 

Model 
developed for 
the use of 
satellite 
imagery  

Model 0 2017    1  1 DCEA report on the results 
achieved in using satellite 
imagery to generate agricultural 
statistics.  

 



Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
 

Thematic 
studies 
performed with 
census 
information 

Number of 
studies 

0 2017    1 2 3 Documents with the results of 
the studies performed within 24 
months following publication of 
the census results. 

 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENT 

Country: Republic of Paraguay 

Project name: Project to Implement the Census and Agricultural Surveys 
System 

Project number: PR-L1147 

Executing agency Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Prepared by: Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(Fiduciary Specialists) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional evaluation for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
assessment and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) on the 
National Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The fiduciary 
agreements applicable in project execution have been prepared as a result of this 
evaluation. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE COUNTRY 

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development; nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for the 
execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared through 
auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the Integrated Financial 
Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting Subsystem (SICO), and 
other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage payment transfers to 
vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central Bank of Paraguay. The 
integration of these tools will allow audited financial statements for a program or 
project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future; in the meantime, parallel systems 
are used. External control is currently performed through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s Public Sector Procurement System (SCSP), the Bank 
makes full use of the Public Procurement Information System (SICP), as well as the 
country subsystems electronic for reverse auction and competitive bidding, for the 
amounts and categories established in the agreement for the use of these 
subsystems signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

III. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

3.1 The executing agency will be the Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), with the support of the Office of Agricultural 
Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and DINCAP. The DCEA, supported by a program 
execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will provide general 
coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, ensuring that the 
conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving as principal 
liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will perform 
administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and contracting, in 
coordination with the PEU.  

3.2 Considering the MAG’s satisfactory fiduciary performance in the execution of prior 
operations (loans 1255/OC-PR and 1800/OC-PR), acting through DINCAP, no 
fiduciary risks are anticipated that could affect meeting the program objectives. 
Nonetheless, the institutional capacity assessment of the MAG was updated during 
the preparation phase of the operation in the following areas: planning and 
organization, capacity to execute the activities programmed and organized 
(administration of personnel, goods, and services, and financial management), and 
control. The consolidated result for the MEG capabilities evaluated using the ICAS 
exhibits a medium level of development, which is associated with medium risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of the MAG and our experience to date, the opportunities 
for improvement are concentrated in the strengthening of accounting and internal 
control. 

4.2 Procurement management. The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation 
actions are envisaged.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for the 
monitoring of project-related activities. For that reason, the DCEA will prepare a 
procedures manual for the PEU that will be approved by MAG authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be included in the special 
provisions:  

a. A special bank account to be opened for the exclusive use of the program.  

b. The executing agency will deliver the audited annual and final financial 
statements for the project, with specific terms of reference acceptable to the 
Bank, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year of the executing 
agency during the original disbursement period or its extensions. The final 
audit report will be delivered within 120 days after the close of the original 
disbursement period or its extensions. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 6 

 
 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR  
PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved the use of the 
electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) of the SCSP (Law 2051/03). The use of other country systems 
accepted subsequent to approval of the project will be implemented automatically, 
and so stated in the procurement plan. 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding will be conducted 
using national bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector 
specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical specifications of 
procurements during the preparation of selection processes. No selection processes 
involving single-source selection are planned initially, with the exception of fuel 
purchases under the fuel provision agreement between Petróleos Paraguayos 
(PETROPAR) and the executing agency,2 and other cases where it is justified under 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.3 Numerous low- and medium skilled operational staff will be hired (approximately 
5,300 people) to collect information in the field. To do so, an international competitive 
bidding process will be held to engage a firm with experience in human resources 
management, or an international agency with such experience will be contracted. 
The estimated budget to engage this firm is US$335,895, and the estimated 
personnel expenditure is US$7,028,731. 

6.4 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts generated 
under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals issued 
or agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector specialist will be responsible for 
reviewing the terms of reference for the contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to the procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. A procurement workshop will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538 of October 2013, the 
use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the use 
of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000)..  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the competitive bidding (shopping) 

                                                
1  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

2  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

method for complex works (for reference, US$250,000), and for 
contracts for goods and nonconsulting services up to the amount 
established by the Bank for use of the shopping method for complex 
goods and services (for reference, US$50,000) 

(iii) Contracts for amounts equal to or greater than the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.5 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any system 
or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. The 
operation’s procurement plan and its updates will indicate what contracts are to be 
executed through the approved country systems.3 

6.6 Recurring expenditures. An intervention of this nature entails significant travel 
expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees of the MAG or 
other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of the census, as 
well as process and disseminate the information generated. The estimated 
expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down as follows: 
per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional compensation 
(45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line with expense 
items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of employees that take 
on additional work. 

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None for this operation. 

6.8 Domestic preference. None for this operation. 

 
Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and International Shortlist (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 
nonconsulting 

services 

International shortlist 
in consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

                                                
3  If the Bank approves another system or subsystem, it will be applicable to the operation, in accordance 

with the loan contract. 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 6 

 
 

Table 2. Main Procurements 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 
Estimated  

amount (US$) 

Goods    

Computer hardware and tablets ICB Year 1 1,382,014 

Procurement of vehicles ICB Year 1 617,500 

Procurement of fuel SSS Year 1 283,353 

Nonconsulting services    

Firm to contract and manage personnel for field work ICB Year 1 335,895 

Consulting firms    

Evaluation of data quality by sampling QCBS Year 2 315,857 

Field operation (7,500 surveys in two waves) QCBS Year 4 758,981 

* Link to procurement plan. 

 
Table 3. Amounts by Category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 35,588 

Goods 2,578,683 

Nonconsulting services 1,339,537 

Consulting firms 1,280,965 

Individual consultants 1,349,647 

Total, procurement plan 6,584,420 

Note: Does not include the US$7,028,731 corresponding to the operational staff expense for collection of information in 
the field, described in paragraph 6.3, as it is not a procurement. 

 

6.9 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by policy 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank, 
considering the position of the Ministry of Finance on the matter. Supervision of all 
procurement processes governed by the SCSP electronic reverse auction and 
competitive bidding subsystems (document GN- 2538-11) will be conducted through 
the country’s system.4 

6.10 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated, beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.11 Records and files. The agreed formats and procedures to be described in the 
project’s Fiduciary Manual of Functions and Procedures should be used for the 
preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

7.1 Programming and budget. (a) The PEU, reporting to the DCEA and in coordination 
with DINCAP, will centralize the coordination of execution, supported by other 
departments and units of the MAG, as necessary; and (b) the MAG will be 
responsible for budget programming, administration, and execution, under the zero-
based budget system. 

                                                
4  Depending on the scope of use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If so, it 

should be mentioned in this Annex. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43


Annex III 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses the modified cash basis 
of accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through 
DINCAP. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the Bank. 
These reports are prepared using different systems, which creates additional 
work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will be made through 
advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the monthly 
submission of a detailed financial plan for up to six months, and another for a 
longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual demand 
inferred from the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and procurement 
plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject to the 
justification of 80% of the previous advance.  

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for 
accountability will be decided by the borrower and executing agency during the 
loan negotiation process. 

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes an improvement 
plan for internal control. Additionally, the MAG internal audit unit does not 
include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency must deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, on terms of reference previously approved by the Bank. The project's 
financial statements include a cash flow statement, statement of accrued 
investment income, the notes to these financial statements, and the statement 
from the project management team. The audit report will include evaluation of 
the internal control system. The project will require the selection of a Plus-level 
independent audit firm. External audits will be covered with loan proceeds, 
estimated at US$260,000 over the planned five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based on 
project execution and internal audit reports. 

 
Table 4. Financial Supervision Plan 

Nature/Scope Frequency 

Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

Review of disbursement requests and attached reports 2/3 per year 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 

 

7.3 Execution mechanism. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to the Republic of Paraguay 
Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey 

and Census System 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary 
with the Republic of Paraguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in 
the execution of the Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey and Census System. Such 
financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the 
Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-1994 
Pipeline: PR-L1147 
 



