





















































50264-002: Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project


LOAN NUMBER 4013-CAM(COL) 

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) 

(Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project) 

between 

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 

and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

DATED 0 7 DEC 2020 
----------

CAM 50264 



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated I 7 (EC 2M between KINGDOM 
OF CAMBODIA (-Borrower ) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANKCADB*)

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has a ppi cd to ADB for a loan for me purposes of me Project 
described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement

«B) The Borrower has also applied Io ADB for a loan (the *0 Loan”) m the 
amount of five million Dollars ($5 000.000) for the purpose* of me Project to be funded by ADB 
entirely from a participation in the B loan by ASEAN lnfrastructu»e Fund ('AIR) unde* its Inclusive 
Finance Facility.

(C) The Borrower has applied to Agence Fran^aise de Devefoppement 
f*AFD") for a loan ("AFD Loan') in Euros which is equivalent to twenty-ftve mlkon Doi ars 
(525,000.000) to assist in cofmancing a part of the Project, upon the terms and condition* 
set forth m a loan agreement between the Borrower and AFD fAFD Loan Agreement'):

(D) by an externally financed gram agreement of even date herewith between 
the Borrower and ADB fJFPR Grant Agreement*). me Borrower has abo applied to the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction for a grant ("Grant') in the amount of three ml on Dollars (S3,000 000) 
to be administered by ADB for the purpose of the Project.

(E) the Project wil be earned out by M metry of Economy and Finance fMEF) 
with the Participating Financial Intermediaries fPFl»") kx Component 1 Ministry of Agncuture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (’MAFF'J for Component 2 and Ministry of Rural Development ('MRD*) for 
Component 3. and for tht* purpose the Borrower will ma«e available to the PFIs MAFF and MRD. 
the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satsfactory to ADB and

(F) ADB has agreed to mane a corcessonai koan to the Borrower from ADB s 
ordinary capital resources upon the terms and condtions set forth heren and m the Project 
Agreement between ADB and respective PFIs

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations, Definition*

Section 101. AU the provisions of AOBs Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations dated 1 January 2017 (‘Loan Regulations’), are hereby made 
applicable to ths Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were futy set form 
herein, subject, however, to the too owing modifications



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor

‘Project Agreement- means each Project Agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB and a PF I. as such agreement may be 
amended from time to time; and such Project Agreement mdudes 
all schedules to the project agreement

(b) The term Protect Executing Agency" appeanng in Sections 001(a). 
8 01(d), B 01(f), 8 01(k), 9 01(c) and 9 02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall 
De substituted by the term ’PFI*

Section 1 02 Wherever used in inis Loan Agreement the several terms 
defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified 
herein or the context otherwise requires Additional terms used in this Loan Agreement have the 
following meanings

(a) *A Loan’ means the loan provided under this Loan Agreement

<b) ’AIF Ebgibie Activity means a subset of Eligible Activity that satisfies the 
eligibility cntena set out m the PAM to be financed from the proceeds of 
8 Loan, as described m the PAM and n paragraph 11 of Schedule 4 to this 
Loan Agreement.

(c) "AiF Subloans’ means a subset of Subioans (cred* line) made, or proposed 
to be made by the PFI out of the proceeds of the B Loan to ar.  
Sub-borrower for an AIF Eligible Activity, as described tn the PAM and n 
paragraph 12 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Elig.be

(d) *0 Loan Agreement’ means the agreement between ADB and the Borrower 
relating to the B Loan

(e) -Component’ means each of Component 1. 2. and 3 of the Project as 
further described in paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement

(f) "Consulting Services’ means consulting services as described n the 
Procurement Regulations and set out m the Procurement Plan, and to be 
financed out of the proceeds of the A Loan B Loan and Grant;

(gi "CPF" means the community participation framework for the Project 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB:

(h) "Credit Guarantee" is a credit guarantee issued or proposed to be issued, 
by the PFI out of me proceeds of the A Loan to an Eng.ble Sub borrower 
for an Eligible Activity as described in paragraph 13 of Schedule 4 to thrt 
Loan Agreement

(it ’Eligible Activity’ means an activity, which satisfies the eligibility cntena set 
out in the PAM and as descnbed in paragraph 11 of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



3

0) 'Eligible Sub-borrower' means a sub-borrower which satisfies the eligibility 
criteria sei out in PAM ano as described m paragraph 10 of Schedule 4 to 
this Loan Agreement.

(k) 'Environmental Management Plan' or 'EMP' means each environmental 
management plan for the Project or for an Eligible Activity, including any 
update thereto, incorporated In the IEE.

(l) 'Environmental Safeguards' means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable} of the SPS.

(m) 'Equity Capital Loan* means an equity capital loan made or proposed to 
be made, by the PFl out of the proceeds of the A Loan to an Ebgibie 
Sub-borrower for an Eligible Activity as described m paragraph 14 of 
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

(n> 'ESMS' means an environmental and social management system for the 
Component 1, Including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
Borrower and cleared by A OB:

(o) 'GAP' means the gender action plan prepared for tne Project including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB

(p) 'Goods’ means equipment and materials as set out m the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the A Loan B Loan and 
Grant, including any related Nonccnsulting Services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning training, and initial 
maintenance:

(q) 'IBP’ means the inclusive business partnership between the participating 
agricultural cooperatives and participating agro-eriterprises

(r) 'ICT means information and communication technology,

(s) 'IEE* means each initial environmental examination fbr the Project or an 
Ebgibie Activity, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB.

It) 'Indigenous Peoples Safeguards* means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V. Appendix 3. and Appendix 4 (as applicable} of the 
SPS

(u) 'Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards' means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V. Appendix 2. and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS:

(v) 'Loan Disbursement Handbook’ means ADBs Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time).

(w) ‘MAFF means tno Borrowers Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB.



4

(X) 'MEF* means the Borrower's Ministry of Economy and Finance or any 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(y) ’MRD’ means the Borrower's Ministry ol Rural Development, or any 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB.

(z) “Nonconsulting Services* means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations (appbcable for Components 2 and 3) and set 
out in the Procurement Plan, and to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
A Loan, B Loan and Grant.

(aa) “O&M* means operation and maintenance.

(bb) “PAM* means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
12 October 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated 
from bme to time in accordance with me respective admwitstratwe 
procedures of the Borrower PEI. and ADB

(cc) "PFI* means each participating financial intermediary, namely Sathapana 
Bank and Agricultural and Rural Development Bank or any respective 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB,

(dd) “Procurement Plan’ means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
12 October 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Poi»cy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB. 
which include among others, the standard operating procedures of ine 
Borrower (2 December 2019. as amended from time to time) providing 
procedures applicable to oxternaiiy-tinanced projects and programs, and 
the procurement manual under the standard operating procedures 
(2 December 201B as amended from time to time) prepared by the 
Borrower setting forth the procurement related policies and procedures for 
externally financed projects and programs;

(eo) ’Procurement Policy’ means ADB s Procurement Pokey • Goods Works. 
Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017. as amended from time to 
time),

(ff> ’Procurement Regulations’ means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods. Works Nonconsulting and Consulting Services 
(2017. as amended from time to time),

(gg) ’Project Executing Agency’ for the purposes of, and with«n the meaning of. 
the Loan Regulations means MAFF or any successor thereto acceptable 
to ADBs that <s respons«ble for carrying out the Project.

(hh) "Project implementing Agencies’ for the purposes of. and within the 
meaning of. the Loan Regulations means MEF for Component 1, MAFF for 
Component 2. and MRD for Component 3 or any respective successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB that IS responsible for carrying out the Project



5

(h) ’Project facitrties' means me facilities to be constructed and the Goods to 
be provided under the Project

(jj) ‘Recycled Funds' means funds repad by PFIs to the Borrower as 
doscnooo in paragraph 26 of Schedule 4 to th® Loan Agreement

(kk) ‘Safeguards Monitonng Report' means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance wth the EMPs and PFI s performance 
with regards to the ESMS including any corrective and preventative 
actions

(II) “Services- means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services

(mm) *SPS‘ means ADB's Safeguard Pokey Statement (2009)

(nn) "Subloan' means agricultural value cham loan made or proposed to be 
made by the PFI out of the proceeds of the A Loan and B Loan to an 
Eligible Sub borrower for an Eligible Activity as described in the PAM and 
in paragraph 12 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

(oo) ‘Subsidiary Loan Agreement' means me agreement between the Borrower 
and each PFI referred to m Section 3 01 of th® Loan Agreement and

(pp) Works' means construction or cwi works as sot out -n the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the A Loan B Loan and 
Grant including any related Nonconsuhing Services, and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibdity ot turnkey 
contract

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 201. (a) ADB agrees to tend to the Borrower from ADBs
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy million Dollar (S70.000.000)

(b) The A Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period' as used m subsection (b) hereinabove means the 
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance w<h the amortization schedule set 
forth m Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2 02 The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at me rate 
of 1% per annum dunng the grace period, and 1 5% per annum thereafter, on the amount ot the 
A Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time



6

Section 2 03 The interest charge and any other charge on the A Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year

Section 2 04 The Borrower shall repay the pnncipal amount of the A Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth in 
Schedule 2 to th>s Loan Agreement

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3 01. The Borrower shall reiend a portion of tne proceeds cf the 
A Loan to each of the PFIs under a separate Subsidiary Loan Agreement for purposes of the 
Component 1 for the Subloans. AIF Subloans. Credit Guarantees and/or Equity Capital Loans 
The Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall provide inter alia for the relending of the proceeds of the 
A Loan to each of tho PFIs, the carrying out of the Project and the rights of the Borrower and 
ADB with respect thereto Such Subsioiary Loan Agreement shall be in form and on terms and 
conditions acceptable to ADB. and shall be without prejudice to. and without Imitation on the 
obligations of the Borrower under mis Loan Agreement

Secton 3 02 (a) E xceot as ADB may otherwise agree the proceeds
of the A Loan made available to the PFIs shall be used only for making Subloans Equity Capital 
Loans and Credit Guarantees to Eligible Sub-borrowers for Eligible Activity and shall be applied 
exclusively to the cost of Goods. Works and Services and other items of expenditure required to 
carry out such Eligible Activity

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the A Loan made available to 
the PFIs to be applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project and specifically 
for purposes of the Eligible Activity by the Eligible Sub-borrowers, tn accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement

Section 3.03 The proceeds of the A Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3 04 Except as ADB may otherwise agree the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of 
the A Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Seaion 3.05 (a) Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to

(i) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and Services 
which a'e supplied from sucn member countries of ADB as shall have been 
specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources for procurement, and



7

(it) Goods. Works and Services when meet such other etigibihty requirements 
as shall have been specified by ADB from time to bme

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(u), Goods Works and Services may also 
be procured under the Project from non-member countnes of ADB

Section 3 06. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8 02 of 
the Loan Regulations shall be 30 August 2027 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4 01 In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project 
facilities the Borrower shal perform, or cause to be performed all obligations set forth m 
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement

Section 4 02. In addition to the information and reports set forth In 
Sections 6 01 and 6 05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrower snail furnish or cause to be 
furnished. Io ADB all such reports and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning 
(a) the Ehg»ble Sub-borrowers, the Eligible Activity and the Sutsoans. Equity Captal Loans and 
Credit Guarantees, and (b) the administration, operations and financial condition of each PFl

Section 4 03. The Borrower shaB enable ADB s representatives to inspect 
the Project, any Eligible Sub-borrower, any Elgible Activity, the Goods. Works and Services, and 
any relevant records and documents

Section 4 04. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project, (■) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in accordance 
with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB. (iii) have such financial statements audited 
annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB. in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB. (iv) as part of each 
such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinions) on the 
financial statements and the use of the A Loan proceeds and a management fetter (which sets 
out the deficiencies m the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the 
audit, if any), and (v) furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after tne end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements audit report and management letter, an m the 
English language and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof 
as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request

(0) ADB snail disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project 
and the opmion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date Of ADB S 
confirmation of their acceptability by posing them on ADB s website

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB. upon ADBs request to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection |a>(m) hereinabove and snal authorize 



and require any representative of such auditors to partcipate m any such discussions requested 
by ADB Thts is provded that such discussions shall be conducted only <i the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Borrower unless the Borrower shat.1 otherwise agree

Section 4 05 The Borrower shall not take or permit any action which 
would interfere w th the performance of PFT» obi g aliens under this Loan Agreement or under the 
Project Agreement

Section 4 06 (a> The Borrower shat* exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the A Loan

(b) No nghts or oblations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be 
assigned amended ab’oga-ed or n*aived without the pnor concurrence of ADB

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5 01 The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower Io make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regu'ations

(a) The Borrower shat nave failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
B Loan and shall nave become iiatse for suspension or cancellation or shall 
have become repayable prior to rts agreed maturity date: and

(b) The Borrower shal have faaed to perform any of its obligations under the 
AFD Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shal have become repayable prior Io its agreed maturity date

Section 5.02 The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations either of the 
events speeded in Section 5 01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01 The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9 01(f) of the Loan Regulations 
the B Loan agreement wil have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower 
and »n conditions precedent to <fs effectiveness, other than a oond<ion requiring the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement snail have been furflied



9

Section 6 02 The tallowing is specified as additional matters for the 
purposes of Section 9 02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to tie mciuded in the opinion or opinions to 
be tarnished to ADB me B Loan Agree men l has Deen duly authonzed or approved by and 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and ts legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with its terms

Section 6 03. A date 90 days after me date of this Loan Agreement ts 
specified for the effectiveness of tn« Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 0 04 of the 
l oan Regulations

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7 01 The Mnister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative o< the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11 02 of the Loan 
Regulations

Section 7 02 The lol.owmg addresses a’e specified for the purposes of 
Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St 92 Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penn
Phnom Penh Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers

(555) 23 427-798
(655) 23 428-424

For APB

As-^n Devetopmenl Bank 
6 AO0 Avenue 
Mandatiyong Cty 
1560 Metro Manna
Ph 4ppine»

Facsanifo Numbers

(632) 8636-2444
(532) 8636-2231



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their representatives 
thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in their respective 
names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the principal office of AO0

KINGDOM OF CA

By
H.E. OR. A PORNMONIROTH

Deputy Pome Minster
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

3v

SUNWYA DURRANI-JAMAL
Country Director 

Cambodia Resident Mission



11

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1 The objective of the Project * to increase the value addition of the selected 
competitive agricultural products in the project areas

2 The Project Shan compose

Component 1: Enhancing the agricultural value chain financing. This output 
includes provision of agricultural value chain loans, equity capital loans and credit 
guarantee by the PFIs to promote investment of agricultural enterprises and 
agricultural cooperatives to strengthen value chains of competitive agricultural 
products

Component 2 Strengthening agricultural value chain linkage and safety. Ths 
output includes establishment of BP between participating agricultural 
cooperatives and participating agro-enterprtses. provision of support in connection 
with obtaining agro-product assurance certificates by participating agricultural 
cooperatives and participating agro-enterpnses support for relevant agriculture 
and poultry research and development, upgrading of agro-product safety testing 
laboratories for ISO accreditation and provision of related prerequisite Stralegc 
plan development and financial viability analyses and enhanang digitalization of 
government services and information and communication system, and

Component 3; Enhancing agricultural value chain connectivity. Th® output 
will improve at least 110 km of rural roads to connect farm to market

3 The Project ® expected to be completed by 28 February 2027



12

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Payment Due

15 May 2026
15 November 2029
15 May 2030
15 November 2030
15 May 2031
15 November 2031
15 May 2032
15 November 2032
15 May 2033
15 November 2033
15 May 2034
15 November 2034
15 May 2035
15 November 2035
15 May 2036
15 November 2036
15 May 2037
15 November 2037
15 May 2038
15 November 2038
15 May 2039
15 November 2039
15 May 2040
15 November 2040
15 May 2041
15 November 2041
15 May 2042
15 November 2042
15 May 2043
15 November 2043
15 May 2044
15 November 2044
15 May 2045
15 November 2045
15 May 2046
15 November 2046

Payment of Principal 
(expressed In USD)*

1.458 333
1,458,333
1,458,333
1.458.333
1.458 333
1,458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458,333
1,458.333
1,458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458,333
1,458,333
1.458,333
1.458,333
1.458,333
1.458,333
1.458,333
1.458,333
1.458.333
1.458,333
1.458.333
1,458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1.458.333
1,458.333
1.458.333 
1 458.333
1,458.333
1,458.333



13

15 May 2047 1 458 333
15 November 2047 1 458 333
15 May 2048 1458 333
15 November 2048 1,458,333
15 May 2049 1458 333
15 November 2049 1458 333
15 May 2050 1 458 333
15 November 2050 1458 333
15 May 2051 1,458 333
15 November 2051 1.458 333
15 May 2052 1 458 333
15 November 2052 1458 349

Total 70,000,000

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions o1 Sections 3 04 and 4 03 of the 
Loan Repulsions



14 

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 

General 

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the A Loan and the allocation of the A Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.) 

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the A Loan shall be allocated 
to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of 
expenditure set forth in the Table. 

Reallocation 

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of the A Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 

(a) if the amount of the A Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may,
by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent
required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the A Loan which have
been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are not
needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot fully
meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable
to such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category
may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the A Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures 

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the A Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account 

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals shall 
be made from the Loan Account for [Financial services Category] until Subsidiary Loan 
Agreements with both PFls, in form and substance satisfacto

r

y to ADB, shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of respective PFI, and shall have become fully effective and 
binding on the parties thereto in accordance with their terms. 



15 
Attachment to Schedule 3 

TABLE 

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF A LOAN PROCEEDS 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Number Item Financing 

($) 
Cateaorv 

1 
Goods, Services, and 

13,509,000 
research and development 

2 Cooperative support 3,223,000 

3 Financial services 49,000,000 

4 Incremental operating cost 1,586,000 

5 Unallocated 2,682,000 

TOTAL 70,000,000 
. .  

• Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed w1th1n the territory of the Borrower.
•• Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account 

100% of total expenditure claimed* 

100% of total expenditure claimed 

100% of total expenditure 
claimed** 

100% of total expenditure claimed 



16 

SCHEDULE 4 

Execution of Project; Financial Matters 

A. Project - General

Implementation Arrangements 

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the Project Implementing Agencies and 
PFls to ensure, that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval 
of such change by the Borrower, PFls, and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the 
PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail. 

Counterpart Support 

2. The Borrower shall ensure that funds necessary for the Project are provided,
including without limitation, the financial charges during implementation and the exemption of
taxes and duties. The Borrower shall ensure that additional counterpart funds are made available
to cover any funding shortfalls that may occur under the Project.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Implementing Agencies provide 
counterpart funds necessary for the Project, including the amount sufficient to finance land 
acquisition costs. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that (i) the Project 
Implementing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Services contract, as well as additional funds to meet any shortfall or cost overruns in 
completing the Project; and (ii) PFls make available funds to the Eligible Activity and the AIF 
Eligible Activity on a timely basis. 

Gender and Development 

4. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause each Project Implementing Agency and PFI 
to ensure, that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents 
and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress 
on implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB 

Prohibited List of Investments 

5. The Borrower shall cause each Project Implementing Agency ar:,d each PFI to 
ensure that no proceeds of the A Loan and B Loan, and JFPR Grant are used to finance any 
activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS. 

Governance and Anticorruption 

6. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing Agencies, 
and the PFls shall (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged 



17 
Schedule 4 

corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with 
any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such 
investigation. 

7. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing Agencies,
and the PFls shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all
bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and
examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

B. Component 1-Agricultural Value Chain Loan, Equity Capital Loan and Credit Guarantee

Eligible PF Is 

8. The Borrower shall ensure that each PFI shall, at all times, fulfill the following
eligibility criteria:

(a) corporate, financial, management and governance practices acceptable to
ADB and MEF;

(b) satisfied ADB's financial, integrity, anti-money laundering and counter­
financing of terrorism due diligence requirements;

(c) satisfy the financial covenant set out in paragraph 9; and

(d) comply with the terms and conditions of the Subsidiary Loan Agreement
between MEF and each PFI.

Financial Covenant for PFls 

9. The Borrower shall ensure that each PFI complies with the following:

(a) gross non-performing loan ratio of less than 5%;

(b) capital adequacy ratio of 15% or as other ratio required by the National
Bank of Cambodia;

(c) liquidity coverage ratio as required by the National Bank of Cambodia;
and

(d) return on equity of at least 2%.

For purposes of this paragraph, the definitions for non-performing loans ratio, 
capital adequacy ratio, and liquidity coverage ratio, as adopted by the National Bank of Cambodia 
shall be applied. In the absence thereof, the Cambodia International Financial Reporting 
Standards and the PFl's operating and risk management framework and policies shall be used. 
The return on equity is expressed as a percentage of net income of the PFI before dividends over 
average shareholder's equity. The financial criteria shall be measured at the end of each year 
based on the annual audited entity financial statements of each PFI, with an auditor's opinion on 
the compliance of the financial covenants. The PFls will furnish to the administrator (project 



18 
Schedule 4 

implementing unit) and ADB a copy of supplemental financial information showing compliance 
with National Bank of Cambodia's prudential regulations. 

Eligible Sub-borrowers 

10. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that Eligible Sub-borrowers are
agricultural cooperatives, farmer groups and farmers engaged in value chains of the specified
agricultural commodities, engaged in agricultural commodity value chain business activities taking
place in the agreed provinces, and that meet such other additional criteria such as registration,
ownership, as are specified in the PAM.

Eligible Activity 

11. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that: (a) Eligible Activities are
activities that: (i) involve the agreed eligible economic investment as set out in the PAM; (ii) comply
with the environmental and social safeguard criterion set out in the PAM; and (iii) are not included
in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS; and (b) otherwise
comply with additional terms set out in the PAM. The Borrower shall further cause each PFI to
ensure that AIF Eligible Activities are a subset of Eligible Activities that are economic investments
in technologies, facilities or business operations that: (a) reduce greenhouse gases and other
pollution; (b) improve energy efficiency; or (c) reduce resource-use, as further described in the
PAM.

Agricultural Value Chain Subloans 

12. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that each Subloan: (a) is
denominated and withdrawn in Dollar and disbursed to Eligible Sub-borrowers in accordance with
procedures specified in the PAM; (b) carries interest at an appropriate rate that takes into account
the cost of funds, administrative costs, credit and other applicable risks associated with the
Subloan and an adequate profit margin for the PFI charged on a declining balance basis; and
otherwise aligned with the market rate; (c) has a repayment period as specified for the relevant
type of Subloan as specified in the PAM; and (d) otherwise comply with the terms set out in the
PAM for (i) the farm production loan, (ii) the short-to-medium term small business loan for working
capital and equipment, (iii) the inventory procurement loan, and (iv) the term loan for fixed
investment and working capital. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that each AIF
Subloan satisfies the requirements of the Subloan and that AIF Subloans are offered for short-to­
medium term small business loans for working capital and equipment or term loans for fixed
capital investment and working capital, as further described in the PAM.

Credit Guarantees 

13. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that each Credit Guarantee is
extended to the Eligible Sub-borrowers in accordance with the terms and procedures specified in
the PAM. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Credit Guarantee is
offered only after appropriate governance structure and operational safeguards to address
financial risks involved with Credit Guarantee, have been established by the Borrower to oversee
the Credit Guarantee scheme, as reasonably agreed by ADB.
Equity Capital Loans



19 
Schedule 4 

14. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that each Equity Capital Loan is
extended to the Eligible Sub-borrowers in accordance with the terms and procedures specified in
the PAM.

Procurement 

15. 

Safeguards 

The Borrower shall ensure, or shall cause each PFI to ensure, that: 

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement
Regulations;

(b) each Eligible Sub-borrower undertakes procurement of Goods, Works and
Services with due attention to economy and efficiency and in accordance
with established private sector or commercial practices, acceptable to ADB;
and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or
infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any
third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of Goods, Works and
Services contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if
appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, consultant or service
provider with respect to the matters referred to in this subparagraph.

Screening, Categorization, and Environmental and Social Assessment and Planning 

16. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that before any subproject is
approved as an Eligible Activity or AIF Eligible Activity: (a) adopts the ESMS, (b) the PFI has
appointed designated staff for implementation of safeguard under Component 1 of the Project;
(c) the ESMS is used to screen and categorize the significance of potential environmental,
involuntary resettlement or indigenous peoples impacts associated with such subproject; and
(d) if such subproject is Category B for environment within the meaning of the SPS, the IEE and
the EMP are prepared for each such subproject in accordance with ESMS.

17. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement or B Loan Agreement,
no withdrawals shall be made from the A Loan Account or B Loan Account for the purpose of any
Eligible Activity or AIF Eligible Activity until the Borrower has caused the PFls to establish the
ESMS in a manner satisfactory to ADB.

18. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that each Eligible Activity and Al F
Eligible Activity involves no involuntary resettlement or indigenous peoples impacts, all within the
meaning of the SPS.

19. Without limiting paragraph 18 of this Schedule: (a) in the event that any subproject
that has been assessed as an Eligible Activity or AIF Eligible Activity does have an impact of the
type described in paragraph 18 of this Schedule, the Borrower shall cause the applicable PFI to



20 
Schedule 4 

promptly notify ADS and ensure that all steps are taken to ensure that the Eligible Activity and 
AIF Eligible Activity comply with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the 
SPS; and (b) the Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that in respect of any proposed Eligible 
Activity and AIF Eligible Activity that involves the acquisition or transfer of any interest in land, 
such acquisition or transfer is between willing parties and not under eminent domain. 

20. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that (a) Eligible Sub-borrower
prepare, design, construct, implement, operate and decommission the Eligible Activity and AIF
Eligible Activity in accordance with (i) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating
to environment, health and safety; (ii) the Environmental Safeguards; (iii) the ESMS; (iv) all
measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, where such measures are
required for an Eligible Activity and AIF Eligible Activity with environmental safeguards category
B under the ESMS; and (v) any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards
Monitoring Report; and (b) any adverse impact on the environment that may arise from Eligible
Activity and AIF Eligible Activity implementation activities is promptly mitigated or minimized and
reported to ADS in accordance with the ESMS.

21. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that (a) necessary budgetary and
human resources are made available to fully implement the ESMS; and (b) each Eligible Sub­
borrower under the Eligible Activity and AIF Eligible Activity makes necessary budget and human
resources to fully implement the respective EMP.

ESMS Monitoring and Reporting 

22. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to do the following: (a) submit semiannual
reports about the PFl's implementation of its ESMS to the Borrower for compilation and timely
submission by the Borrower to ADS; (b) inform ADB of the occurrence of any unanticipated
environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during Eligible Activity and AIF Eligible Activity
implementation, with detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and
(c) report to the Borrower and ADS any actual or potential breach of compliance with the
measures and requirements set forth in the ESMS and any EMP promptly after becoming aware
of the breach. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to review the effectiveness of its ESMS
implementation after 12 months of Project implementation, and report to the Borrower as part of
the semiannual report on ESMS implementation, and make any necessary changes as required
by ADB and Borrower following such review.

Grievance Redress Mechanism 

23. Each PFI to ensure that, grievance redress mechanism acceptable to ADS is
established at the PMU under MAFF. In addition, each PFI to ensure that its respective existing
customer service which includes letter boxes at branch offices, telephone hotline and on-line
social media platform will be made available for Component 1.

Labor Standards 

24. The Borrower shall cause each PFI to ensure that core labor standards and applicable
laws and regulations of the Borrower, including workplace occupational safety requirements, are
complied with during implementation of any Eligible Activity and AIF Eligible Activity.



21 

Schedule 4 

Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism 

25. The Borrower shall ensure that each PFI:

(a) complies with applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower on
combating money laundering and financing of terrorism and that A Loan,
B Loan, and JFPR Grant proceeds are not used, directly or indirectly, in
money laundering or financing of terrorism;

(b) formulates and implements internal control procedures, including customer
due diligence procedures, to prevent violation of subparagraph (a)
hereinabove; and

(c) promptly informs the Borrower and ADB if there is any violation or potential
violation of subparagraph (a) hereinabove. In the event that ADB informs
the relevant PFI of its concern that there has been such an alleged
violation, the relevant PFI shall (i) cooperate in good faith with ADB and its
representatives so that ADB can determine whether such a violation has
occurred, (ii) respond promptly and in reasonable detail to any query from
ADB, and (iii) furnish documentary support for such response upon ADB's
request.

Post-Project Utilization 

26. Following completion of the Project, the Borrower shall assess whether funds
repaid by PF ls to the Borrower are to be recycled for further lending to financial intermediaries in
accordance with the following: (a) selected in a manner consistent with the selection of the PFls
under Component 1 of the Project; and (b) for subloans, credit guarantees and/or Equity Capital
Loans to sub-borrowers for subprojects, in each case similar in terms and nature to Subloans,
Credit Guarantees, Equity Capital Loans, Eligible Sub-borrowers Eligible Activity and AIF Eligible
Activity under Component 1 of the Project.

C. Component 2 and Component 3- Project

Procurement 

27. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Implementing Agencies to ensure,
that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the procurement
and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and ADB's review
requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed arrangements set
forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior agreement of ADB, and
such modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan;
and



22 

Schedule 4 

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or
infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any
third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of Goods, Works and
Services contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if
appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, consultant or service
provider with respect to the matters referred to in this subparagraph.

28. The Borrower shall cause each Project Implementing Agency not to award any
Works or Nonconsulting Services contracts which involves environmental impacts until such
Project Implementing Agency has:

Safeguards 

Environment 

(a) obtained the final approval of the applicable IEE from the Borrower's
relevant authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works contract.

29. For Component 2, the Borrower shall cause MAFF to implement the rapid
environmental assessment checklist for screening and assessing small infrastructure
developments by agricultural cooperatives, as set out in the EMP, and ensure compliance with
the terms and conditions of the IBP agreement, as applicable. For Component 3, the Borrower
shall ensure or cause the MRD to ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities comply
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the
IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring
Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement 

30. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary
resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the Project does have
any such impact, the Borrower shall take necessary steps to ensure that the Project complies with
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

31. For Component 2, the Borrower shall ensure that the MAFF implements the
safeguards criteria set out in PAM to screen and categorize small scale infrastructure projects,
and ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the IBP agreement. For Component 3,
the Borrower shall ensure or cause MRD to ensure: (a) the due diligence report on the Project
roads is updated upon completion of detailed engineering design on those Project roads to
confirm that there is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition impacts, and submitted,
together with all the relevant supporting document, to ADB for review; and (b) no Works contract
will commence until ADB has given its no-objection.



23 

Schedule 4 

32. In the case of land donations for the Project, the Borrower shall ensure that:
(a) eminent domain or other powers of the Borrower is not involved in the acquisition; (b) such
donations are implemented in accordance with the CPF; (c) there was informed consent and
power of choice of affected persons through a prior and informed consultation(s) with them; and
(d) such donations do not severely affect the living standards of the affected persons but benefit
them directly.

33. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project
are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the
related Works contract.

Indigenous Peoples 

34. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Implementing Agencies to ensure
that the Project does not have any indigenous peoples impacts within the meaning of the SPS.
In the event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall carry out a social
impact assessment and prepare an indigenous peoples plan for the Project to ensure that the
Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements 

35. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Implementing Agencies to
make available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP, the IBP
agreement, and the CPF.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts 

36. The Borrower shall'ensure or cause the Project Implementing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE,
the EMP, and the Screening Report prepared for Component 2 and CPF
and Due Diligence Report prepared for Component 3, and any corrective
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social measures;

(c) provide the EA with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental,
resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not
considered in the IEE, the EMP, the IBP agreement and the CPF;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.



24 

Schedule 4 

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting 

37. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Project Implementing Agencies
to do the following:

(a) submit consolidated environment and social semi-annual Safeguards
Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose relevant information from such
reports to affected persons promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the IBP agreement, and the CPF,
promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and
requirements set forth in the EMP, the IBP agreement or the CPF promptly
after becoming aware of the breach; and

(d) prior to the commencement of the Works, prepare and submit to ADB a
Due Diligence Report which certifies that all activities, measures and
requirements set forth in the CPF are duly accomplished.

Grievance Redress Mechanism 

38. The Borrower shall ensure that: (a) a separate local safeguards grievance redress
mechanism, acceptable to ADB, that has been established for the Project in accordance with the
provisions of the EMP, the CPF and the SPS, is maintained throughout the Project
implementation, to consider any safeguards complaint; and (b) the local grievance redress
mechanism is functioning effectively to (i) review and document eligible complaints of Project
stakeholders; (ii) proactively address grievances; (iii) provide the complainants with notice of the
chosen mechanism/action; (iv) prepare periodic reports to summarize the number of complaints
received and resolved, chosen actions; and final outcomes/status of the grievances; and (v) make
these reports available to ADB as part of the Safeguard Monitoring Report, including semiannual
reports and reports upon request. Eligible complaints include those related to the Project, any of
the service providers, any person responsible for carrying out the Project, complaints on misuse
of funds and other irregularities, and gender-related grievances.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety 

39. The Borrower shall cause the Project Implementing Agencies to ensure that the
core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during
Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other
things: (a) comply with the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate
workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict
the workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate,
or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually



25 

Schedule 4 

transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the 
Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly 
women. 

40. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in
paragraph 39 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Support for Laboratory Investment 

41. MAFF will ensure that before any works or goods contract is advertised for bidding
for laboratory upgrading under Component 2, MAFF will: (a) prepare and adopt a ministerial
strategic plan for laboratory upgrading, which will be in line with the requirements of international
accreditation (ISO 17025 or the equivalent); and (b) prepare a business plan and financial viability
analysis for such laboratory. Both (a) and (b) should be acceptable for the MEF and ADB.

Support for ICT Investment 

42. MAFF will ensure that before any works or goods contract is advertised for bidding
for any ICT under Component 2, MAFF will: (a) prepare and adopt a ministerial ICT development
strategic plan; and (b) the proposed ICT investment has been reviewed, and endorsed by the
inter-ministerial working group for ICT Project Review and Evaluation established under MEF
Decision No. 050 MEF dated 29 July 2020, as amended from time to time.

O&M of Project Facilities 

43. The Borrower shall cause the Project Implementing Agencies to ensure that the
Project facilities are operated and maintained appropriately and in accordance with the standards
and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower, and that
adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. Further, Borrower
shall cause the Project Implementing Agencies to monitor operation and maintenance of the
Project facilities, and update the financial sustainability analysis at least once a year throughout
the Project implementation. Each Project Implementing Agency shall consult with ADB if any key
assumptions in the financial sustainability analysis cannot be realized and will require adjustment
or corrective action.
















































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3932-BAN: Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing


LOAN NUMBER 3932-BAN(COL) 
[Additional Financing to Loan 3731-BAN and Loan 3732-BAN(COL)]

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 JUNE 2020

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 June 2020 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
BANGLADESH ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a loan from its ordinary capital 
resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Initial Loan”) to the 
Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the project described in Schedule 1 of 
the Initial Loan Agreement (“Initial Project”);

(B) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Concessional Loan Agreement”). ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) 
("Initial Concessional Loan”) to the Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the 
Initial Project:

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
scaling up of the Initial Project, as described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED”) under the Local Government Division of the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to LGED the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and 
conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Participation Framework” or “CPF” means the community 
participation framework for the Project, including any update thereto, as 
agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Initial Project and 
revised for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Initial Project 
as revised for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(l) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 29 
April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
29 April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



3

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) "Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 16 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources (concessional) an amount of one hundred million Dollars 
($100,000,000).



4

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for suspension 
of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the purposes of 
Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Initial Loan or the Initial Concessional Loan shall 
have become liable for suspension or cancellation in accordance with the terms of the Initial 
Loan Agreement or Initial Concessional Loan Agreement respectively.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for acceleration 
of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event specified in 
Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary, Secretary, any Additional 
Secretary. Chief, Joint Secretary, Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary, Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary, Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh



7

Facsimile Number:

(880) 2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 APB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2340.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

FATIMA YASMIN 
Secretary 

Economics Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By________ _ __________________
MANMOHAN PARKASH 

Country Director 
Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1
I

Description of the Project

1 The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

The Project will scale up the Initial Project and shall comprise improving the 
condition of approximately 930 km of rural roads to all-weather standards which incorporate 
climate resilience and safety features.

3 The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Date Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(expressed in USD)*

1 November 2025
1 May 2026
1 November 2026
1 May 2027
1 November 2027
1 May 2028
1 November 2028
1 May 2029
1 November 2029
1 May 2030
1 November 2030
1 May 2031
1 November 2031
1 May 2032
1 November 2032
1 May 2033
1 November 2033
1 May 2034
1 November 2034
1 May 2035
1 November 2035
1 May 2036
1 November 2036
1 May 2037
1 November 2037
1 May 2038
1 November 2038
1 May 2039
1 November 2039
1 May 2040
1 November 2040
1 May 2041
1 November 2041
1 May 2042
1 November 2042
1 May 2043
1 November 2043
1 May 2044
1 November 2044
1 May 2045

2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000 
2,500,000

Total 100,000,000

* The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 
4.03 of the Loan Regulations.



11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1 The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5 Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible 
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
___________ ($)___________

Category

1

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 90,100,000 65% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Unallocated 4,900,000

TOTAL 100,000,000
Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the 
PAM Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this 
Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all 
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency does not award 
any Works or Nonconsulting Services contracts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.



14

Schedule 4

Community Participation Framework (CPF)

4 The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project Executing Agency to, implement 
the CPF as agreed with ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower.

5 The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure, 
no section or part thereof under any Works contract awarded for the Project shall be handed 
over to the contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been implemented in 
full.

Operation and Maintenance

The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and 
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to the Project Executing Agency on a timely basis for the same 
purpose.

Environment

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) 
all measures and requirements set forth in the I EE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the Project does not have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, 
Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agency to 
make available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people



15

Schedule 4
I

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the I EE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation.or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing 
Agency includes specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB 



16

Schedule 4

under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to strictly monitor 
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

15 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets in the GAP are achieved.

Counterpart Support

16 The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient 
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18 The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.



























































51423-002: Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project


LOAN NUMBER 3896-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 MAY 2020

MON 51423



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 May 2020 between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a concessional loan (“COL 
Loan”) in an amount of twenty-five million three hundred thousand Dollars ($25,300,000) to 
assist in financing the Project from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, upon the terms and 
conditions set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“COL Loan 
Agreement”, together with this Loan Agreement, “Loan Agreements”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied to the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
for a grant (“JFPR Grant”) in an amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) to assist in financing 
a part of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon the terms and conditions set forth 
in a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CGG” means a community grower group to be supported under the 
Project;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “DEIA" means a Detailed Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(d) “EBA” means an environment baseline assessment for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMDP” means ethnic minority development plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) “EMP” means the consolidated environmental management plan for the 
Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “GEIA” means a General Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(j) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(k) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(l) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MET” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Environment and Tourism, or 
any successor thereto;

(o) “MOF” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance, or any successor 
thereto;

(p) “MOFALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light 
Industry, or any successor thereto;



3

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 18 
December 2019and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “PIU” means a Project implementation unit established within MOFALI;

(u) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated - 
18 December 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(v) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(w) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(x) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MOFALI, or any successor acceptable 
to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(y) “Project facilities” means facilities to be constructed, procured, 
rehabilitated and/or maintained under the Project;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation and compliance with the EMP, including any corrective 
and preventative actions;

(aa) “SDAP" means the social development action plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(bb) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(cc) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(dd) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fourteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($14,700,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 19 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit 
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 August and 15 February in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and



5

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall perform, or cause 
to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 



6

management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, 
shall enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the COL Loan and JFPR Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of the COL Loan Agreement and the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been 
duly executed and delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.



7

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of MOF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S.Danzan Street 5/1
Ulaanbaatar-15160
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

(976-11)320247

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2407.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPME

By
PAVIT RAMIACHANDRAN

Country Director 
Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase efficiency of climate resilient 
agricultural production and marketing.

2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs.

Output 1: Efficient and climate-resilient irrigation infrastructure and 
management systems installed. Upgrading, modernizing and climate­
proofing selected irrigation systems along with directly associated infrastructure 
providing irrigation services for 7,000 ha.

Output 2: Environmentally sustainable production systems improved.
Improving food safety, environment sustainability and climate resilience of 
agriculture production systems, through (a) supporting the National Institute for 
Plant Protection with testing equipment and reagents for additional testing 
capacity; and (b) supporting, through the coordination of the national extension 
center, four regional crop research institutes with: (i) provision of equipment and 
facilities such as climate-controlled growth chambers, storage cool rooms, 
sheds, fencing, mechanization packages, seed cleaning and packaging 
equipment, conservation farming equipment, and teaching facilities; (II) small- 
scale irrigation rehabilitation and modernization; and (Hi) greenhouses including 
low-carbon options for extending cropping seasons, high value vegetable 
cultivation and quality seedling production.

Output 3: Technical, institutional and management capacity and 
coordination strengthened. Setting up CGGs in the selected irrigation 
systems and providing training on improved vegetable production for CGG 
participating farmers in collaboration with crop research institutes, and providing 
mechanization technology packages, all-weather greenhouses with solar- 
powered heating and long-life films, and small cool rooms for product storage.

3. Parts of Output 1 and Output 3 shall be financed by the JFPR Grant.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)

15 August 2026
15 February 2027
15 August 2027
15 February 2028
15 August 2028
15 February 2029
15 August 2029
15 February 2030
15 August 2030
15 February 2031
15 August 2031
15 February 2032
15 August 2032
15 February 2033
15 August 2033
15 February 2034
15 August 2034
15 February 2035
15 August 2035
15 February 2036
15 August 2036
15 February 2037
15 August 2037
15 February 2038
15 August 2038
15 February 2039
15 August 2039
15 February 2040
15 August 2040

2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579
2.631579



11

Schedule 2

15 February 2041 2.631579
15 August 2041 2.631579
15 February 2042 2.631579
15 August 2042 2.631579
15 February 2043 2.631579
15 August 2043 2.631579
15 February 2044 2.631579
15 August 2044 2.631579
15 February 2045 2.631577
Total 100.000000

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal in 
said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.



12

Schedule 2

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest and Commitment Charges” is for 
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Goods and Works3 11,391,228 100% of total expenditure claimed*

2 Services3 805,084 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Interest andCommitment Charges 837,396 100% of amounts due

4 Unallocated 1,666,292

TOTAL 14,700,000
Exclusive of VAT and duties.

a Proceeds of the COL Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to 
disbursement of this loan for this category.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Environment, Social, Financial and Other Matters

General Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that an 
implementation agreement shall be entered into with each aimag government which shall 
among things (a) define aimag government responsibilities for operating and maintaining the 
irrigation systems, (b) ensure sufficient amount of funding for maintenance is in place in the 
aimag annual budget, (c) ensure small-farmers are the beneficiaries of the irrigated systems 
for at least 15 years (land lease agreement period), (d) have appropriate systems in place for 
selecting land leasers to be included in the irrigated systems area, (e) ensure there are 
transparent irrigation fee systems in place which shall cover, at least partially, O&M costs.

Procurement

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all 
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall not award any 
Works contract, and shall ensure no Works contract is awarded, which involves environmental 
impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:



16

Schedule 4

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s relevant 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

Counterpart Funds

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) 
counterpart funds are made available to the Project in a timely manner, including additional 
counterpart funds, as and when required, to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during 
Project implementation; and (b) O&M of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In 
addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from Works, Goods, and/or Consulting Services 
contracts.

Environment

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, commissioning, implementation and operation of the project 
and all Project facilities comply with: (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all 
measures and requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower. In case of any discrepancy or inconsistency among the 
Borrower’s laws, regulations and procedures relating to environment, health and safety and the 
SPS, the SPS shall prevail.

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no 
Works shall be conducted for a subproject until domestic requirements for environmental 
assessment have been completed and approved by the relevant domestic agencies. This shall 
include, but not be limited to: (a) the preparation of an EBA for each subproject by a certified 
domestic agency, and the submission of this assessment to MET for review; (b) the issuance 
of a GEIA Letter by the MET, which endorses the subproject EBA and clarifies whether a DEIA 
is required; (c) the preparation of a DEIA for each subproject, as required; and (d) subsequent 
review and approval of the DEIAs by MET. The Borrower, through the Project Executing 
Agency, shall further ensure that any environmental safeguard conditions specified by MET for 
any subproject, through the GEIA Letter, DEIA, or other means, which are not covered under 
the project EMP, shall be (i) integrated in the EMP, and (ii) included in all bidding documents.

8. After completion of the EBA, GEIA, and/or DEIA for each subproject, the 
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall submit the following documents to ADB 
for review: (a) the summary findings of the EBA, GEIA Letter, and DEIA; and (b) English- 
language translations of the GEIA Letter and MET letter of conclusion following completion of 
the DEIA. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that any findings 
or conclusions that represent new safeguard risks and/or mitigation tasks or costs which are 
not already included in the EMP, shall be discussed between MET, MOFALI, PIU and ADB 
and any additional requirements shall be included in the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that, in 
compliance with SPS, an ecological survey for rare, threatened and restricted-range species 
and their uses of the subproject area will be implemented, by a certified biodiversity 
specialist(s) and using an internationally accepted survey methodology for Okhindiin Tai 
subproject. The resulted assessment shall (a) cover the ecological values of the specific 
subproject area, (b) strengthen the preliminary ecological impact assessment undertaken in 
the IEE, (c) develop detailed mitigation measures, and (d) conclude on the final net (residual) 
ecological impacts and whether these are acceptable under the SPS and/or national 
regulations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that 
such assessment will be undertaken before the detailed engineering designs are completed 
and approved, and can be done as part of, or in parallel with, the DEIA. No works shall 
commence for the subproject before ADB and the Borrower have reviewed and approved the 
ecological survey, impact assessment, and detailed engineering designs.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no 
pesticides or other chemicals classified as “hazardous" or restricted-use by the World Health 
Organization or the government will be funded by the project. Prohibited chemicals shall 
include omethoate and methamidophos (pesticides) and bromadolion (a rodenticide).

11. In compliance with national requirements for the provision of environmental 
flows, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the water 
allocation extraction volumes calculated for each subproject for environmental flows and 
irrigation (and which are included in lEE’s Appendix 5 and the feasibility study reports for each 
subproject) are included in detailed engineering designs and complied with. The Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that, for this purpose: (a) water 
extraction for each subproject will be monitored on a monthly basis by each soum government 
Project coordinator; (b) the monitoring results will be reported on a monthly basis to the 
subproject soum government and PIU, and compared against the monthly environmental flow 
rates calculated for each project river; (c) the monitoring results will be submitted at least 
annually to the relevant River Basin Administration responsible for the subproject rivers, for 
review and confirmation that extraction volumes comply with the permitted allocations; and (d) 
based on these comparisons, corrective actions will be identified in the event that irrigation 
water extraction is clearly exceeding the modeled acceptable extraction volumes.

12. For the associated facilities to the Project, as provided in the PAM, the 
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that they are maintained in 
accordance with domestic requirements for environmental management, including, but not 
limited to, environmental safety measures, water allocation approvals, and worker and 
community health and safety. In case any changes are made to such existing facilities which 
would significantly impact their capacity or function and as a result the viability of the Project, 
the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall immediately advise ADB of such 
changes, and the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall assess the Project 
impact and prepare a corrective action plan, if necessary, to be agreed with ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples

13. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
Project does not have any indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within 
the meaning of SPS. In the event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency and other agencies as necessary, shall take all steps 



18

Schedule 4

required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, the resettlement framework and with SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards and Social Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available 
necessary human and budgetary resources to fully implement, as applicable, the EMP, SDAP 
and GAP.

Safeguards-Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

15. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and PIU to, 
ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain specific provisions that 
require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under the Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) 
a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) subsequently agreed between 
ADB and the Borrower;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous people risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the project that 
were not considered in the IEE and the EMP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

16. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB semiannually during 
construction and the implementation of the Project and the EMP, and 
thereafter annually during operation, until the issuance of ADB’s Project 
completion report unless a longer period is agreed in the EMP, and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to the respective affected 
people under the Environmental Safeguards, promptly upon submission; 
and

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event 
and proposed corrective action plan.



19

Schedule 4

Gender and Social Development

17. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the 
GAP and SDAP are implemented in accordance with their terms; (b) the bidding documents 
and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth 
in the GAP and SDAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP 
and SDAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP and SDAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender and social outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Works Contract

18. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core 
labor standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things (a) comply with the applicable labor 
law and regulations of the Borrower and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment; (f) do not delay any lawful payment to the workers; and 
(g) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further 
ensure that this paragraph shall be applicable to any workers regardless of their nationality, 
and strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide 
ADB with semiannual reports.

Grievance and Redress Mechanism

19. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that 
safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in accordance 
with the provisions of the IEE and the EMP at the project management office, within the 
timeframes specified in the relevant IEE and EMP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Household connections

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that water 
supply to all households within the water supply network under the Project is in operation with 
adequate connections by the Project completion.

Land Leasing

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, , shall ensure that the 
existing land lease contracts for irrigation systems to be covered by the Project for which land 
has been leased out by the soum governments to farmers and companies for agriculture 
purpose, the existing terms and conditions of the lease are maintained. The Borrower shall 
ensure by causing MOFALI to issue a letter to soum governments involved in the project that 



20

Schedule 4

they shall not revoke land possession rights issued to farming households. Forthose irrigation 
systems with which the land lease contracts are not yet in place, the Borrower, through the 
Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all farmers have a certificate, a map of the leased 
land and a contract, with the land lease contracts with the terms and conditions which are (a) 
in line with the principle of fairness and equity; (b) reflect the willingness of households who 
are leasing land; and (c) are in line with the Borrower’s Land Law and Crop Planting Law, and 
relevant requirements by ADB.

Governance and Anticorruption

22. The Borrower shall and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and other 
government agencies involved in the Project to comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, 
as amended to date) and the Borrower acknowledges that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project. The Borrower agrees to cooperate, and to cause the Project Executing 
Agency and all other government offices, organizations and entities involved in implementing 
the Project to cooperate, fully with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance, 
including providing access to all relevant books and records as may be necessary for the 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, the PIU, other government 
agencies involved in the Project, and all contractors, suppliers, consultants and other services 
providers as they relate to the Project.



