















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Eirivelthon S. Lima 
(RND/CPE) and Juan Manuel Murguía Baysse (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; 
Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND); Mario González Flores 
(SPD/SDV); Michael Kent and Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); 
Carolina Escudero (FMP/CBO); Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); and 
Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND).  

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. 
Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 
available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.  

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale .......................................... 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to 

increase legal certainty over rural property. ................................................... 8 
C. Results matrix and key indicators. ................................................................ 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Economic viability ....................................................................................... 10 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
E. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements ............................................ 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan  

2. Annual Work Plan 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Plan  

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic Analysis of the Project 

2. Institutional Analysis 

3. Sector Analysis 

4. Strategic Environmental and Social Evaluation of the Program 

5. Draft Program Operating Regulations 

6. Consolidated Budget  

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319371
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319624
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319558
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319364
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319629
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319484
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320821
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319541


 - iii - 
 
 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ABT Autoridad de Fiscalización y Control Social de Bosques y Tierra [Forest 
and Land Social Control and Oversight Authority] 

APMT Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra [Mother Earth Plurinational 
Authority] 

AWP Annual Work Plan 
CIOC Comunidades Interculturales Originarias [Original Intercultural 

Communities] 
DDRR Registro de Derechos Reales [Real Property Rights Registry] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Planning Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas [National Statistics Institute] 
INRA Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria [National Agrarian Reform 

Institute] 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural Development and Land 
MEF Ministry of Economy and Public Finance 
MPD Ministry of Planning and Development 
PCR Program Completion Report 
SESA Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
SIC Sistema Integrado de Catastro [Integrated Cadastre System] 
SIMAT Sistema de Mantenimiento y Administración de Tierra [Land 

Maintenance and Management System] 
TIOC Territorios Indígena Comunitario Campesino [Rural Community 

Indigenous Territories] 
VIPFE Office of the Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External 

Financing  
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia  OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 
Executing Agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 51,000,000 51 
Inspection and supervision 
fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

IDB (FSO): 9,000,000 9 Interest rate: SCF fixed
(b) 

0.25% 

Local cofinancing: 40,000,000 40 
Credit fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

Approval currency: US$ US$ 

Total: 100,000,000 100 

Project at a Glance 

Program objective/description: To increase legal certainty over rural property. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of 

Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) will sign a 
subsidiary agreement defining the following matters, among others: (a) the method to be used to transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; 
and (b) INRA’s commitment to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); 
(ii) appointment of the Director of INRA’s Planning Bureau (DGP) as the program’s general coordinator and of the program 
component coordinators, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and the contracting of the following 
specialists: financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social management, through a competitive process, in 
accordance with terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) the entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7). 

Special contractual conditions by component: Evidence of the signing and entry into force of the following interagency 

cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA and the Real Property Rights Registry prior to the disbursement to finance activities 
related to public registries under Component 2 (paragraph 3.5); (ii) between INRA and the Forest and Land Social Control and 
Oversight Authority, the Madre Tierra [Mother Earth] Plurinational Authority, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, prior to 
disbursement to finance activities related to the program’s Environmental and Social Management Plan in Component 2 (paragraph 
3.5); and (iii) between INRA and the National Statistics Institute, prior to disbursement to finance activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan (paragraph 3.5). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(b)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-cutting issues
(c)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the 

Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies. 
(b)

 The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balances of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan at a LIBOR-based rate. Once the outstanding 
balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is greater, the rate will be set for this balance. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law). 

 
 

 



 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Property rights over land and agricultural competitiveness. The agriculture 
sector is one of the most important sectors of the Bolivian economy. Between 2002 
and 2014, average annual growth in the sector was 4.16%, accounting for close to 
13.4% of gross domestic product. It employs 30% of the total labor force nationally 
and is even more significant in rural areas where it employs 62% of the labor force. 
The agriculture sector also makes a significant contribution to Bolivian exports; 
between 1999 and 2014, exports grew at an average annual rate of 13%, leaping 
from US$247 million to US$1.29 billion. Over this period, the agriculture sector 
accounted for between 14% and 18% of the total value of the country’s exports.1 
Considering that the economy of rural households is closely tied to agricultural 
activities, growth in the sector contributed to a 21 percentage point reduction in 
rural poverty levels, with poverty falling from 62% to 39% (Castellani and Zenteno, 
2015).  

1.2 Despite the importance of the agriculture sector, a detailed examination shows low 
productivity levels. According to the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), agricultural yield from grain production is 57% of the average 
for South America and 39% in the case of starchy root crops. In addition, a Bank 
analysis shows that growth in Bolivia’s total factor productivity has been lower than 
the regional average, with a decline in efficiency but increases in technological 
change (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Data from the Social and Economic Policy Analysis 
Unit indicate that the area under cultivation increased by 460,000 hectares 
between 2006 and 2014. This means that sector growth has been due more to 
expansion of the area under cultivation than to increased productivity. Sector 
growth was concentrated in a small group of items intended for export in the 
eastern part of the country, where producers have benefited from the region’s 
natural characteristics (soils, topography, and water), a good level of public 
spending on sector public goods, and private investments in intensive systems of 
production with access to financing and the latest technologies. 

1.3 The agriculture sector’s potential contribution to economic growth and rural poverty 
reduction depends on farmers’ increased productivity, particularly among small and 
medium-sized producers (World Bank, 2008; Escobal, J., 2012). In Bolivia, most 
small and medium-sized producers are located in the valleys and highlands. The 
main items of those agricultural producers are crops such as potato, corn, and 
grains. More than 80% of the parcels with pending regularization and titling belong 
to the small farmer category, which includes rural producers with fewer than two 
hectares in the highlands and up to 50 hectares in the lowlands. These agricultural 
producers are estimated to represent 83% of the country’s rural households.2 

1.4 Improving agriculture sector productivity and thus efficiency and sustainability in 
the use of land in Bolivia requires investments in sector public goods to promote 
farmers’ private productive investments (Lopez, 2004, Blackman et al. 2014, 
Quisumbing and Kumar, 2014; Ali, et al., 2014). A requirement for achieving this 

                                                
1
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC). What Does Bolivia Export? 

(http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 
2
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura 

http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura


- 2 - 

objective is to establish secure property rights over land. According to the available 
empirical evidence, such rights reduce the risk of expropriation and give farmers 
the incentive to make investments that increase productivity and the sustainability 
of rural properties. In the Bolivian case, the empirical evidence is limited because 
no rigorous assessments of the impacts of titling on the productivity and 
sustainable management of agricultural producers’ natural resources have been 
done. Nonetheless, empirical evidence in the region shows the positive impact of 
titling on the use of inputs, increased productive investments, stimulation of the 
land market, reduced deforestation, and farmers’ income (Aldana and Fort, 2001, 
Ghatak and Besley, 2010; Deininger and Chamorro, 2004; Hernández and 
Reardon, 2012; Foltz, Larson and Lopez, 2000, Torrero and Field, 2005; Zegarra, 
2008, Gignoux, J. et al. 2013; Lawry et al. 2014; and Rockson et al., 2013). 

1.5 Property rights, sustainability, and conflicts. Property rights in and of 
themselves do not guarantee the sustainable use of natural resources. In 
Nicaragua, the assignment of property rights improved agricultural productivity and 
also increased the rate of deforestation (Liscow, 2013). The preliminary data for 
Bolivia (Santa Cruz) indicate that land titling, particularly for ranchers, increases 
deforestation (Murguia, 2016). Thus, if the regularization of rural property rights is 
not accompanied by a legal framework and the corresponding environmental 
management instruments, the results of rural titling tend to generate environmental 
degradation. In this regard, the evidence shows that a requirement for ensuring the 
positive impacts of rural land titling on environmental management is the ability to 
monitor and penalize violations (OECD, 2009). With respect to social conflicts, 
10% of the last 25 million hectares subject to intervention are paralyzed by social 
conflicts. This problem is estimated to be significant in the area where property 

rights are yet to be regularized, covering 15 million hectares (paragraph 1.6), in that 
small landholdings (minifundios) are involved (Carrasco, 2016). Under this 
scenario, dispute resolution is important to remove barriers to titling. 

1.6 Status of regularization and titling. The Bolivian government has made 
significant strides in the regularization of rural property and the regularization, 
cadastre, titling, and registration of rural lands is reaching its final stage. Table 1 
indicates that the regularization and titling target was approximately 106 million 
hectares. Between 1996 and 2014, the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 
has been involved in interventions covering approximately 93 million hectares as 
follows: (i) it regularized and titled approximately 41 million private hectares, which 
included collective properties (Territorios Indígenas Comunitarios Campesinos 
[Rural Community Indigenous Territories] (TIOCs) and Comunidades 
Interculturales Originarias [Native Intercultural Communities (CIOCs)) and 
individual properties; (ii) it regularized approximately 25 million hectares of public 
lands; and (iii) it made headway with the regularization of rural lands that did not 
yet comply with all the legal and technical requirements, involving 27 million 
hectares. The work of regularization, titling, and registration of rural lands that is 
pending for the next few years is to continue in the areas not yet subject to 
intervention, amounting to 15 million hectares, and to finalize the regularization 
process in 25 million hectares that were already subject to intervention but have 
not yet complied with all the requirements of the regularization process. 

1.7 The indigenous peoples and intercultural communities were the primary 
beneficiaries of INRA’s interventions, for a total of approximately 32 million titled 
hectares, which represents 78% of the total titled area in the country (Table 1). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 3 - 

This is the result of the effect of Law 3,545, which gave priority to the regularization 
and titling of TIOCs and CIOCs. Small and medium-sized properties occupy 
second place in terms of titled area, with 5.6 million hectares, which represents 
14% of the country’s titled area. According to INRA, this individual titling progress 
occurs in settlement areas, Andean-Amazonian transition areas, and integrated 
management areas of the Amboró National Park (Cochabamba and Santa Cruz). 
Lastly, three million hectares held by agricultural companies were dealt with in the 
regularization process, representing 8% of the country’s titled area. The company-
held properties are located in Santa Cruz, Pando, and Beni. 

Table 1. Status of Regularization and Titling between 1996 and 2014. 

Categories 
Titles 

(Number) 

Area 

(Hectares) 
% 

A. Regularization and titling target  - 106,751,722 100 

B. Titled Area 391,685 40,786,475 38.2 

B1. Small property  377,802 3,852,050 9.4 

B2. Medium-sized property 3,148 1,667,651 4.1 

B3. Agricultural company 1,374 3,091,530 7.6 

B4. Community properties (CIOCs)    8,921 9,176,971 22.5 

B5. Rural Community Indigenous Territories (TIOCs) 440 22,998,273 56.4 

C. Regularized public lands - 24,542,520 23.0 

D. Area in the process of being regularized - 26,867,679 25.2 

E. Area without regularization and titling - 14,555,048 13.6 

Source: INRA, 2016 and Colque et al. 2016. 

 

1.8 According to data from INRA (Andrade, 2016), the areas still not covered by the 
titling policy are distributed throughout the country. Nonetheless, the demand for 
titling of rural lands is concentrated primarily in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, 
Cochabamba, Beni, and Santa Cruz. In terms of the number of titles to be 
delivered, La Paz (48%) has the highest percentage, followed by Potosí (15%) and 
Cochabamba (14%). The departments with the largest areas to be titled are: 
Santa Cruz (30%), La Paz (22%), and Beni (22%). 

1.9 Institutional framework of property rights.  The institutional structure for 
establishing property rights over rural land was developed under the Agrarian Law 
of 1953. That law created the National Agrarian Reform Service, which is headed 
by the President and implemented through the National Agrarian Reform Council. 
The Council controlled the operational aspects of the work of titling rural lands at 
that time. This institutional framework was redesigned in 1996 with the enactment 
of Law 1,715/96. With the new law, the Council was replaced by INRA, identified 
under Law 1,715/96 as a technical and legal institution with operational 
responsibilities for defining rural land ownership rights. In 2006, Law 3,545/06, 
which reinstituted the agrarian reform on a community basis, amended Law 
1,715/96 by facilitating the titling of collective lands and establishing that all 
available public lands would preferably be assigned to indigenous or campesino 
peoples or communities that had limited land. It also established that private lands 
(medium-sized property owners and companies) would revert to the State if they 
failed to serve an economic and social function (Endo, 2016; Colque et al., 2016). 

1.10 Laws 1,715/96 and 3,545/06 retained the National Agrarian Reform Service as the 
body responsible for planning, executing, and consolidating the agrarian reform 
process. The Service is made up of: (i) the President, the supreme authority 



- 4 - 

responsible for signing title deeds, among other duties; (ii) the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land (MDRyT), which is responsible for implementing policies 
and other strategic activities in the sector; (iii) the National Agrarian Commission, a 
mixed government/civil society agency charged with community oversight and the 
strategic course of the agrarian reform process; (iv) the Agrarian Judicatura [bench 
of judges], a specialized body for the administration of agrarian justice, made up of 
the Agri-Environmental Tribunal and the Agri-Environmental Courts, for the 
resolution of disputes arising from land ownership and property rights, which was 
conceived as an independent institution and is thus not part of the Service; and 
(v) INRA, an autonomous decentralized public agency under the MDRyT 
responsible, among other things, for steering, coordinating, and executing agrarian 
property regularization policies (Endo, 2016; Colque, et al., 2016). 

1.11 Law 1,715/96 kept unchanged the rural property types previously defined by the 
Agrarian Law of 1953. Rural property types include: campesino site, small 
property, medium-sized property, and agricultural enterprise. However, Law 
1,715/96 added a new type of collective property, the Native Community Land, and 
recognized equal property rights for men and women, defining parity criteria in land 
distribution, management, tenure, and use. Another important change introduced 
by Law 1,715/96 was the development of new instruments recognizing rural 
property rights. The regularization instruments were developed to implement the 
multiple objectives of Law 1,715/96: to regularize property rights, consolidate 
indigenous territories, recover idle lands, certify public lands and distribute them to 
those who need them, resolve disputes, and develop the rural cadastre (Endo, 
2016). 

1.12 The Real Property Rights Registry (DDRR) supplements the institutional 
framework of property rights mentioned above. The DDRR is the Judicial Council 
entity responsible for recording all entries and annotations covering real property 
rights, including real estate and real estate rights, in Bolivia. It was created by the 
Law on the Registration of Real Property Rights of 1887; its operational rules are 
defined in the Civil Code and the regulations approved by Supreme Decree 29,757 
of 2004. For a large-scale rural land regularization and titling operation like that 
proposed in this program, the technical, operational, and technological link 
between INRA and the DDRR is very important for expediting the registration of 
rural properties that have been regularized and surveyed. The workloads 
generated by INRA exceed the existing capacities of the DDRR, which sometimes 
receives packets of more than 10,000 property titles in files and titling data maps 
all at once. 

1.13 Bank actions and other sources of financing. Various funding agencies have 
supported the activities involved in regularizing rural land property rights. The 
World Bank granted a loan of US$24.7 million; the Nordic Development Fund 
financed US$7.5 million; the Kingdom of the Netherlands provided support through 
a nonreimbursable fund of US$8.8 million; the European Union contributed 
US$4 million to the process. The Bank began its support for land titling in Bolivia 
through the “Environmental and Social Protection Project in the Santa Cruz – 
Puerto Suárez Corridor” (1099/SF-BO), through which it financed a titling 
subcomponent amounting to US$2.4 million. The Bank consolidated its 
participation in this area with a land titling operation for US$22 million called the 
“Land Regularization and Legal Cadastre Program” (1512/SF-BO). These funds 
totaled US$70 million and were executed between 1996 and 2012. 



- 5 - 

1.14 The advances made in the area of land regularization are part of a series of 
reforms in the country’s legal framework. Since the National Agrarian Reform 
Council was replaced by INRA, a series of rules was developed to expedite the 
process of regularizing rural lands. Although an institutional structure was created, 
INRA still lacked the capacity to implement the new legal framework for land 
regularization. To overcome the institutional constraints, the decision was made to 
contract land regularization companies, which transferred regularization 
technologies and trained local specialists during contract implementation. With the 
entry into force of Law 3,545/06, the method whereby companies were contracted 
for land regularization became obsolete and INRA assumed the direct execution of 
land regularization. The existing financial resources were thus reallocated to 
finance INRA’s specialized brigades (equipment, vehicles, and specialists). The 
Bank also supported the development, implementation, and linkage of the initial 
versions of the rural property cadastre and registration systems.3 

1.15 Problems in land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration. The 
diagnostic assessments of the process of regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural land indicate that the following issues need to be addressed:  

1.16 Limitations of the regulatory framework. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the existing legal framework (Endo, 2016), the latter permits 
program execution to start. Nonetheless, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) the regularization, titling, and cadastre 
manuals are outdated; (ii) the rural land regularization procedures are not entirely 
suited to the new areas of intervention; (iii) the rural land regularization procedures 
do not incorporate technological changes that will have a positive impact on titling; 
(iv) the current dispute resolution mechanism needs to be reformulated to reduce 
the burden of pending litigation in titling processes; (v) the ability to use land as a 
guarantee for obtaining credit is restricted to medium-sized property and 
agricultural enterprises; and (vi) the costs for maintaining the formal status of rural 
properties are high and the incentives for maintaining the rural cadastre are 
insufficient. 

1.17 Limitations of the regularization process. The cadastral sweep (barrido 
catastral)4 is the most efficient methodology for large-scale regularization of land 
tenure in rural areas with large numbers of producers and low titling levels. The 
cadastral sweep takes advantage of economies of scale; per title costs are thus 
lower than regularization based on individual demand. Operation 1512/SF-BO 
helped the government to implement the cadastral sweep method. Operation 
1512/SF-BO financed the basic inputs for implementing the sweep, including: 
(i) the formation of regularization specialist brigades – contracting of specialists; 
(ii) the purchase of equipment for the field work; and (iii) logistical support. 
According to the regularization diagnostic assessment (Andrade, 2016), in order to 
achieve the program targets, it is essential that: (i) brigade staff members working 
in INRA under contingent contracts be retained throughout program execution; 
(ii) equipment for the field work be modernized; and (iii) the logistical support 
infrastructure be replaced. An estimated 150 to 200 field brigades will need to be 

                                                
3
  The project completion reports (PCR) for project 1099/SF-BO and program 1512/SF-BO detail the efforts 

made by the Bank and the government to overcome the challenges of regularization work in Bolivia. 
4
  The cadastral sweep is a methodology for systemic surveying of each and every one of the rural parcels 

in an area to gather the technical and legal information on the property and its owner for the mass 
regularization of rural property tenure.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319504/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/37382628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/36662436/R


- 6 - 

financed each year. These brigades are made up of seven regularization 
specialists. Each brigade’s field operations require a minimum infrastructure of 
GPS equipment, portable computers, complete stations, and vehicles. 

1.18 Deficiencies of the technological platform. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the technological platform (Solíz, 2016), the current technology is 
capable of continuing the rural land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration 
process. However, the following problems must be overcome: (i) consolidating the 
Land Maintenance and Management System (SIMAT) and the Integrated Cadastre 
System (SIC) as technical tools; (ii) migrating data from the Integrated 
Regularization and Titling System (SIST) to the SIMAT/SIC systems; (iii) replacing 
the use of the SIST with the SIMAT/SIC in all INRA offices; (iv) improving the 
electronic link between INRA and the DDRR for the large-scale property tilting and 
registration process; (v) reorganizing the data centers and updating the data 
servers; (vi) updating the equipment (computers); (vii) developing the INRA nexus 
with GeoBolivia; (viii) reviewing and consolidating administrative systems; 
(ix) cleaning spatial data; (x) completing the process of digitization and indexation 
of the INRA documentary collection; and (xi) developing the INRA platform. 

1.19 Limitations of environmental and social management tools. According to the 
results from the program’s Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) (see Carrasco, 2016), the current legal framework is sufficiently developed 
for the environmental and social management of the rural property regularization 
process. However, the management tools for handling potential environmental and 
social problems stemming from rural property regularization are not fully 
developed. The main conclusion of the SESA indicates that the above weaknesses 
produce a situation in which current regulations are not fully enforced and/or 
compliance with them is not verified. Accordingly, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) forest coverage monitoring does not 
generate information in real time for monitoring and controlling deforestation; 
(ii) the rural cadastre does not include the environmental information needed to 
facilitate monitoring and control at each rural property; and (iii) the tools that INRA 
has for managing social conflicts are inadequate for addressing the complexity of 
the conflicts and the processes for resolving them.  

1.20 Lessons learned. The proposed project has taken into account lessons learned 
from loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO and other similar Bank-financed 
operations in the region (see Table 2).  

  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323300/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 7 - 

Table 2. Lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in the sector 

Problem by work area Reflected in project design 

Legal framework. It is necessary to 

ensure that the legal framework 
allows rural titling to be carried out. 

While the current legal framework allows for moving 
forward with the regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural lands, the program will finance activities to improve 
the regulatory framework. 

Institutional organization. Titling 

requires the participation of various 
public agencies that neither share 
information nor coordinate activities 
well. 

The project will finance the strengthening of key 
institutions involved in the process of regularizing rural 
property.  

Information safeguards. The rural 

cadastre information must be 
protected.  

The working methodology for the cadastral survey will be 
100% digital with backup systems.  

Cadastral survey. The cadastral 

sweep methodology has yielded good 
results. 

The sweep methodology will be improved for working in 
highland areas with small landholdings, through the use 
of unmanned aerial vehicles, for example. 

Monitoring and quality control 
system. The lack of monitoring 

systems makes it difficult to manage 
progress made in rural titling. 

The project will develop an integrated system for 
monitoring progress, including the reactivation of 
participatory monitoring mechanisms. 

Community participation. The 

communities’ participation in the 
titling process was a key factor in the 
success of the operation. 

The program will reinstall the interagency titling 
committees with the participation of authorities from 
indigenous communities and territories. 

Support for permanent institutions. 

It is important to focus efforts on 
supporting permanent institutions. 

The project will support INRA, the DDRR, the Forest and 
Land Social Control and Oversight Authority (ABT), and 
the Mother Earth Plurinational Authority (APMT), which 
are permanent government institutions, in the work of 
regularization and environmental and social 
management of rural property.  

Management of the regularization 
brigades. It is critical to design a 

cadastral sweep methodology with 
incentives and penalties. 

In the first year of program execution, funds will be 
earmarked for the design of a system to monitor the field 
brigades, taking into account incentives for achieving 
goals and penalties. 

Source: OVE, 2014. Comparative Evaluation: Land Regularization and Management, PCRs for the following 
projects: 906/OC-PE, 1340/OC-PE, 1099/SF-BO, and 1512/SF-BO. 

 

1.21 Conceptual overview of the operation. The project is conceived as an operation 
that continues the rural property regularization process initiated by the Government 
of Bolivia through loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO. The project design 
emphasizes the key aspects identified in the diagnostic assessment of the current 
situation: (i) the strengthening of integrated mass sweep campaigns for the 
regularization of rural property, which will make it possible to proceed with rural 
titling on a cost-effective basis; (ii) modernization of the cadastre and public 
registry system, which will help to strengthen the integration of titling entities and 
public registries, as well as the efficient and secure management of cadastral 
information; (iii) strengthening of environmental and social management tools, 
which will help to reduce the environmental and social problems identified; and 
(iv) maintenance of the cadastre and public registry of rural properties, which will 
help to reduce transaction costs for the end user. 

1.22 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020, 
the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019, and the Bank’s strategy 
with Bolivia 2016-2020. The program is consistent with the Update to the 
Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008). Specifically, the program is 



- 8 - 

in line with the challenge of low productivity and innovation, by increasing farmers’ 
productivity related to the establishment of secure land ownership rights. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 
(document GN-2843) in that it contributes to the priority area of increasing 
productivity and diversification in the economy as well as with its strategic 
objectives: (i) promotion of innovation and (ii) provision of quality public goods and 
services. The operation is included in the 2016 Country Programming Document  
and the 2016 Operational Program Report (document GN-2849). Lastly, the 
program is consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management 
Sector Framework (document GN-2709-5), which identifies security of land tenure 
as a key activity for improving productivity and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to increase 
legal certainty over rural property. 

1.23 Target population. The program beneficiaries are small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and indigenous communities. Small and medium-sized 
producers characteristically have small family farming operations, primarily for their 
own consumption and with low levels of access to financing and productive 
technologies. The livelihood of the indigenous communities is based on the use of 
natural resources, along with small-scale farming usually occupying less than one 
hectare.  

1.24 Component 1: Land regularization, titling, and registration (US$74.9 million). 
This component will support rural land regularization, titling, and registration. In this 
respect, the following stages in the process need to be financed: (i) preparatory 
stage, which will support: evaluations of the areas of intervention, preparation of 
the technical and legal diagnostic assessment, increased density of geodetic 
points; (ii) field survey, which will support: dissemination of regularization, signage 
of vertices and boundaries, signing of records of agreement, survey of the rural 
property file, verification of the social function and/or social and economic function, 
dispute resolution, and development of the cadastral database; and (iii) titling and 
registration, which will finance: the preparation of draft resolutions, the signing of 
resolutions, the issuance of property titles, and registration of the titles in the 
DDRR. This component will also support management of social conflicts and the 
activities to be financed include: dispute resolution training for INRA staff; 
implementation of dispute resolution brigades; strengthening of the 
Agri-Environmental Tribunal for dispute resolution, development and 
implementation of customer service protocols and mechanisms, and strengthening 
of INRA’s Transparency Unit. 

1.25 Component 1 will use loan proceeds to finance key inputs for continuing with rural 
land regularization (paragraph 1.17). The key inputs for carrying out the 
regularization work include: (i) retention of INRA temporary staff; (ii) purchase of 
computer equipment, navigation and measuring equipment, and furniture; and 
(iii)  purchase of logistical support vehicles. Up to US$47 million in loan proceeds 
will be used to finance staffing requirements, to hire technical personnel to perform 
land regularization work. The “service delivery contractor” model indicated in 
paragraph 3.21 of the Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants 
financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9) was identified as being suited to 
INRA’s needs. According to this Bank policy, this model is recommended when 



- 9 - 

project execution requires the hiring of large numbers of individuals who deliver 
services on a contract basis. 

1.26 Component 2: Land management (US$14.04 million). This component will 
finance: (i) modernization of INRA’s rural cadastre technological platform and the 
DDRR’s rural land registration platform to facilitate the administration of mass rural 
land cadastre, titling, and registration processes; and (ii) the program’s 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will contribute to the 
social and environmental management of titled land. 

1.27 To modernize INRA’s cadastral system, the component will finance: the 
consolidation of the SIMAT and SIC as technical tools for rural land administration, 
the development and implementation of the INRA–GeoBolivia nexus, the design 
and implementation of the INRA services platform, and the digitization and 
indexation of the INRA documentary collection. To modernize the DDRR 
registration system, the component includes: the development of the DDRR 
services platform; training for DDRR office staff in the use of the platform 
developed; and the implementation of the cadastral maintenance campaigns. To 
implement the ESMP, the component will finance: the strengthening of the national 
forest coverage monitoring system; the development of the environmental 
dimension of the rural cadastre; indigenous land management measures; and 
measures to strengthen the gender focus and interculturality in the titling process.5 

C. Results matrix and key indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with INRA; it shows 
impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, targets, and 
means of verification. The program’s main outcomes are: (i) to regularize and title 
approximately 24.5 million hectares; (ii) to record property rights in the DDRR for 
approximately 1,340,000 parcels of small and medium-sized rural producers, 
benefiting approximately 490,000 families; (iii) to regularize and title the pending 
indigenous territories; (iv) to modernize the cadastral and registration information 
systems; and (v) to institutionally strengthen the Bolivian government in order to 
improve the environmental and social management of land. Over the long-term, 
the impact of the program will be reflected in increased agricultural income for 
small and medium-sized agricultural producers.  

Table 3. Main Results Matrix Indicators 

Impact Indicators 
Frequency of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Per household agricultural 
income (US$) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraph 1.3. Increased productivity 
results in higher income.  

Gross value of agricultural 
production per hectare 
(US$/ha) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4. Greater 
certainty regarding land tenure increases 
productive investment; and this investment 
increases agricultural productivity. 

 

                                                
5
  In the final stage of the design of the Rural Land Regularization Program, the Ministry of the 

Environment and Water, the technical focal point for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), asked the 
IDB for an additional project to be financed by the GEF Fund to implement the environmental dimension 
of the rural cadastre in the amount of approximately US$6 million. This additional project will 
complement the activities envisaged in the program (ESMP). 



- 10 - 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is US$100 million, which will be financed by the Bank 
through a blended loan as follows: US$51 million from Ordinary Capital funds and 
US$9 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The local counterpart is 
US$40 million. The distribution of the financing by source is shown in Table 4 
below: 

Table 4. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Investment category IDB Local Total % 

I. Administration 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

Execution unit 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

II. Direct costs 56.32 35.56 91.88 91.88 

Component 1. Regularization, titling, and 

registration 
46.92 28.01 74.93 74.93 

Component 2. Land management 9.40 7.55 16.95 16.95 

III. Monitoring and evaluation 0.58 - 0.58 0.58 

IV. Audit 0.30 - 0.30 0.30 

Total 60.00 40.00 100.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

Table 5. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB Total  20.95  19.11 9.07  6.95 3.92 60.00 

% 34.9% 31.8% 15.1% 11.6% 6.5% 100% 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. 
The analysis is based on the program’s expected incremental costs and benefits 
using a time horizon of 15 years and a discount rate of 12%. Program costs 
include investment, operation, and maintenance. The benefits stem from an 
estimate of marginal changes in agricultural income as a result of improvements in 
land tenure certainty and reduced processing time for registering property. Data 
from the 2008 Agricultural Survey, the 2013 Agricultural Census, and INRA titling 
databases were used to quantify the direct benefits associated with an 
improvement in the land tenure situation. The results indicate that the families that 
obtained title to their land increased their annual agricultural income by US$336 
and the gross value of agricultural production by US$216/household. Surveys and 
process analyses at both INRA and the DDRR office were used to estimate the 
benefits of reduced costs and processing time at the DDRR office. The results 
show benefits amounting to US$22.1 million due to a 16% reduction in processing 
times. The cost-benefit analysis indicates that the program has a positive net 
present value and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 51%. An analysis was done of 
the sensitivity to variations in the speed with which the benefits of titling were 
generated. In the worst case, in which the benefits increase gradually, the IRR is 
36%. The benefits of reduced processing time for registration exceed the expected 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553


- 11 - 

costs of maintaining the cadastre, which increases system sustainability by 
transferring these benefits to the users. 

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.4 This program has been classified as a Category B operation in accordance with 
the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). During the 
preparation of the program a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) was developed; it determined that the program would have significant 
positive impacts and negative risks and impacts. The principal risks identified in the 
SESA were summarized in the program’s environmental and social management 
report (ESMR). They include: (i) failure to meet the indigenous peoples’ demand 
for titling due to conflicts already existing in the area of intervention; (ii) weakening 
of campesino communities’ organizations due to the demand for individual titling; 
(iii) maintenance of gender inequality in terms of access to and use of the land; 
(iv) exacerbation of existing social conflicts and creation of new conflicts due to 
land titling; and (v) loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services in lowlands due to 
the deforestation of titled properties. A program environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) was developed to mitigate these risks and negative 
impacts. Table 6 summarizes the main risks and mitigation measures proposed in 
the ESMP. Thus, the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies have been 
fulfilled, especially those of the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP-765). The ESMR 
presents compliance with the safeguards policies in detail (paragraph 3.18 of the 
ESMR). Lastly, consultation processes have been carried out, resulting in records 
of agreement with the program signed by the principal national organizations 
representing the program’s beneficiaries (paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23 of the ESMR). 

Table 6. Main Risks and Mitigation measures  

Problem and risks (ESMR) Main Mitigation Measures (ESMP) 

Problem: Remaining demand from indigenous 

people in lowlands consists of lands where 
third parties are present.  
Risk: Failure to provide titling for indigenous 

populations and potential fragmentation of 
their territories. 

(i) Participatory mechanisms will be implemented for the 
titling of the remaining areas; 
(ii) The extent to which the territorial demand of the 
indigenous populations is met will be evaluated; 
(iii) INRA will be trained to incorporate the intercultural 
approach in rural land titling activities.  

Problem: Parceling of collective lands in 

peasant communities. 
Risk: Weakening of community organizations. 

(i) Will contribute to making decisions that are appropriate 
for communities by providing information on the 
advantages and disadvantages of collective and individual 
titling. 

Problem: Gender inequality in access to and 

use of land. 
Risk: Continued gender inequality in access to 

and use of land through rural titling. 
 

(i) INRA’s Gender Unit will be strengthened; 
(ii) INRA will be trained to implement a gender approach 
in titling and registration; 
(iii) Women’s knowledge/exercise of their rights over the 
land will be promoted.  

Problem: Exacerbation of existing conflicts 

and emergence of new social conflicts; 
Risk: Delay in the regularization of property 

rights.  

(i) A comprehensive strategy for resolving disputes over 
rural land will be implemented; 
(ii) INRA staff will be trained in dispute resolution; 
(iii) Specialized dispute resolution brigades will be formed 
in INRA; 
(iv) The dispute resolution capacity of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal will be strengthened. 

Problem: Increased deforestation of titled 

properties; 
Risk: Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 

services.  

(i) The national plant cover monitoring system will be 
strengthened; 
(ii) The environmental dimension of the rural cadastre will 
be developed; 
(iii) Soil use plans will be updated. 

Source: Program’s Environmental and Social Management Report and Environmental and Social 

Management Plan, 2016. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319558/R


- 12 - 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, INRA has the institutional 
capacity needed to assume responsibilities as the executing agency for the 
proposed operation. The results indicate that programming and organizational 
capacity, execution capacity, and control capacity are at a satisfactory level of 
development and present a low level of risk. However, based on the risk analysis, 
some institutional weaknesses affecting the institution’s fiduciary capacity have 
been identified. Accordingly, an institutional development plan was drawn up to 
mitigate the risks identified. The main actions include: (i) contracting procurement 
and financing specialists to strengthen execution capacities; (ii) deepening and 
institutionalizing an operational framework for risk management; and 
(iii) developing a framework of internal procedures for accounting and cash flow, as 
well as updating internal administrative management documents. 

E. Other project risks 

2.6 The SESA has identified the risk that the presence of third parties with legitimate 
rights within the lowland TIOCs may become an obstacle for completing the titling 
of all the territory claimed by these TIOCs. This could turn into a reputational risk 
for the Bank. To mitigate this risk, Component 1 includes participatory titling 
mechanisms6 that involve the authorities of the TIOCs, to reach consensus on 
titling processes and results. In addition, the ESMP includes a diagnostic 
assessment of the extent to which the territorial demand of lowland indigenous 
peoples is met, as well as the formulation of new public policies in the event that 
this demand has not been addressed. An extensive process of consultation with 
the principal organizations representing those benefiting from and affected by land 
titling was carried out during the preparation of the program. These consultations 
have resulted in the signing of records of agreement with the program by the 
participants, beyond what is required for projects with the identified level of risk and 
impacts (see paragraphs 3.20 to 3.24 of the ESMR for more details on the 
consultations). 

2.7 As indicated earlier, the Bolivian government has been financially supporting the 
regularization of rural property for the last 20 years. The proposed program, with a 
total cost of US$100 million, will complete the work of regularizing rural lands 
throughout the country, involving 106 million hectares. Once the investment for 
regularizing rural properties is completed, long-term sustainability will depend on 
the ability of the key stakeholders to keep the information on rural properties up to 
date, both in the rural cadastre system (INRA) and in the Real Property Rights 
Registry (DDRR) system, as identified in the report on the legal framework for the 
regularization of rural property (Endo, 2016). The program seeks to improve, 
simplify, and reduce the costs of rural cadastre and property registration services, 
as well as to generate information on obligations and benefits so that owners will 
have incentives and will report to the official entities the existence of changes in 
property rights (through market transfers or inheritance) or through cadastral 
conservation processes (subdivisions or consolidations). 

                                                
6
  The Interagency Titling Committees are the main mechanism of participation. The participants in these 

committees are the authorities of indigenous and campesino organizations and the representatives of 
the program’s beneficiaries. The role of the committee is to reach agreement with INRA on the work 
plans for the titling of beneficiary communities and TIOCs and to promote the beneficiary population’s 
participation in and monitoring of the execution of these plans. The role of the committees will be duly 
clarified in the program’s Operating Regulations. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R


- 13 - 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the executing agency will 
be INRA, legally established under Law 1,715/96 as a decentralized public entity of 
the MDRyT with national jurisdiction and legal status.  

3.2 INRA’s responsibilities as executing agency include: (i) maintaining consolidated 
accounting records that make it possible to identify the sources and uses of 
program funds by component; (ii) preparing and submitting disbursement requests 
and supporting documentation to the Bank, together with the financial statements 
for the components under its responsibility; (iii) contracting the program’s annual 
external audits and submitting the respective reports to the Bank; (iv) preparing 
open calls for proposals and bid processes, processing contracts and payments, 
and providing technical supervision of the contracts for activities under its 
responsibility; (v) preparing the consolidated monitoring and evaluation reports 
required, submitting them to the Bank, and making them publicly available; and 
(vi) ensuring compliance with the contractual clauses established in the loan 
contract, the program’s Operating Regulations, and the agreements signed for 
program implementation. A condition precedent to the first disbursement will 
be the signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and INRA 
defining the following aspects among others: (i) the method to be used to 
transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; and (ii) INRA’s commitment to conduct 
program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.  

3.3 Program execution will use INRA’s existing organizational structure, in both 
technical and fiduciary (procurement and finances) and legal matters. In this 
respect, the Planning Bureau (DGP) will be designated as the entity responsible for 
the general coordination of the program and the ESMP; the Regularization and 
Titling Bureau will be designated as the entity responsible for the execution of 
Component 1; the Land Management Bureau will be designated as the entity 
responsible for the execution of Component 2; and, lastly, the Administration and 
Finances Bureau will manage the program’s budget, procurement, legal analysis, 
and financial control. 

3.4 The Director of INRA’s DGP will serve as the general coordinator of the program 
with sufficient autonomy to make operational decisions, prepare all documents, 
program actions, and coordinate with the participating entities and the IDB. A 
condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the appointment of the 
Director of INRA’s DGP as the general coordinator of the program, 
appointment of the program component coordinators, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, and the contracting of 
financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social 
management specialists through a competitive process, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.  

3.5 During program preparation, provision was made for the signing of interagency 
collaboration agreements between INRA and the DDRR Office, the APMT, INE, 
and the ABT. These agreements will lay the foundation for cooperation among 
those involved and will describe the activities covered under the agreement, the 
parties’ commitments, including the operation and maintenance of investments, 



- 14 - 

and other conditions necessary for execution. Evidence of the signing and entry 
into force of the following interagency cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA 
and the DDRR, will be a special condition for the disbursement of financing for 
activities related to public registries under Component 2; (ii) between INRA, the 
ABT, the APMT, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the program’s 
ESMP under Component 2; and (iii) between INRA and INE, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan. 

3.6 To facilitate implementation of the ESMP, in the context of the program, INRA may 
provide cooperation and technical coordination to the relevant public institutions 
that assist in achieving the program’s objective. 

3.7 Program Operating Regulations. Execution of the program will be governed by 
the program’s Operating Regulations. These regulations establish guidelines and 
operational procedures related to: (i) the responsibilities of the entities participating 
in the program; (ii) operational procedures for the planning and programming of the 
activities to be financed; (iii) financial and procurement instructions; (iv) procedures 
for the program’s environmental and social management; and (v) operational 
instructions for the implementation of activities to monitor and evaluate the 
program’s impact. The entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, will be a 
contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement.  

3.8 Procurement. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services funded 
with program resources will be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies 
as set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and the provisions of the 
loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (see 
Annex III), including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. That plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operations and computer equipment, furniture, 
the contracting of individual consultants and consulting firms, and other items. In 
addition, the procurement plan includes the contracting of “service delivery 
contractors” corresponding to the staff engaged in the regularization and titling 
process (paragraph 1.25). The contracting procedures currently used by INRA for 
annual or multiyear periods will continue to be used for these individual 
consultants. The procurement plan will be updated each year or whenever there 
are substantial changes, subject to the Bank’s approval. Procurement may be 
made using the ex post review method as established in Annex II. 

3.9 Recognition of retroactive expenses. The Bank may recognize and charge 
against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the local contribution) in 
eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to the loan approval date for operational 
and temporary staffing expenses, provided that requirements substantially similar 
to those established in the loan contract have been met. Said expenses must have 
been incurred on or after 6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in 
no case may they include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date. 

3.10 Audit. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the end of 
INRA’s fiscal year, the program’s annual audited financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank. The audit will be performed by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The determination of the scope and other related 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765


- 15 - 

aspects will be governed by the Guide to Financial Management for Projects 
Financed by the IDB (OP-273-6) and the guide on financial statements and 
external audit.  

B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements 

3.11 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. INRA will prepare 
and send a monitoring report to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of 
each six-month period during project execution. These reports will focus on the 
achievement of the output indicators and progress made in terms of outcomes, the 
identification of problems encountered and corrective measures adopted. INRA will 
submit to the Bank’s satisfaction the annual work plan (AWP) corresponding to the 
upcoming year, no later than within the final quarter of each year during project 
execution. INRA will perform two independent evaluations financed using loan 
proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no later than 
90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been executed; and (ii) the final 
evaluation will be conducted no later than 90 days after 90% of the project’s funds 
have been executed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of the 
data in the monitoring system, the degree to which the expected outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts established in the Results Matrix have been achieved, as 
well as the level of compliance with the ESMP, including progress made in the 
social and environmental indicators. 

3.12 Evaluation. The impact estimates will be based on the differences-in-differences 
method applied to a panel of households that includes a treatment group and two 
control groups. To this end, provision has been made for two surveys, a baseline 
and the final evaluation. The proposed sample includes the non-random 
identification of a group of municipios with a high percentage of titling in the first 
two years of the program. Later, through a propensity score matching process, a 
control group of municipios with a high percentage of titling prior to 2016 (control 
group 1) and another control group of municipios that will be titled at the end of the 
program (control group 2) will be identified. The municipios in control group 1 will 
serve to verify the proportion of attributable marginal change over time, while the 
municipios in control group 2 will be used to measure the program’s impact in the 
execution period. The sample for the baseline study is estimated to include 3,500 
farmers distributed in 50 municipios (20 treated and 30 in the two control groups; 
households will be selected at random within each municipio). A similar sample will 
be used for the final evaluation. The data collection budget has been included in 
the project. The design of the operation provides a good opportunity for generating 
empirical evidence on the impact of rural land titling on productivity, income, and 
the sustainable use of natural resources. 

 



Annex I - BO-L1113

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.8 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.3 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.7

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in 

the evaluation plan

Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase the legal security of rural property. This is expected to lead to the increase in income of beneficiary rural households, through an increase in the 

gross value of agricultural production. The diagnosis provided in the document and documentation that supports it is robust with respect to the current situation, shortcomings and causes 

of insecurity of tenure in the country. Likewise, the proposed interventions under components 1 and 2 clearly respond to the deficiencies identified in the diagnosis and evidence is 

presented that validates the effectiveness of the proposed actions in other contexts.

The vertical logic of the results matrix is well delineated. Overall, indicators at all levels are SMART. The baseline for some impact and results indicators is from 2008,  therefore does not 

represent the starting point of the program.

Ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. The benefits come from the estimated marginal changes in agricultural income by improving the security of 

land tenure and the reduction in processing time in the land registry.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes the identification of causal impacts through the use of differences in difference with Propensity Score Matching methods. Overall the plan 

meets the requirements established in the DEM Guidelines.

The Environmental and Social Management Plan includes 

a series of measures to strengthen the participation of 

women in the benefits of land titling. These include 

strengthening the INRA with a specialist in gender; the 

adoption of gender mainstreaming in all activities of 

INRA; a communications strategy to increase awareness 

by women of their rights and the benefits of titling.

The program will strengthen the deforestation monitoring 

system and the inclusion of the environmental dimension 

in the cadastre. These environmental management tools 

will improve the Government’s capacity to monitor and 

sanction environmental infractions such as illegal 

deforestation.

The program will generate valuable information on the 

causality between titling and: i) increased productivity; ii) 

increase in intra investments - property taxes; and iii) 

increased use of financial services.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and 

services.

The intervention is included in the 2016 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

I. Strategic Alignment



 Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
RESULTS MATRIX 

 

Project objective: The general objective of the program is to increase legal certainty over rural property.  

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure-
ment  

Baseline Target 
Means of verification Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Impact: Increase total net 

household incomes 

 

Indicator: Increase in total net 

household income 

US$/year 801 2008 974 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

Impact: Increase agricultural 

productivity of agricultural 

producers 

 

Indicator: Increase in the Gross 

Value of Agricultural Production 

(GVAP) 

US$/ha 870 2008 1,075 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

 

 

 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 

 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Expected outcomes 
Unit of 

measure
ment 

Baseline Intermediate Targets Means of 
verification 

Observations 
Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Final outcome. Increase in 

productive investment. 
 
Indicator. Value of  agricultural 

producers’ productive 
investment (machinery and 
equipment) 

US$ 
invested 
per year 

215 2008 - - 241 2021 

Program 

Impact 

Evaluation 

Report 

- The target value is based on estimates of the 
program’s economic evaluation. The estimates’ 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 
 

- These values will be verified with baseline 
surveys and follow-up of the program’s impact 
evaluation. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced cost of titling rural 
properties. 
 
Indicator. Average cost of 

complete rural property titling 
process 

US$ per 
hectare 

8.31 2016 - - 7 2021 

INRA 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of regularization, cadastre, titling, 
and registration of rural land (Andrade, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in land regularization processes, 
operational infrastructure, and technology, which 
could reduce per hectare titling cost by 15%. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced average time to record 
property purchase/sale 
 
Indicator. Timed needed to 

record purchase/sale of property 
in Public Registries  
 

Number of 
working 
days 

39.7 2016 - - 25 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of the time spent by citizens and 
legal entities in procedures to record property in 
the Office of Real Property Rights (Medeiros, 
et al., 2016). 
 

- These values will be verified with the study of 
strategies for maintaining regularization planned 
for the first year of program execution. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduction of the area of 
intervention with disputes due to 
regularization and titling  
 
Indicator. Number of hectares 

with conflicts due to 
regularization and titling of rural 
property 

Millions of 
hectares 

5 2016 - - 3 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Evaluation (Carrasco, 
et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in dispute resolution instruments 
(Carrasco et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016) 

Intermediate outcome. 

Institutional strengthening of 
INRA and the DDRR 
 
Indicator. INRA and the DDRR 

offices sharing cadastre and 
registry information automatically 

% 0 2016 0 2019 100 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The value is based on the recommendations 
from Component 2 (Solíz, 2016). 



 Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs  
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measurement 

Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Component I: Rural land regularization, titling, and registration  

Output #1. Rural property titles delivered to agricultural producers and indigenous communities 

Indicator 1.1. Number of 

beneficiaries with titles 
registered at the DDRR 
offices 74,938,706 

Households 566,356 104,707 151,866 107,635 82,217 49,650 1,062,431 Program 

Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.2 Number of 

property titles registered at 
the DDRR offices 

Title 653,535 296,320 426,990 292,354 212,185 115,289 1,996,732 

Output #2. Intercultural conflict management   

Indicator 2.1. INRA staff 

training on social conflict 
resolution 

70,000 
Number of 

people trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System 

Indicator 2.2. Implementation 

of a specialized brigade on 
social conflicts 

150,000 
Number of 
brigades 

0 1 - - - - 1 

Indicator 2.3. Strengthening 

of Agri-environmental 
Tribunal for dispute resolution 

150,000  
Number of 
specialists 

trained  
0 30 30 50 20 30 160 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 

 
 
 

Output #3. Development and implementation of land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration customer service mechanisms 

Indicator 3.1. Development of 

customer service protocols 
and mechanisms  

50,000 
Number of 
protocols 

0 1 - - - - 1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #4. Strengthening of INRA Transparency Unit 

Indicator 4.1. Update of 

transparency manual  

108,000 

Number of 
manuals 

0       
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Indicator 4.2. Implementation 

of manual in all INRA offices 

Number of 
specialists 

trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

          
 

Component II: Land management 

Output #1. Update and implementation of SIMAT/SIC to complete regularization of rural properties 

Indicator 1.1.  Update of 

SIMAT/SIC  
824,802 

Software 
updated 

0 2 0 0 0 0 2 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System Indicator 1.2. Implementation 

of SIMAT/SIC  

Number of 
offices using 

software  
1 5 4 - - - 10 

Output #2. Development of the information technology (IT) platform for real property rights services 

Indicator 1.3. Implementation 

of the IT platform for real 
property rights services 

800,000 Platform 0 - 1 - - 
- 

1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #3. Design and implementation of the INRA services platform 

Indicator 1.4. Design of the 

platform 
3,868,430 

Number of 
platforms 
designed 

0 1    
 

 Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of the platform 
Platform 
launch 

0 - 1 - - - 1 



 Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of GeoBolivia nexus 
Nexus in 
operation 

0 - 1 - - - 1 

Output #4. Cadastral maintenance 

Indicator 1.6. Cadastral 

maintenance campaigns 
600,000 

Number of 
campaigns 

0 1 1 1 1 1 5 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #5. Digitization and indexation of INRA documentary collection 

Indicator 1.7. Digitization and 

indexation of files 
1,900,000 

Number of 
files digitized 
and indexed 

0 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 5000 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #6. Strengthening of INRA Operations Center 

Indicator 1.8. Permanent 

infrastructure for INRA 
6,044,172 

Number of 
offices 

improved or 
constructed 

2 - 3 4 1 - 10 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project number/ 
name: 

BO-L1113 – Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program II 

Executing agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This Annex III has been prepared on the basis of the following elements, used to 
determine the level of fiduciary risk associated with the program: (i) results of the 
most recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, 
2009; (ii) analysis of institutional capacity used during the design of the INRA 
operation. 

1.2 Program execution will be the responsibility of INRA, a decentralized entity of the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Lands (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be maintained in the Public 
Management System (SIGEP). The IDB’s Integrated Project Administration 
System (SIAP-IDB), developed by the Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO), will 
be used for the financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s standard 
bidding documents or other documents agreed upon with the Office of the 
Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External Financing (VIPFE) and made 
available through SICOES1 will be used for execution of this operation. Similarly, 
SICOES will be used for the publication of specific procurement notices. 

1.4 The Government of Bolivia and the Bank have drawn up an agreement for 
making partial use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services 
Management System (NB-SABS) in IDB-financed operations in Bolivia. This 
program may apply that agreement once it enters into force. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1 As a public agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 on 
Government Control and Administration. This law regulates the administration 
and control systems for government resources, and their relationship with 
country public investment and planning systems.  

2.2 INRA uses SIGEP for all of its financial records. SIGEP offers secure and reliable 
access to budget execution information. With Bank support, an Accounting 

                                                
1
  Government Contracting Subsystem, which has been approved for use in Bank operations. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 2 of 8 
 
 

Management Module has been developed in this system, which systematizes 
reporting based on the financing structures and the currency of loans from 
international development partners, which is expected to come on line in 2017. 
Until then, INRA will use SIAP-IDB as a supplementary accounting and reporting 
system for accountability and financial reporting purposes. As a State agency, 
INRA is supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit 
unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES 

3.1 The Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) assessment of INRA 
indicates an adequate level of institutional development and capacities and a 
LOW level of fiduciary risk. However, provision has been made to strengthen the 
team that will be responsible for program execution, by contracting staff working 
full-time in the areas of financial management and procurement, and by holding 
training update workshops on Bank policies on fiduciary matters.  

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. The Operating Regulations will include details of 
execution arrangements, procedures, and information flows, previously agreed 
upon between the Bank and the parties.  

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for rendering 
accounts. The exchange rate used will be the one in effect in the borrowing 
country on the effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the 
executing agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the 
program disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each of the executing 
agency’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by an independent auditing 
firm acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for the last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for contracting the independent auditing firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval and may include outputs under the 
International Standards on Auditing, related to the financial audit of the program, 
and related audit tasks. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MENTIONED IN THE SINGLE ANNEX, IN THE DESCRIPTION 
OF THE CORRESPONDING COMPONENT 

5.1 The program provides for the purchase of 41 4x4 light trucks totaling up to 
US$1,762,178 for INRA’s regularization and titling activities. The details on the 
purchase terms, procurement method, and estimated prices are set out in the 
procurement plan duly agreed upon with the Bank. In addition, the program 
Operating Regulations include the technical and legal analysis supporting the 
need to purchase vehicles as well as the technical specifications to be used in 
the bidding process. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

VI. PROCUREMENT EXECUTION AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

6.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with 
Bank policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services provided for in the program and 
subject to international competitive bidding (ICB) will be carried out using the 
Standard Bidding Documents issued by the Bank.  

6.3 Works for an estimated amount of less than US$3 million will be contracted via 
the shopping method, using the standard price comparison document for works 
procurement prepared by the Bank for operations in Bolivia; works for an 
estimated amount of less than US$250,000 will be contracted via the Shopping 
method, using the document for requesting quotes for small contracts agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES. 

6.4 Off-the-shelf goods (computer equipment, furniture, etc.) for an estimated 
amount of less than US$200,000 will be procured via the shopping method and 
using the document for requesting quotes for the purchase of goods agreed upon 
with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES.  

6.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consultants will be selected using 
the selection methods in the Bank’s procurement policies (GN-2350-9), taking 
the following into account: 

a.  Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms for the project will be 
selected using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals and Request 
for Proposals documents for amounts of less than US$200,000 agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which are available in SICOES.  

b.  Shortlist of consulting firms. The list may be comprised entirely (100%) 
of Bolivian firms, for contracts with a value of up to US$200,000. 

c.  Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be 
selected on the basis of a comparison of the candidates’ individual 
qualifications. When the call for proposals is made through SICOES, one 
qualified candidate will suffice; when the call is by invitation, the 
qualifications of at least three qualified candidates will be compared. 
When the tasks involve working with other people in providing 
administrative or operational assistance, the advisability of using 
individual consultants with supplementary services will be examined on a 
case-by-case basis. 

d. Services contractors. As explained in the Proposal for Operation 
Development, the program needs to retain temporary staff members who 
have received training and are currently working on the process of land 
regularization, titling, and registration, in order to ensure achievement of 
program targets in due time and manner. Accordingly, such staff will be 
financed with loan funds in an amount up to US$47,000,000 within the 
framework of provision 3.6 of Policy GN-2350-9. 

6.6 Procurement planning. INRA will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 4 of 8 
 
 

each year to reflect the project’s actual execution needs and the progress 
achieved.  

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may recognize and 
charge against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the estimated 
amount of the local contribution) in eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to 
the loan approval date, for operating and temporary personnel expenses, 
provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan 
contract have been met. Such expenses must have been incurred on or after 
6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in no case may they 
include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan approval date. 

6.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement processes envisaged for this operation.  

6.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The executing agency, in 
coordination with the program’s Project Team Leader, is responsible for 
reviewing the shortlist selection criteria, terms of reference, and/or technical 
specifications. In all cases these must be agreed upon ex ante. 

6.10 Table of threshold amounts (in US$000)  

Works Goods and Nonconsulting Services Consultancies 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 

National 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Publicity for 
Consulting 

Services 
(except when 
CQS is used) 

Shortlist 100% 
National 

(except when 
CQS is used)  

> US$3,000 
< 

US$3,000 
> US$200 ≤ US$200 

≤ US$50 
and 

≤ US$200 
for 

common 
goods and 
services 

> US$200 ≤ US$200 

 

6.11 Main procurement processes(*). The main procurements for this operation are 
detailed below:  

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting firms    

14 contracts for services related to verification of land use, 
conceptual framework of rural environmental cadastre, 
national environmental cadastre system, analysis of 
ecological easements, strengthening of national plant 
coverage monitoring system, et al.  

CQS  
 

According to 
data in the 

procurement 
plan 

US$1,160 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting for formulation of eight indigenous territorial 
management plans, according to prioritization 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$960 

Consulting to support strengthening of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal in the area of dispute resolution 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 1 – 2Q 

 

US$150 

External audit of the program QCBS Year 1 – 4Q US$300 

Development of program baseline QCBS Year 1 – 1Q US$275 

Final evaluation of the program QCBS Year 5 – 4Q US$275 

Individual consultants    

Service delivery contractors. Direct contracting of INRA’s 
temporary staff who have been trained in and are 
familiar with: 

- Regularization, titling, and registration processes 

- Tasks of coordination and planning, administrative 
and financial management, legal advice, 
departmental coordination and management, and 
social and environmental management of the 
program 

 

 

 

 

 

DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

 

 

 

 

US$47,594 

Various contracts to integrate technical teams 
responsible for: 

- Updating the SIMAT/SIC 

- Development of IT platform for real property rights 
services 

- Design and implementation of INRA services platform 

- Classification of small property 

- Support on interculturality topics 

- Design and development of protocols for customer 
services mechanisms, and 

- Strengthening of the INRA Transparency Unit 

IICQ 

or NICQ 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 
US$3,932 

Goods    

3 contracts (two of them in several lots) for purchase of 
IT equipment 

ICB Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$3,046 

Navigation (GPS) equipment ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,210 

41 4x4 light trucks ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,762 

2 contracts to purchase furniture for INRA’s 
decentralized offices  

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$96 

2 contracts to purchase software Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$155 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Works    

Various contracts for construction or improvement of 
existing infrastructure for INRA 

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$6,044 

Nonconsulting services    

Digitization and indexing of titling files ICB Year 2 – 4Q US $1,900 

Preparation and execution of communication and 
registration campaigns to update and maintain the 
cadastral database 

 

ICB 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$600 

Development of training manuals and activities for INRA 
staff on the institution’s new services platform 

 

Shopping 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$268 

Various contracts for various services related to training 
activities, etc. 

 

Shopping 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

US $441 

* To access the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click here. 

 

6.12 Procurement supervision. The project may be executed based on ex post 
review of procurement processes worth up to 100% of the threshold for NCB, as 
set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and procurement transactions not 
included in this table will be subject to ex ante review.) The external audit firm for 
the program will conduct the annual ex post review of procurement. Although the 
level of fiduciary risk is rated LOW, the Bank will offer ongoing training and 
advisory services during program execution. 

Threshold for Ex Post Review 

Works 
Goods and 

Nonconsulting 
Services 

Consulting firm 
services 

Shortlist may be 
100% national 

Consulting Services 
Individuals 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$3,000,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$200,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤US$200,000 

Not subject to any 
limit. 

 

6.13 Operating or recurring expenses. These are expenses (operational and 
maintenance, among others) necessary for the program to operate. They will be 
agreed upon with the Project Team Leader and included in the procurement plan. 
This type of expenses will be executed according to the executing agency’s 
administrative procedures, as referenced in the Operating Regulations.  

6.14 Direct contracting.2 Goods and nonconsulting services (for example 
workshops/meetings: rental of hall/site, audiovisual equipment, transport, 

                                                
2
  OP-272-2 establishes a threshold of up to US$750,000 for direct purchases or contracting of goods, 

works, and nonconsulting services and provision 3.6(a) of document GN-2359-9 refers to cases in which 
neither the savings nor the efficiency of competitive bidding is justified. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

facilitators, etc.) for individual amounts below US$500 and totaling no more than 
US$5,000, may be contracted directly in order to achieve economy and efficiency 
in execution. These contracts are to be approved by the Project Team Leader 
through the procurement plan. 

6.15 Files. INRA will be responsible for establishing the supporting documentation, 
procedures, and controls necessary for project execution, as well as for 
safeguarding them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract and local 
laws. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

7.1 Programming and budget. INRA will utilize an administrative division3 under 
which the project will be created. This will allow budget records to be based on 
individual identification of the sources of financing and funds used in project 
execution. Initial inclusion in the budget as well as future budget modifications 
will be based on the annual work plan and project execution plan agreed upon 
with the Bank. Budget modifications must also be approved through a Ministerial 
Resolution by the Ministry of Development Planning (MPD), through the MDRyT.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded 
in SIGEP. This system integrates the various accounting events at different 
points in time in a single registry and complies with budgetary requirements 
(budget execution), recording of financial position (assets, liabilities, equity, and 
earnings), and cash management (cash transfers), on an accrual basis. In 
addition, for purposes of project accounting, a chart of accounts will be prepared 
to allow for the identification of expenditures incurred in each period on a cash 
basis, aligning the program’s investment categories with the respective budget 
line items and accounts. Moreover, until such time as the SIGEP Accounting 
Management Module is in operation, INRA will use the SIAP-IDB as a 
supplement on an interim basis for financial reporting.  

7.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will primarily be disbursed in the form 
of advances of funds, based on the program’s financial programming, which will 
be updated periodically. The Bank may make a new advance of funds once at 
least 80% of previously disbursed fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency (both within the 
CUT).4 

7.4 Internal control and internal audit. INRA financial management is subject to 
annual reliability reviews by the internal audit unit and given the relative 
importance of the program it is expected to be included in this type of review. As 
a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank will arrange annual coordination 
meetings with the internal audit units, in order to identify monitoring activities for 
the program. 

                                                
3
  Under SIGEP’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative division may include several 

projects with independent records and controls.  
4
  Unified Treasury Account. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 8 of 8 
 
 

7.5 External control and reports. In order to comply with the annual submission of 
the program’s audited financial statements, INRA will hire an independent 
auditing firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies, the cost of which 
will be covered from program funds.  

7.6 Financial supervision plan. The planning and frequency of supervision will be 
based on identified fiduciary risks. The following activities are envisaged: (i) the 
annual external audit by the firm hired for the review of program financial 
statements; (ii) onsite visits to the program’s investment sites; and (iii) visits to 
verify compliance with the internal control recommendations issued by the 
program’s external auditor. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling 
program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$51,000,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __  ______ 2016) 
 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403194-16 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program  

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower for the purpose of granting 
it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling program. 
Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$9,000,000 from the resources of the Bank's 
Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of the 
multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the 
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary 
of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 2016) 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403179-16 
 

 
 


	o_proyectos_2016_bolivia_bo-l1113_lp_lp---paquete-para-directorio---bo-l1113.pdf
	LP - limpio - BO-L1113
	Documento del Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo
	Propuesta de Préstamo
	1.1 Derechos de Propiedad sobre la Tierra y la Competitividad Agropecuaria. El sector agropecuario es uno de los sectores más importantes de la economía boliviana. Entre 2002 y 2014, el sector tuvo un crecimiento anual promedio del 4,16%, contribuyend...
	1.2 A pesar de la importancia del sector agropecuario, un examen detallado muestra niveles bajos de productividad. Según la Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Alimentación y la Agricultura (FAO), el rendimiento agrícola de la producción de ce...
	1.3 La contribución potencial del sector agropecuario al crecimiento económico y reducción de la pobreza rural depende del incremento de productividad de los agricultores, especialmente los pequeños y medianos productores (Banco Mundial, 2008; Escobal...
	1.4 Para mejorar la productividad del sector agropecuario y por ende, la eficiencia y sostenibilidad en el uso de la tierra en Bolivia, se requiere inversiones en bienes públicos sectoriales para facilitar inversiones productivas privadas de los agric...
	1.5 Derechos de Propiedad, Sostenibilidad y Conflictos. Los derechos de propiedad por sí mismo no garantizan el uso sostenible de los recursos naturales. En Nicaragua, la asignación de derechos de propiedad mejoró la productividad agraria y también in...
	1.6 Estado de Avance del Saneamiento y Titulación. Los avances en materia de saneamiento de la propiedad rural por el Gobierno de Bolivia han sido significativos, el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales está llega...
	1.7 Los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades interculturales fueron los principales beneficiarios de las intervenciones del INRA, sumando aproximadamente 32 millones de hectáreas tituladas, lo cual representa el 78% del área total titulada en el país (...
	Cuadro 1. Estado de avance del proceso de saneamiento y titulación entre 1996 y 2014.
	1.8 Según los datos del INRA (Andrade, 2016), las áreas que aún no fueron atendidas por la política de titulación están distribuidas por todo el país. No obstante, la demanda por titulación de tierras rurales se concentra principalmente en La Paz, Pot...
	1.9 Marco Institucional de Derechos de Propiedad. La institucionalidad para el establecimiento de derechos de propiedad sobre las tierras rurales fue desarrollada con la Ley Agraria de 1953. Esta Ley creó el Servicio Nacional de Reforma Agraria (SNRA)...
	1.10 Las Leyes 1715/96 y 3545/06, mantuvieron al SRNA como organismo responsable de planificar, ejecutar y consolidar el proceso de reforma agraria. El SRNA está conformado por: (i) el Presidente, autoridad máxima encargada de firmar los títulos ejecu...
	1.11 La Ley 1715/96 mantuvo sin cambios los tipos de propiedad rural definidos anteriormente por la Ley Agraria de 1953. Los tipos de propiedad rural incluyen: solar campesino, pequeña propiedad, mediana propiedad y empresa agropecuaria. Sin embargo, ...
	1.12 El Registro de Derechos Reales (DDRR) complementa el marco institucional de derechos de propiedad mencionado arriba. El DDRR es el órgano del Consejo de Magistratura encargado de efectuar todas las inscripciones y anotaciones que recaigan sobre d...
	1.13 Acciones del Banco y otras fuentes de financiamiento. Las actividades de formalización de derechos de propiedades sobre tierra rural han sido apoyadas por varios financiadores. El Banco Mundial otorgó un crédito de US$24,7 millones; el Fondo Nórd...
	1.14 Los avances en saneamiento de tierras se enmarcan en el conjunto de reformas del marco legal del país. Después que el CNRA fue reemplazado por el INRA se desarrollaron un conjunto de normas para acelerar el proceso de saneamiento de tierras rural...
	1.15 Problemas en Saneamiento, Catastro, Titulación y Registro de Tierras. Los diagnósticos del proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierra rural indican que los siguientes temas ameritan atención:
	1.16 Limitaciones del marco normativo. Según el diagnóstico del marco legal vigente (Endo, 2016), el mismo permite iniciar la ejecución del programa. No obstante, los siguientes problemas deben ser superados durante la ejecución del programa: (i) los ...
	1.17 Limitaciones del proceso de saneamiento. El barrido catastral3F  es la metodología más eficiente para regularizar de forma masiva la tenencia de la tierra en áreas rurales donde exista un gran número de productores y bajos niveles de titulación. ...
	1.18 Deficiencias de la plataforma tecnológica. Según el diagnóstico de la plataforma tecnológica (Solíz, 2016), la tecnología vigente permite continuar el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales. Sin embargo, los si...
	1.19 Limitaciones de las herramientas de gestión ambiental y social. Según los resultados de la Evaluación Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) del programa (ver Carrasco, 2016), existen en la actualidad un marco legal suficientemente desarrollado pa...
	1.20 Lecciones aprendidas. El proyecto propuesto ha tomado en cuenta las lecciones de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO y otras operaciones similares financiadas por el Banco en la región (ver Cuadro 2).
	1.21 Conceptualización de la operación. El proyecto se conceptualiza como una operación que continua el proceso de formalización de la propiedad rural iniciado por el Gobierno de Bolivia a través de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO. El diseño del...
	1.22 Alineación estratégica con la Actualización de la Estrategia Institucional (UIS) 2010-2020, el Marco Corporativo de Resultados CRF 2016-2019 y la Estrategia del Banco con Bolivia 2016-2020. El programa es consistente con la Actualización de la Es...
	1.23 Población Objetivo. Los beneficiarios del programa son pequeños y medianos productores agropecuarios y comunidades indígenas. Los pequeños y medianos productores se caracterizan por tener explotaciones pequeñas de agricultura familiar, orientadas...
	1.24 Componente 1: Saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras (US$74,9 millones). Este componente apoyará el saneamiento, titulación y registro de las tierras rurales. En este sentido se requiere financiar las siguientes etapas del proceso: (i) pre...
	1.25 El Componente 1 financiará con recursos del préstamo los insumos claves para continuar con el saneamiento de tierra rural (1.17). Los insumos claves para llevar a cabo el trabajo saneamiento incluyen: (i) la manutención del personal eventual del...
	1.26 Componente 2: Administración de Tierras (US$14,04 millones). Este componente financiará: (i) la modernización de la plataforma tecnológica de catastro rural del INRA y la plataforma de registro de tierras rurales del DDRR para facilitar la admini...
	1.27 Para la modernización del sistema catastral del INRA, el componente financiará: la unificación del SIMAT y SIC como herramientas técnicas para la administración de tierras rurales, el desarrollo e implementación del nodo INRA-GeoBolivia, el diseñ...
	1.28 El programa cuenta con una matriz de Resultados (ver Anexo II) acordada con el INRA que presenta los indicadores de impacto, resultados, y productos con sus respectivas líneas de base, metas, y medios de verificación. Los principales resultados d...
	Cuadro 3. Principales Indicadores de la Matriz de Resultados
	2.1 El costo total del programa es de US$100 millones que serán financiados por el Banco de forma Blend de la siguiente forma: US$51 millones con cargo a los recursos del Capital Ordinario (CO) y US$9 con cargo al Fondo de Operaciones Especiales (FOE)...
	2.2 El programa se estructura bajo la modalidad de Operación de Inversión Especifica, a ser ejecutado en 5 años con el siguiente cronograma de desembolso y de acuerdo al plan financiero preliminar:
	2.3 El análisis económico ex ante del programa utiliza una metodología de costo-beneficio. El análisis se basa en los costos y beneficios incrementales esperados del programa utilizando un horizonte de análisis de 15 años y una tasa de descuento del 1...
	2.4 De acuerdo a la Política de Medio Ambiente y Cumplimiento de Salvaguardias (OP-703) este programa ha sido clasificado como Categoría “B”. Durante la preparación del programa se ha desarrollado una Estratégica Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) ...
	2.5 Los resultados de la evaluación institucional permiten concluir que el INRA cuenta con la capacidad institucional para asumir las responsabilidades de organismo ejecutor de la operación propuesta. Los resultados demuestran que la capacidad de prog...
	2.6 La EASE ha identificado el riesgo que la presencia de terceros con derechos legítimos dentro de los Territorios Indígena Originario Campesinos (TIOCs) de tierras bajas se vuelva un obstáculo para culminar la titulación del territorio pleno reivind...
	2.7 Como se identificó anteriormente, el Gobierno de Bolivia viene apoyando financieramente la formalización de la propiedad rural en los últimos 20 años. El programa propuesto con un costo total US$100 millones finalizará el trabajo de saneamiento de...
	3.1 El prestatario será el Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia y el INRA será el Organismo ejecutor, legalmente constituido a través de la Ley 1715/96 como entidad pública descentralizada del MDRyT con jurisdicción nacional y personalidad jurídica.
	3.2 Las responsabilidades del INRA como Organismo Ejecutor incluyen, entre otras, las siguientes: (i) mantener registros contables consolidados que permitan identificar las fuentes y usos de los recursos del programa por componente; (ii) preparar y pr...
	3.3 La ejecución del programa utilizará la estructura organizacional existente del INRA, tanto en materia técnica como fiduciaria (adquisiciones y finanzas) y jurídica. En este sentido, la Dirección General de Planificación (DGP) será designada como  ...
	3.4 El Director de la DGP del INRA actuará como Coordinador General del programa con autonomía suficiente para la toma de decisiones operativas, la preparación de toda la documentación, programación de acciones y la coordinación con las entidades part...
	3.5 Durante la preparación del programa se ha previsto la suscripción de convenios de colaboración interinstitucional entre el INRA y Oficina de DDRR, Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra (APMT), Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (INE), y la Au...
	3.6 Para facilitar la implementación del PGAS, el INRA, dentro del marco del programa, podrá brindar cooperación y coordinación técnica a las instituciones públicas pertinentes, que coadyuven a lograr el objetivo del programa.
	3.7 Reglamento Operativo del Programa. La ejecución del programa se regirá por un Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). El ROP establece directrices y procedimientos operativos relacionados con: (i) las responsabilidades de las entidades que partic...
	3.8 Adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones de obras, bienes y servicios de consultoría financiadas con recursos del programa se llevarán a cabo conforme a las políticas del Banco establecidas en el GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9 y conforme a los establecido en el Co...
	3.9 Reconocimiento de gastos retroactivos. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de aprobación del préstamo en gastos op...
	3.10 Auditoria. Durante el período de desembolsos del préstamo, dentro de los 120 días siguientes al cierre del ejercicio fiscal del INRA, se presentarán al Banco los estados financieros auditados anuales del programa. La auditoría será efectuada por ...
	3.11 Seguimiento. El programa cuenta con un plan de monitoreo y evaluación. El INRA elaborará y enviará al Banco, a más tardar 60 días después del fin de cada semestre durante la ejecución del proyecto, un informe de seguimiento. Estos informes se foc...
	3.12 Evaluación. Las estimaciones de impacto se basarán en el método de diferencias en diferencias de un panel de hogares con un grupo de tratamiento y dos grupos control. Para esto se han previsto dos encuestas, línea de base y evaluación final. Se p...


	IDBDOCS-#40384160-v1-BO-L1113_DEM_SPD_Validación_Resumen
	LP - Anexo II (limpio) - Matriz de Resultados - BO-L1113
	LP - Anexo III (limpio) - Acuerdos y Requisitos Fiduciarios - BO-L1113
	1.1 El presente Anexo III se elaboró considerando lo siguiente en la determinación del nivel de riesgo fiduciario asociado al Programa: (i) resultados del último informe de gasto público y rendición de cuentas PEFA 2009; y (ii) análisis de la capacida...
	1.2 La Ejecución del Programa estará a cargo del INRA, entidad descentralizad del Ministerio de Desarrollo Rural y Tierras (MDRyT).
	1.3 Los registros contables de la operación se llevarán dentro del Sistema de Gestión Pública (SIGEP). Para los reportes financieros requeridos por el Banco utilizarán el Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco (SIAP-BID), desarrollado por CA...
	1.4 El Gobierno de Bolivia y el Banco han elaborado un acuerdo a través del cual se adoptaría el uso parcial de las Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios (NB-SABS) en las operaciones financiadas por el BID en Bolivia. Este...
	2.1 El MDRyT, como entidad pública se rige por la Ley No.1178 de Administración y Control Gubernamentales del 20 de julio de 1990 (SAFCO), que regula los sistemas de administración y de control de los recursos del estado y su relación con los sistemas...
	2.2 El INRA utiliza para todos sus registros financieros el SIGEP que permite la disponibilidad de información sobre la ejecución presupuestaria, de forma segura y confiable. Con apoyo del Banco, se ha desarrollado en este sistema un Módulo de Gestión...
	3.1 La evaluación SECI practicada al INRA determinó un grado de desarrollo institucional y capacidades adecuadas y un nivel de Riesgo Fiduciario BAJO. Sin embargo, se prevé fortalecer el equipo que estará a cargo de la ejecución del Programa, con la c...
	4.1 Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). Deberá incluir el esquema de ejecución, procedimientos y los flujos de información, previamente acordado entre las partes y el Banco.
	4.2 Tipo de cambio acordado con el ejecutor para la rendición de cuentas. Se utilizar el tipo de cambio vigente en el país del prestatario en la fecha efectiva de la conversión de recursos en moneda extranjera a moneda local, en las cuentas de los eje...
	4.3 Estados financieros y otros informes auditados. Dentro del plazo de ciento veinte (120) días siguientes al cierre de cada ejercicio económico del Organismo Ejecutor y durante el plazo para desembolsos del financiamiento, se presentarán al Banco lo...
	4.4 Los términos de referencia para la contratación de la FAI deben contar con la aprobación previa del Banco, los cuales podrán incluir productos enmarcados en las NIA, relacionados con la auditoría financiera del Programa y trabajos relacionados de ...
	5.1 El Programa prevé la compra de 41 camionetas 4x4 por un monto de hasta US$1.762.178 para las actividades de saneamiento y titulación del INRA. Los detalles sobre los plazos para la compra, el método de adquisición y precio estimado se definen en e...
	6.1 Ejecución de las adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones se realizarán en el marco de las políticas GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9.
	6.2 Adquisiciones de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría. Los contratos de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría previstos en el Programa, y sujetos a Licitación Pública Internacional (LPI), se ejecutarán utilizando los D...
	6.3 La contratación de obras estimadas en montos por debajo de US$3.000.000 se ejecutarán aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios, utilizando el Documento Estándar de Comparación de Precios para la Contratación de Obras elaborado por el Banco pa...
	6.4 La adquisición de bienes comunes (equipo informático, mobiliario, etc.) estimados en montos por debajo de US$200.000, se realizará aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios y utilizando el Documento de Solicitud de Cotizaciones para Compra de ...
	6.5 Selección y Contratación de Consultores. La selección de consultores se realizará aplicando los métodos de selección de las Políticas GN-2350-9, teniendo en cuenta lo siguiente:
	a. Selección de Firmas Consultoras. La selección de firmas consultoras para el proyecto se hará utilizando la Solicitud Estándar de Propuesta (SEP) emitida por el Banco y Documentos de Solicitud de Propuestas para contratos por montos inferiores a US$...
	b. Lista Corta de Firmas Consultoras. La lista podría estar integrada en su totalidad (100%) por firmas bolivianas para contratos con valor de hasta US$200.000.
	c. Selección de Consultores Individuales. La selección de Consultores Individuales se realizará sobre la base de comparación de las calificaciones individuales de los candidatos. Cuando la convocatoria se realice por el SICOES bastará contar con un ca...
	d. Contratistas de Servicios. El Programa, según se explica en el POD, requiere mantener al personal eventual que ha recibido capacitación y está actualmente trabajando en el proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras, para asegurar el c...

	6.6 Planificación de las adquisiciones. El INRA publicará el Plan de Adquisiciones en el Sistema de Ejecución de Planes de Adquisiciones (SEPA), y lo actualizará por lo menos anualmente para reflejar las necesidades reales de ejecución del proyecto y ...
	6.7 Adquisiciones Anticipadas/Financiamiento Retroactivo. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del monto estimado del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de ap...
	6.8 Preferencia Nacional. Para la ejecución de esta operación, no se considera la inclusión de preferencia nacional en los procesos de adquisición.
	6.9 Términos de Referencia y Especificaciones Técnicas. La revisión de los criterios para la selección de listas cortas, los TdR y/o de las especificaciones técnicas son responsabilidad del Organismo Ejecutor en coordinación con el Jefe de Equipo de P...
	6.10 Tabla de montos límite (miles US$).
	6.11 Adquisiciones principales(*). Las adquisiciones principales previstas en esta operación se detallan a continuación:
	6.12 Supervisión de Adquisiciones. El proyecto puede ejecutarse aplicando la modalidad de revisión ex post a los procesos de hasta el 100% del Umbral de LPN, conforme la siguiente cuadrícula (las contrataciones directas y no enunciadas en la cuadrícul...
	6.13 Gastos Operativos o Recurrentes. Son aquellos gastos (operativos, de mantenimiento, entre otros), requeridos para poner en funcionamiento el Programa, y que serán acordados con el JEP e incluidos en el PA. Este tipo de gastos se ejecutarán siguie...
	6.14 Contrataciones Directas1F . Las contratación de bienes y servicios diferentes de consultoría (por ejemplo para talleres/reuniones: alquiler de salas/locales, equipo audiovisual, transporte, facilitadores, etc.) por montos individuales menores a U...
	6.15 Archivos. El INRA será responsable de establecer los documentos de soportes, procedimientos y controles necesarios para la ejecución del Programa, así como el resguardo de los mismos conforme a lo establecido en el contrato de préstamo y a las le...
	7.1 Programación y presupuesto. El INRA utilizará una Dirección Administrativa (DA)2F , bajo la cual se creará el Proyecto, permitiendo de este modo que presupuestariamente exista un registro e identificación individualizada de las fuentes de financia...
	7.2 Contabilidad y sistemas de información. Las transacciones del Programa se registrarán en el SIGEP. Este sistema integra en un único registro sus diferentes momentos contables y cumple con los requisitos presupuestarios (ejecución del presupuesto),...
	7.3 Desembolsos y flujo de caja. El préstamo se desembolsará bajo la modalidad de anticipos de fondos principalmente, en función de la programación financiera del Programa, a ser periódicamente actualizada. El Banco podrá efectuar un nuevo anticipo de...
	7.4 Control interno y auditoría interna. Anualmente, la gestión financiera del INRA es sujeta de revisiones de confiabilidad por parte de la Unidad de Auditoría Interna (UAI), y dada la importancia relativa del Programa se prevé que el Programa será i...
	7.5 Control externo e informes. A fin de cumplir con la presentación de los Estados Financieros del Programa Auditados anualmente, el INRA contratará una firma de auditoría independiente aceptable para el Banco siguiendo las políticas del BID, cuyo co...
	7.6 Plan de supervisión financiera. Los planes y periodicidad de la supervisión estarán diseñados en base a los riesgos fiduciarios identificados. Las acciones que se contemplan son: (i) la realización de la auditoría externa anual contratada para rev...

	Resoluciones legales español
	IDBDOCS-#40385375-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL-_OC
	IDBDOCS-#40385407-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL_-_FOE


	PR-4410-E.pdf
	resoluciones-legales-inglés.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40403179-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_FOE
	IDBDOCS-#40403194-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_OC






















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA 

 

 

 

PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 

 

THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)  

(AR-X1006) 

 

 

 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ricardo Quiroga (RND/CAR), 
Project Team Leader; Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR), Project Team Co-leader. Juan de Dios 
Mattos and Maria Claudia Perazza (CSD/RND); Juan Manuel Leaño and Carolina Benitez 
(TSP/CAR); Alonso Chaverri-Suarez (LEG/SGO); Teodoro Noel, Marisol Pinto, and Carlos 
Carpizo (PDP/CAR); Denis Corrales and María Elena Castro (VPS/ESG); Gabriela Szarfer 
(CAR/CAR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 





 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost .............................................................. 10 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 12 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 12 

A. Financing instruments and costs ................................................................ 12 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 13 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 15 
D. Other project risks and special issues ......................................................... 15 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 16 

 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan 

2. Annual work plan (AWP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Program Operating Regulations (Preliminary) 

2. Complete Results Matrix 

3. PROSAP I Completion Report (899/OC-AR) 

4. PROSAP II Completion Report (1956/OC-AR) 

5. PROSAP III midterm evaluation (2573/OC-AR)  

6. Economic evaluation of the program (PROSAP IV) 

7. Ex post economic evaluation of the PROSAP III projects 

8. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – major works 

9. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – minor works 

10. Information on the projects in Component 2  

11. Bibliography 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40678623
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677463
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679522
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AGN Office of the National Auditor General 
CCLIP Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects 
CDC Country Development Challenge 
CRF Corporate Results Framework 
DCIP Development and competitiveness improvement plans 
EIRR Economic internal rate of return 
ESM Environmental and Social Manual 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GHG Greenhouse gases 
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
MAGyP Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries  
NEA Northeastern region of Argentina 
NG Norte Grande 
NPV Net present value  
NRC Nonreimbursable contribution 
NWA Northwestern region of Argentina 
OC Ordinary Capital 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight  
PCR Project completion report 
PROSAP Programa de Servicios Agrícolas Provinciales [Provincial Agricultural 

Services Program] 
PSAS Provincial strategies for the agrifood sector  
SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises 
UIS Update to the Institutional Strategy  
URC Unit for Rural Change 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

ARGENTINA 
PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 
THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT 

PROJECTS – (AR-X1006)  
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Argentine Republic 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Original WAL: 15.25 years 

Disbursement period: 4 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Inspection and supervision fee: (b) 

IDB (OC): 100,000,000 76 Interest rate: LIBOR based 

Local 31,426,000 24 Credit fee: (b) 

Total 131,426,000 100 Approval currency: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

The objective of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of 
regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent with this purpose. Specifically, the third i ndividual 
operation proposed herein seeks improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change. 

Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: 

The executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC), will provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations 
have been approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank, including the Environmental and Social Manual (ESM) (paragraph 3.3). 

Special contractual conditions for environmental and social execution: 

Those established in the environmental and social management report (ESMR) will be included (paragraph 2.6).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as well as 

currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests. 
(b) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 

lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

  



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

 Recent context on the development of the agricultural sector in Argentina  

1.1 In Argentina, the agrifood sector accounts for around 10% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), and 20% of GDP including the agroindustry sector. The sector generates 
65% of total exports (US$35 billion) and 36% of employment. The country’s Pampa 
region1 generates 90% of agricultural production by value and 80% of the sector’s 
exports. The non-Pampa agriculture sector accounts for around 65% of agricultural 
exploitation, generates 20% of total production, and provides 54% of all rural jobs to 
220,000 rural families, the majority of them without their own capital (INDEC, 
Gallacher, and Lema, 2014).  

1.2 Over the last 10 years, Argentina’s agricultural sector passed through three distinct 
periods of sector and macroeconomic context that significantly affected its structure 
and performance. Between 2006 and 2012, the strong growth of the sector’s grain 
exports stood out, a result mainly of high demand from Asian countries and the 
agricultural capacity of the Pampa to meet growing international demand. Six 
products accounted for 65% of all exports, with a significant contribution from the 
soy chain and with export destinations highly concentrated: 82% of the soy was 
exported to China and 60% of the wheat to Brazil. For agricultural products, 30% is 
exported without any processing, and only 54% of agribusiness exports are products 
with basic processing (soy oil and flour). Although the expansion of soy was 
concentrated in the Pampa provinces, growing areas have also expanded to other 
regions, causing changes in land use and replacement of traditional crops (Anlló, 
Bisang, and Salvatierra, 2010).  

1.3 A second contextual period from 2012 to 2015 was characterized by the application 
of policies resulting in strong macroeconomic distortions: taxes and quantitative 
restrictions on agricultural exports (grains mainly), foreign-exchange controls and 
differentiated exchange rates, import controls, price controls, and targeted 
subsidies. Estimates from the IDB Agrimonitor (2014) show that from 2007 to 2012, 
producers generated net transfers to the public purse (via tax collection) and to 
consumers (through lower prices) that averaged US$11 billion annually, accounting 
for more than 30% of the value of the sector’s production. This policy framework 
caused productive and export activity in general to stall, but particularly impacted the 
non-Pampa regional economies, since as described in the following section, these 
regions face significant development gaps, forcing them to compete with greater 
disadvantages (Gallacher and Lema, 2014). 

1.4 A third period of context began with the change of government in December 2015, 
one of whose first measures was to eliminate the macroeconomic and sector policy 
distortions (Argentina, Country Development Challenge 2016 – CDC). Along these 
lines, restrictions on corn and wheat were eliminated and restrictions on soy were 
reduced; the exchange rate was free floated and foreign exchange restrictions were 
removed, as were administrative price and import controls. The new government 
seeks to reposition Argentine agriculture to make it competitive in external markets, 

                                                
1  Argentina’s provinces are grouped into the following five broad geographic regions: (i) Pampa region; 

(ii) Northeast region (NEA); (iii) Northwest region (NWA); (iv) Cuyo Region; and (v) Patagonia region. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
incentivize private investment in cutting-edge technology, and focus attention on 
structural shortcomings and development gaps that affect the sector, particularly in 
the more vulnerable regional economies that have fallen behind in terms of social 
and economic development (Belgrano Plan). 

 Gaps in regional development and priorities for competitiveness and 
developing rural regional economies  

1.5 Development gaps in regional economies, particularly the Norte Grande (NG) 
provinces, are notable. The per capita GDP in the NG is 47.5% of that of the nation 
as a whole. With 20.7% of the total population, the NG only generates 9.8% of the 
country’s GDP and exports around 10% of the national total. (Meloni, 2012; 
Argentina CDC). In a study on production and technology gaps for the agricultural 
sector, Cuervo (2016) tracks the Global Yield Gap in Agriculture. The index 
measures the production gap based on maximum achievable yield and actual yield 
(farm yield) for national-scale field crops. The production gap shows low relative 
levels of technical efficiency: 41.5% for corn, followed by wheat with 41% and soy 
with 31.7%. Measured as “yield” differences in the production of national field crops 
(cereals and oilseeds) for the 2011-2014 period, the productive gap figures show 
that the NG’s technical efficiency index in corn is 62% that of the humid Pampa area, 
while for soy it is 82%, for wheat it is only 53%, sorghum stands at 62%, and 
sunflower at 74%. 

1.6 A number of factors affect the regional gaps in technology and development for 
Argentina’s rural regional economies, with the following generally standing out: (i) a 
deficit in production infrastructure, particularly irrigation, connectivity, and rural 
logistics infrastructure, as well as dependable access to energy sources; (ii) climate 
change and its implications for water availability for high quality and high volume 
agricultural production; (iii) deficits in services for improving competitiveness and 
value added, restricting productivity and innovation; and (iv) institutional, 
governance, and social participation weaknesses, both public and within private 
organizations and associations of small and medium-sized rural producers. (Lema, 
2010; Lissi and Losi, 2010; Leyva, 2016; Bisang, Campi, and Aniló, 2013). These 
factors are described below. 

1.7 Productive infrastructure: Irrigation. According to the 2014 National Irrigation 
Plan and the study “Potencial de Ampliación del Riego en la Argentina,” [Potential 
for Expanding Irrigation in Argentina, United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), PROSAP, World Bank, 2015], Argentina has a little more than 
2 million hectares of irrigated land, with potential to expand that to around 6 million 
hectares.2 The non-Pampa regions are the most dependent on this infrastructure for 
agricultural development. Half of all irrigated land is in dry regions with annual 
precipitation of less than 500 mm (e.g. the Andean areas of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán, 
Catamarca, La Rioja, San Juan, and Mendoza), while 20% is in the semi-dry central 
and northern regions, with between 600 mm and 800 mm of rain during the summer. 
The water stress situation in these regions is worsening due to the effects of climate 
change and more intense drought periods. Irrigation accounts for 70% of total water 
consumption in Argentina, and 75% of the water used for this purpose comes from 

                                                
2  Including expansion over existing areas, new areas, and complementary irrigation.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
surface sources, generally reservoirs created by dams and river diversion, with the 
other 25% coming from aquifers through individual wells. 

1.8 The four irrigation systems identified by the program have low efficiency (60%) as a 
result of: (i) main canals that are not lined (75%); (ii) secondary canals that are not 
lined (80%); and (iii) little use of pressurized irrigation systems (25% of farmers). The 
records and technical evaluations of the systems rehabilitated by PROSAP show 
that it is possible to increase initial efficiency levels from 60% to over 90% in terms 
of water loss reduction. Also, in terms of technology, at the level of the individual 
farm, the use of inefficient irrigation technology is still prevalent (e.g. surface 
irrigation) partly due to limited management capacity and knowledge, but also 
because of the property investment costs. The improved gravity systems have an 
average cost of US$398/hectare, but with objective efficiency of 65%, while 
pressurized irrigation systems (micro spray, drip, pivot) that achieve efficiency of 
80% to 90%, cost between US$2,600/hectare and US$4,000/hectare 
(FAO-PROSAP).  

1.9 The PROSAP interventions address the investment niche needed to rehabilitate 
existing systems and expand irrigated areas in provinces with a high degree of water 
stress, while targeting the needs of small and medium-sized producers. In the NG, 
investments have been identified of around US$3.6 billion that would make it 
possible to increase arable land by between 22% and 50% (approximately 320,000 
hectares). In any case, the success of irrigation interventions requires ensuring 
proper coordination between three areas: (i) institutional and legal, including 
regulatory frameworks, land titling and registration, institution-strengthening, and 
development of financially-autonomous user organizations; (ii) economic, including 
accessible financing instruments, viable public-private partnership models, 
affordable water fees and prices, and tax incentives; and (iii) technical, for dealing 
with cutting-edge engineering and technology, modern water information systems, 
and environmental studies. Investments in irrigation infrastructure financed by 
PROSAP have included actions in these three areas and contributed to improving 
productivity in the intervention areas (see paragraphs 1.19, 1.20, and 1.21).  

1.10 Productive infrastructure: Rural roads and rural energy. Of the total volume of 
cargo transported, 95% is moved over the country’s road network. Annual average 
daily traffic has been increasing, but not evenly across all regions, with significant 
imbalances for cargo traffic (Agosta, R. 2010). For rural economies in the non-
Pampa provinces, the poor condition of secondary and tertiary roads results in: 
(i) high transportation and logistical costs; and (ii) poor accessibility to large 
expanses of territory. For example, the project for secondary route RT13 in 
Corrientes province shows that the route is closed on average more than 80 days 
out of the year. RT13 is 163 km, unpaved and without drainage. In the rainy season, 
70 km of it (43%) is impassable. This worsens the competitiveness of non-Pampa 
rural areas considering that for the main exportable grains and oilseeds, logistical 
costs of transportation to the ports or mill account for 30% of the price for NEA and 
NWA producers (IDEA. FIEL, 2009). Likewise, regarding the rural public energy 
infrastructure, significant gaps and coverage needs are evident. Nationally, more 
than 60% of rural homes do not have access to electricity, with the farms furthest 
from the grid’s main lines being the most affected (Mendoza, 2016).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.11 Climate change challenges. Given the fundamental role that Argentina plays in 

global food security, addressing extreme events resulting from climate change is of 
vital importance considering their impact on agricultural activity and the production 
and provision of food. Agricultural and livestock activity are estimated to contribute 
28% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, for which reason these 
sectors are a central focus for the government as it complies with its goal of reducing 
GHG emissions by 15% by 2030, as established in its intended nationally 
determined contribution (INDC) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  

1.12 According to Argentina’s Second National Message on Climate Change, there is 
evidence that the effects of climate change have contributed to glacier melt in the 
Andes Mountains, increasing desertification, and an increased recurrence in forest 
fires over the last 10 years. From the perspective of impact on agriculture, the most 
severe effects manifest themselves through water stress and water availability for 
production, particularly in the areas of Cuyo, NEA, and NWA where PROSAP is 
engaged (Argentina: Second National Message; ECLAC 2012; Ludeña, Wilk, and 
Quiroga).  

1.13 The Cuyo region has been under a water emergency during 7 of the last 10 years, 
and the trend toward declining availability of water directly impacts availability of the 
irrigation needed to maintain the current levels of irrigation-dependent wine and fruit 
production (Brown, 2015). According to a study entitled “The Economics of Climate 
Change in Argentina” (ECLAC, 2014), if adaptation measures are not taken, climate 
change-related productivity losses could reach 17% of the national agriculture 
sector’s value added, along with drops in yield of between 11% and 16% for wheat, 
15% and 24% for corn, and 14% and 25% for soy. In terms of its effect on irrigation, 
in a study of Argentina’s irrigation potential, the FAO reports potential climate 
change-related productivity losses in areas under irrigation equivalent to the loss of 
325,000 hectares, or production value of US$900 million. 

 
Table 1. Production losses due to climate change in areas under irrigation (in 1,000s of ha) 

 

*FAO-PROSAP World Bank (2015). 

51

74 78

58

18

62
29

9

1

8

22 24 22 19 7
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Central Cuyo NWA NEA Patagonia

Underground irrigation Surface irrigation

Losses (% of total surface area)

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
 

1.14 Competitiveness services gaps. Integration of agricultural producers into clusters 
and value chains is necessary for regional economies to take off. The diagnosis of 
Argentina’s CDC indicates that the lower competitiveness of the non-Pampa 
agricultural systems can be partly attributed to the lower degree of sophistication of 
scientific-technological-educational subsystems and of management in general, as 
well as their poor links to agricultural technology supply companies. Along these 
lines, Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris (2008) find that the benefits of increased sector 
clustering are positive and highly significant, although to be effective it requires 
strengthened institutions. Likewise, using company-level data, Long and Zhang 
(2011) show that China’s rapid industrialization is characterized by the growing 
formation of clusters. They find that the clusters help overcome the credit restrictions 
that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face. Scalice (2016) finds in an 
analysis of nine agrifood supply chains in Argentina’s NG that more than 80% of 
small producers of are not part of a value chain, nor do they have access to financial 
services. The author also identifies a number of limitations to developing competitive 
chains and clusters, including: (i) low product quality; (ii) limited access to capital; 
(iii) lack of economies of scale; (iv) weak organizational capacity; and (v) limited 
capacity to innovate. Regarding access to capital, Sanguinetti (2011) identifies 
access to financial services as one of the main restrictions faced by rural areas of 
regional economies, and Lapelle (2007) finds that more than 80% of SMEs in 
regional economies are self-financing. 

1.15 Weaknesses in institutions, governance, and social participation. The various 
provinces are distinctly heterogeneous in terms of their institutional capacities. The 
provinces in the NWA and NEA have institutional quality gaps averaging -2.3 
and -1.2, respectively This means that, compared to the national average, these 
regions are being left behind. (Villalobos, 2015, CDC Argentina). In terms of social 
participation, which is an integral part of governance, unequal access for and 
participation by women is a key weakness. The URC report entitled “Las nuevas 
generaciones de mujeres rurales como promotoras de cambio (2015)” [New 
generations of rural women as agents of change] conducts a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the needs of and opportunities for young rural women. This 
study provides evidence of the relatively low impact of participation among women 
in rural areas, although regional differences are noteworthy (between 5% and 20%), 
and for young women facing a series of disadvantages that intensify in remote rural 
areas, the differences are related to difficulties participating in the labor market while 
caring for members of the household. PROSAP project design has found that only 
5% of the beneficiaries of training or technical assistance are women, and only 
between 0.3% and 3% of land owners in irrigator organizations are women.  

 Progress and outcomes of PROSAP loans from the CLIPP 

1.16 The national government implemented PROSAP in the mid-1990s to support 
agricultural development in the rural economies of the non-Pampa provinces. The 
implementation of this program was mainly focused on the construction of rural 
public works. PROSAP’s first phase was financed by the Bank through operation 
899/OC-AR. Based on that program’s outcomes, in 2008, the Government of 
Argentina requested a CCLIP (AR-X1006) for US$600 million. The CCLIP began 
with operation 1956/OC-AR (PROSAP II), execution of which completed in 2014. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
The second operation, 2573/OC-AR (PROSAP III) was approved in 2011. Its level 
of execution is 90%, and it is set for closure in March 2017. Project completion 
reports (PCR) for loans 899/OC-AR and 1956/OC-AR, as well as the midterm 
evaluation for 2573/OC-AR, describe in detail the outputs and outcomes achieved, 
as well as the lessons learned in each operation. The following table summarizes 
the scope and main outputs of the PROSAP operations.  

 
Table 2. Outputs of PROSAP operations 

 
PROSAP I: 
899/OC-AR 

PROSAP II: 

1956/OC-AR 

First operation 
under the 

CCLIP 

PROSAP III: 
2573/OC-AR 

Second 
operation under 

the CCLIP 

Loan amounts (millions of US$) 322 200 230 

Irrigation and drainage systems built (km) 294 154 374 

Hectares irrigated 137,521 73,038 59,560 

Beneficiaries of irrigation systems 12,769 14,489 5,269 

Rural roads improved (km) 482 339 49  

Rural electrification (km of power lines) 5,251 1,020 45  

Producers receiving services, technical 
assistance, and training 

111,819 34,039 149,111 

Business plans financed—
Nonreimbursable contribution (NRC) 

133 85 229 

 

1.17 The types of outputs that have been generated from PROSAP I to PROSAP III 
reflect the evolution of the interventions from an approach predominately aimed at 
physical infrastructure to interventions that are more balanced with technical 
assistance and soft components on management and market development. The 
PCRs for the completed PROSAP projects show that they have achieved the direct 
outcomes and effects expected, including: (i) productive overhaul of irrigation 
projects, with increases in surface area irrigated, better water availability and quality 
throughout the year for irrigators, and improved irrigation efficiency; (ii) improved 
productivity at the level of individual farms for specific crops; (iii) irrigator 
organizations strengthened and taking over the operation, maintenance, and 
financial management of their systems; (iv) the rural roads that were financed are 
usable year-round; and (v) development and consolidation of clusters that have 
been able to diversify into and/or export processed products for the first time. An 
ex post economic assessment of the Canal del Norte and 25 de Mayo, San Juan 
rehabilitation projects and the project to improve rural roads in productive areas in 
Entre Ríos, Zone VII, based on surveys conducted upon project completion shows 
that both projects achieved economic benefits demonstrating their economic return, 
with economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of 21.1% and 19.4%, respectively.  

1.18 Other noteworthy outcomes of PROSAP are institutional and strategic. Among them, 
PROSAP has provided the Ministry of Agroindustry with a land management 
operating model that enables it to strengthen and leverage programs with greater 
scope and coverage in the provinces as part of its provincial strategies for the 
agrifood sector (PSAS) and its development and competitiveness improvement 
plans (DCIP). Among other outcomes, this has enabled the strengthening of an 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
environmental and social area that enables it to move forward on these issues 
proactively, incorporating the inclusion of the gender dimension in rural 
development, as well as addressing climate change, resulting in the Ministry 
qualifying as an executing agency for the Climate Change Adaptation Fund.  

1.19 PROSAP impact evaluations. During the design of PROSAP I and PROSAP II, 
impact evaluations were not performed for experimental designs. Recently, 
PROSAP III has incorporated a methodology for evaluating the impact of quasi-
experimental designs that will enable analysis of how outcomes are attributed to the 
program’s investments. These evaluations will be conducted once PROSAP III ends 
in 2017. However, some partial and complimentary impact evaluations have been 
conducted using data generated by PROSAP projects, as described below. 

1.20 Using quasi-experimental methodologies, Gibbons, Maffioli, and Rossi (2016) and 
Rossi (2016) evaluated the impact of the PROSAP component providing improved 
irrigation channels in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. These studies 
conclude that PROSAP had positive impacts on both production and per-hectare 
productivity, showing that producers who participate in the program produce 9.4% 
more than nonparticipants, with per-hectare yields higher by 7%. 

1.21 Lastly, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture conducted a study 
entitled The Territorial Impact of Public Policies: The case of PROSAP (2016), which 
evaluated the outcomes of PROSAP I projects from 1998 to 2010. The study applied 
a synthetic methodology by comparing administrative data from departments that 
had PROSAP interventions with data from departments that did not. The study finds 
that out of all the departments, those with PROSAP projects had better development 
results in each of the dimensions analyzed and in the total synthetic index. The 
degree of overall development of the departments without PROSAP was almost 
37%, while for those benefiting from PROSAP it was almost 50%. 

 Lessons learned for PROSAP IV design and compliance with CCLIP 
requirements 

1.22 The main lessons learned from the execution of PROSAP II and III were taken into 
account when preparing this operation and formed the basis for the inclusion of 
certain adjustments. The following table provides a summary of these lessons. 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Institutional consolidation. The creation of a 

comprehensive strategic coordination 
structure, with the same functions as the URC, 
has been the basis for better PROSAP project 
performance  

The Ministry of Agroindustry has decided to 
maintain the URC’s functional structure and 
has launched a process to consolidate it 
internally as a specialized agency for 
coordinating investment with external funding. 

Coordination of public interventions in the 
field. Prioritizing projects in the framework of 

the PSASs, which were introduced starting 
with PROSAP II, has enabled participatory 
processes that offer better coordination and 
strategic synergy with a variety of initiatives, 
expanding the area of impact.  

The proposal is to strengthen and consolidate 
these processes for territory and microregion 
management in the framework of the PSAS so 
as to achieve synergies among PROSAP 
projects and other URC projects, in addition to 
better coordinating the intervention of other 
public policy instruments in the same areas. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Priority on investment in public goods, 
complemented by direct support that is 
intelligent and well targeted on producers. 

The initial focus of the first PROSAP on 
building public works demonstrated the need 
for supporting small and medium-sized 
producers with technical assistance and NRC 
for in-field improvements and development of 
new products. The evaluations conducted, 
including those of the Office of Evaluation and 
Oversight (OVE), found that the instrument 
had positive outcomes, but that it was 
necessary to ensure that the NRCs were 
applied with stricter diagnostic, eligibility, real 
market failure justification, measurement, and 
variability criteria.  

The Technology Modernization Fund, which 
includes NRC, has been redesigned based on 
the standards established in the recent 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document: 
(i) focus on technological support for mitigation 
of and adaptation to climate change and 
environmental sustainability; (ii) eligibility of 
small producers lacking access to credit and 
associations organized to establish new local 
networks and value added in new markets; 
(iii) technical assistance to promote the 
participation of the banking sector in financing 
the sector’s technological modernization, in 
coordination with private sector operations; 
and (iv) transient nature of the support and 
transparent, flexible, and evaluable 
mechanisms for granting it.  

Minor infrastructure works for rural 
development. During PROSAP III, a pilot 

program of minor works intended to meet the 
local production needs of small producers was 
piloted successfully. These works, which are 
prioritized in the PSAS, saw high ownership 
and participation levels among producers. 

The minor works component is continued in a 
reinforced context of PSAS interventions in 
priority microregions, along with technical 
assistance for local organizations to ensure 
the works’ sustainability. 

 

1.23 Eligibility of the operation under the CCLIP. Compliance with the eligibility 
conditions for a new individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006 of 17 April 2008 
has been verified: (i) the program is framed within the sectors and components 
defined under the CCLIP; (ii) its objectives are related to the Bank’s country strategy, 
and it is included in the country program; (iii) the aforementioned agreement 
stipulated that the executing agency would be the same for all the individual loans 
under the line, which is the case given that the URC will continue to be in charge of 
execution; (iv) the outcomes obtained by the URC in these two individual operations 
are satisfactory and have been supported by the corresponding performance 
evaluations for PROSAP II and PROSAP III, meaning the project team and national 
authorities can expect the new proposed program will perform satisfactorily; 
(v) regarding the financial execution of PROSAP III, under execution, 84% of the 
loan proceeds have been committed, while 94% of the proceeds have been 
disbursed; and (vi) the borrower and executing agency have fulfilled the conditions 
of the loan contract and the Bank’s policies on disbursements and procurement of 
goods and services, including updated financial statements.3 

 Design of PROSAP IV  

1.24 As the third individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006, PROSAP IV has the same 
design as the first two operations. Specifically, PROSAP IV is designed to bolster 

                                                
3  The most recent report including audited financial statements includes a minor qualification that does not 

affect the reasonableness thereof. This minor qualification refers to a debt observed by the Office of the 
National Auditor General between contractors and the provinces of Mendoza, Entre Ríos, and Catamarca, 
set forth in a note to the financial statements, representing an integral part thereof. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
local production systems via the strengthening of critical local assets (public goods: 
the economic infrastructure—irrigation, transportation, energy, social capital—
business culture; quality of regional associations and business networks) and 
improve the effectiveness of the intergovernmental framework. These actions 
contribute to improving the efficiency of local production systems by creating positive 
externalities through clustering and by resolving market and coordination failures. 

1.25 In particular, PROSAP IV will strengthen local development mechanisms, bolstering 
public-private partnerships in order to increase the competitiveness of producers 
and their associations. Also, the following specific objectives will be consolidated 
and strengthened: (i) internalization of measures for adapting to climate change with 
special emphasis on managing water resources and implementing climate-smart 
irrigation systems; (ii) the comprehensive incorporation of the gender dimension in 
the program through implementation of specific gender action plans for each 
provincial public investment project that include gender diagnostics, training, 
technical assistance, access to available funds, and monitoring of indicators; and 
(iii) consolidation of mechanisms for measuring outcomes and impacts.  

1.26 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 
2010-2020, and the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019. The 
program is consistent with UIS 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and strategically 
aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation through 
investments in productive public infrastructure and technical assistance that will 
enable increases in the productivity of rural producers in the program’s work areas. 
The program is also in line with the crosscutting issue of climate change and 
environmental sustainability through improved use of water and land via investments 
in irrigation technology. A full 100% of the proceeds of the operation are invested in 
climate change adaptation activities, according to the as climate financing for 
adaptation to climate change according to the multilateral development banks’ joint 
methodology for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB 
Group target of increasing financing for projects related to climate change to 30% of 
all operation approvals through 2020. The program provides additionality in terms of 
gender equality through specific activities for promoting the participation of women 
in the training provided by the program through gender action plans. In addition, the 
program will contribute to the goals of CRF 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) via 
the indicator of the number of beneficiaries that improve their management and use 
of natural resources. 

1.27 Alignment with the IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB 
Country Strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document GN-2687), in particular with 
the priority area “Alleviating Obstacles to Growth” in the area of rural and agricultural 
development, the objectives of which include supporting investment programs in 
basic rural infrastructure in regional economies. It is also aligned with the priorities 
of the new Country Strategy with Argentina (2016-2019), which is in the approval 
process as of the distribution date of this loan proposal, in particular with the 
following strategic areas: (i) business climate improvement by fostering 
environmentally sustainable solutions; and (ii) strengthening of private-sector 
integration and insertion into value chains by developing public goods for innovation 
and cluster development.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.28 The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development 
of regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent 
with this purpose. Specifically, the third individual operation proposed herein seeks 
improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small 
and medium-sized agricultural producers, with a focus on strengthening resilience 
to climate change. The program is structured in two main components. 

1.29 Component 1: Investment to support competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$80.2 million). This component includes: (i) a subcomponent for strengthening 
public infrastructure of major works aimed at increasing the coverage and quality of 
rural infrastructure in the provinces by executing the public investment projects 
prioritized in the PSAS. Investments include the rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage systems, forest fire prevention, and tertiary roads in climactically vulnerable 
areas with a focus on adaptation and resilience, and (ii) a subcomponent for minor 
infrastructure works for building, overhauling, or expanding public works and 
community improvements. All investments include financing for the technical 
assistance and training necessary for execution, use, and maintenance of the works 
and for strengthening local governance and the provincial and municipal agencies 
that manage water resources for irrigation while managing the promotion of 
participation by women. The objective of all the works and activities under this 
component is to support adaptation of the agricultural productive activity to scenarios 
and conditions of climactic vulnerability, with technical designs that take those 
scenarios into account in the long-term.  

1.30 The major infrastructure works to be financed whose final technical, economic, 
social, climactic, and environmental designs are in place are the following:  

 

Table 4. Major Works Projects 

Project 

Total 
amount 

(US$ 
millions) 

Lining of the of the upper section of the Cacique Guaymallén irrigation channel. 
First section. Mendoza 

21.5 

Improvements to the Colorado River irrigation system. Second stage. Colonia 
Santa Rosa. Salta 

13.9 

Improvements to the Benavidez Gral. 9 de Julio Canal system. Departments of 
Rivadavia, Chimbas, Santa Lucía, and 9 de Julio. San Juan 

17.7 

Development of the Tala River system irrigation area. Department of Trancas. 
Tucumán 

19.4 

Improvement of rural roads in productive areas of the province of Corrientes. 
Provincial Route 13 

10.4 

Improvement of provincial fire management services for preventing and 
controlling fires in the Northwest of Chubut 

6.1 

Total 89.1 

 

1.31 For their part, the minor works being prioritized and whose technical, economic, and 
environmental designs are in place are: (i) overhaul of systems for surface irrigation 
and increasing production yields, located in Anjullon, La Rioja; (ii) irrigation 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677496
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677507
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677534
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677541
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677483
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
improvement project in Colalao del Valle, Tucumán; (iii) water system improvement 
project in Angulos, La Rioja; (iv) improvements to the irrigation infrastructure of the 
water system in Figueroa, Santiago del Estero; and (v) micro reservoirs in the Cano 
River basin, Córdoba.  

1.32 Component 2: Support services for competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$14.4 million). This component finances technical assistance and business 
plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness and value-added of agricultural 
products in regional economies, with a priority on complementing the major and 
minor works projects of Component 1. The criteria for prioritizing and selecting 
business plans and technical assistance activities is detailed in the program 
Operating Regulations and the technical annexes for each of the three instruments, 
with technical, economic, financial, institutional, social, and environmental feasibility 
being a priority prerequisite: (i) Technology modernization fund, which uses NRCs 
to cofinance in-field  and partnership-building projects that contribute to closing 
technological gaps, bolstering value added at origin; and promoting environmentally 
sustainable practices and climate smart agriculture (CSA) to address the challenges 
of climate change. The focus of the fund is generating positive externalities and 
seeking synergies with private initiatives that promote producer access to formal 
banking and its financial product lines, including access to green financing;4 
(ii) Territorial development initiatives for financing development projects and 
consolidating agrifood clusters that are formulated and prioritized in the participatory 
framework of the DCIPs, which bring together public/private actors with 
scientific/technology actors and producers in the provinces. These projects finance 
technical assistance activities, generating knowledge and cutting edge technology 
that benefit the cluster and the regions where they are developed; (iii) Institutional 
strengthening and preinvestment, providing underlying and crosscutting support for 
technical assistance and training activities to improve management in provincial 
institutions, including raising awareness on climate change and improving capacities 
to identify, prepare, and monitor public investment projects. 

1.33 The program’s beneficiary provinces are the non-Pampa provinces, which will be 
prioritized based on the criteria set forth in the program’s Operating Regulations, 
including: (i) relative degree to which they lag behind; (ii) vulnerability to climate 
change; (iii) provincial sector strategies with a time horizon of at least 10 years; 
(iv) provincial association in place with adequate human and technical resources; 
and (v) due authorizations in place for the province to take on debt in order to accept 
PROSAP resources. The projects are chosen through a planning process consistent 
with the priorities of Argentina’s CDCs and the diagnostics performed. The program 
Operating Regulations defines project eligibility criteria, considering the different 
decision levels, type of project, criteria for analysis, and the project cycle from 
identification and preparation through to approval and execution.  

1.34 Program coordination, monitoring, and evaluation will also be financed. 
Under this item, support will be provided for the strengthening, operation, and 
maintenance of the project monitoring and evaluation system; the URC’s 
incremental operating expenses; the preparation of studies, including impact 

                                                
4  MIF project AR-T1170 includes financing technology packages for small producers and their cooperatives 

through a new line of credit between the Fund and Banco Credicoop. As part of the actions to integrate the 
IDB Group, once the MIF operation is approved, the proposal is to offer PROSAP producers this line of credit.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677611
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
evaluations, progress reports, and audit reports; and environmental and social 
monitoring. 

C. Key results indicators  

1.35 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the executing agency 
(Annex II). It includes indicators for impact, as well as outcomes and outputs, with 
their corresponding baseline values, targets, and means of verification. The main 
outputs include 31,638 hectares under irrigation, 71 km of main irrigation channels; 
and 44 km of rural roads. The main outcomes expected from the sample projects 
are described in Table 5. The program is expected to directly benefit 18,200 rural 
producers in six provinces. Over the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected 
in higher gross value of the production of rural producers and lower losses from 
drought associated with climate change. 

 

Table 5. Key Results Matrix Indicators 

Outcomes 
Time of 

measurement 
Proposed indicators 

Improved productivity for producers 
served by financed irrigation systems. 

Year 4  Average increase in land productivity 
(including both agriculture and livestock). 

Greater irrigation water use efficiency by 
rehabilitated systems. 

Year 4  Volume of water delivered to the farms / 
Volume of water that enters the system. 

Improved rural accessibility on Route 13 in 
the province of Corrientes. 

Year 4  Lower number of impassable days. 

Reduction of the average area affected 
annually by fire. 

Year 4  Average area affected by fire in the 
province of Chubut. 

Diversification of markets and/or products 
in regions served by the program. 

Annual  Number of business initiatives that 
increase sales by at least 20%. 

Users who adopt technologies for 
adaptation to climate change. 

Annual  Number of agricultural and livestock 
producers adopting pressurized irrigation 
technologies. 

1.36 Economic viability of the program. Overall analysis of the program yields an 
average weighted EIRR of 20.6% for a time horizon of 20 years. The benefits include 
marginal changes to productivity and increases in the area under irrigation. The 
costs include the total investment in the program, opportunity costs for training the 
farmers; operation and maintenance; and additional investment on the plot (see 
Annex). At a discount rate of 12%, overall net present value (NPV) is 
US$77.7 million. The sensitivity analysis considered: (i) modification of investment 
costs; (ii) changes in crop yields; (iii) changes in the costs of investment 
sustainability; (iv) delays in benefit realization; and (v) technology adoption rates. 
For a 30% increase in costs, the NPV is US$52.3 million, and the EIRR is 16.9%. 
For a three-year delay in benefit realization, the NPV is US$77.7 million and EIRR 
is 17.1%. For an adoption rate of 70%, the EIRR is 15.5%, with NPV of 
US$28.3 million.  

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments and costs  

2.1 The program’s cost is US$131,426,000, of which the Bank will finance 
US$100 million, chargeable to the Ordinary Capital in United States dollars under 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
CCLIP AR-X1006.5 The needed for the works and interventions analyzed accounts 
for 100% of the available financing. It will be structured as an investment loan, with 
an execution period of four years, taking into consideration that the major works to 
be financed are all at the stage of executable projects ready for public tender, and 
that the annual disbursements under PROSAP III over the last four years have 
demonstrated execution levels in keeping with the proposed planning.  

 

Table 6. Program cost and financing (in US$) 

Investment categories* IDB 
Local 

contribution 
Total % 

1. Component 1: Support investments 80,200,000 26,476,000 106,676,000 81 

1.1  Strengthening public infrastructure 73,000,000 26,476,000 99,476,000 76 

1.2 Minor works 7,200,000 0 7,200,000 5 

2. Component 2: Support Services  14,400,000 3,600,000 18,000,000 14 

2.1  Technology modernization fund 5,600,000 1,400,000 7,000,000 5 

2.2  Territorial development initiatives 6,400,000 1,600,000 8,000,000 6 

2.3  Provincial institutional strengthening 2,400,000 600,000 3,000,000 2 

3.  Management, monitoring, and evaluation 5,400,000 1,350,000 6,750,000 5 

3.1  Management 5,013,900 1,253,475 6,267,375 5 

3.1  Monitoring and evaluation (includes 
environmental and social) 

378,000 94,500 472,500 0 

3.2  Audits 8,100 2,025 10,125 0 

Total 100,000,000 31,426,000 131,426,000 100 

Percentage 76 24 100   

 

2.2 Bank financing will be disbursed according to the timetable provided in Table 7 and 
detailed in the Multiyear Execution Plan. 

 

Table 7. Estimated disbursement timetable (in thousands of US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total % 

IDB 23,626.00 33,530.00 34,194.00 8,650.00 100,000.00 76% 

Local 7,513.00 10,631.60 10,797.60 2,483.80 31,426.00 24% 

Total 31,139.00 44,161.60 44,991.60 11,133.80 131,426.00 100% 

% 24% 34% 34% 8% 100%  

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), and pursuant to the applied safeguards forms, this 
program has been classified as a category “B” operation. This program is designed 
to promote better management of natural resources related to agricultural production 
and improve producers’ climate resilience and adaptation. Irrigation projects 

                                                
5  Total financing of the CCLIP (AR-X1006) was set at US$600 million, of which US$200 million were executed 

under the first operation (1956/OC-AR) and US$230 million were allocated to the second operation 
(2573/OC-AR), leaving US$170 million available. In the context of programming loans with the Bank for 2016, 
the government has decided to allocate US$100 million to the financing of this third operation, leaving a 
remainder of US$70 million. No additional operations are expected. 



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
internalize measures for adapting to hydrometeorological and climate change risks 
(e.g., expanding drainage for rural roads, reviewing hydrological series for irrigation 
works), as well as elements of sustainability and water use efficiency. Another 
benefit is climate change mitigation through the project to improve rural roads in 
Corrientes by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 69.9 tons of CO2 equivalent 
thanks to reductions in fuel consumption, or an emissions cut of 43.2% from the 
scenario without the project. 

2.4 The execution of the PROSAP program is governed by the program Operating 
Regulations and the respective Environmental and Social Manual (ESM), with 
updated guides for environmental and social evaluation, including involuntary 
resettlement and mitigation and control procedures, as well as public consultation 
and monitoring and evaluation. In line with directive B.14 of Operational Policy 
OP-703, during preparation, an independent socioenvironmental review of the 
execution of PROSAP III was conducted. It found that the executing agencies had 
improved their socioenvironmental management capacity, and no 
socioenvironmental liabilities were identified. 

2.5 All of the infrastructure projects have socioenvironmental impact studies and 
environmental and social management plans that comply with IDB policies. The 
program Operating Regulations and ESM were reviewed mainly to incorporate 
gender equality opportunities and actions to prevent and adapt to the risks from 
disasters and climate change. Also, monitoring measures were strengthened by 
defining evaluation and monitoring indicators. Where applicable, projects include 
plans to ensure that indigenous peoples share in the projects’ benefits, in keeping 
with Operational Policy OP-765. Plans are also in place to address effects on assets, 
in keeping with Operational Policy OP-710. Likewise, all the projects include plans 
for pest management in their training and assistance programs, as well as plans for 
taking action on gender with a view toward increasing the participation of women in 
training programs, technical assistance, and other services, consistent with 
Operational Policy OP-761 of the Bank. 

2.6 Participatory consultative meetings were held in the areas to benefit from the 
projects as part of the design process. Prior to the Bank’s no objection for contracting 
the works, where necessary, the provinces will submit the pertinent environmental 
permits granted by the corresponding authorities. As established in the program 
Operating Regulations, prior to issuing the public tender for the works, the URC will 
present evidence to the Bank that it has obtained those permits. The environmental 
and social studies are available for consultation at the URC/PROSAP and Bank 
websites. The environmental and social management report (ESMR) summarizes 
the outcomes of and recommendations for environmental and social management 
to ensure the operation’s environmental and social sustainability. The borrower 
agrees to carry out—through the executing agency—the program activities in 
accordance with the environmental and social standards and recommendations 
included in the program Operating Regulations, including its ESM and the program’s 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The special contractual 
conditions on environmental and social management are detailed in paragraph 6.4 
of the ESMR. 

http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746


 - 15 - 
 
 

 
C. Fiduciary risks  

2.7 The main fiduciary risks identified are associated with processes of interaction 
between the national and provincial levels, which are often complex. These risks 
include: (i) delays in procurement processes; (ii) delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by the provinces and deficient quality thereof; and 
(iii) delays in providing accounting information to the Bank. Experience with 
execution has demonstrated that these risks are medium, that the executing agency 
has adequate execution capacity, and that the executing agency has been able to 
manage the aforementioned risks effectively in previous operations. The following 
were agreed upon as the main mitigation measures: (i) quarterly update and 
management of the procurement plan; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 2.3: 
Provincial Institution Strengthening; and (iii) permanent 65% flexibility for justification 
of expenses for disbursement of advances of funds (see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks and special issues  

2.8 An inherent risk involved in rural infrastructure works is weak commitment by 
beneficiaries to operating and maintaining the infrastructure works. The main 
mitigation measure for this comes in the framework of participatory processes for 
local empowerment, as well as the implementation of training and technical 
assistance programs. Also, the risks associated with changes to the national and 
provincial government are: weak interagency coordination between the program’s 
executing agencies, as well as scattered and uncoordinated implementation of 
external financing for agricultural projects The main mitigation measure is thus the 
implementation of targeted training plans for the provincial execution units. 

2.9 Regarding the program’s overall sustainability, at the level of the provincial 
governments and producer organizations, PROSAP has been able to build 
management mechanisms and secure commitments to ensure the operation and 
maintenance of the works. It has also been able to consolidate the capacities and 
processes developed in Component 2 (See program Operating Regulations).  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower is the Argentine Republic, and the Ministry of Agroindustry will be the 
executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC). The URC will be 
responsible for the execution, administration, and supervision of the program. Within 
it, the Program and Project Management Area will be in charge of executing the 
activities of the projects financed under the program. It will also have support from 
the crosscutting support areas and units that are part of the URC. 

3.2 The Ministry of Agroindustry is responsible for the local counterpart of the national 
projects. The URC’s main responsibilities include: preparing the budget and 
controlling and supervising fulfillment of the local contribution by the provinces and 
other participating agencies; supervising and coordinating the preparation of the 
AWPs, procurement plans, and financial plans; preparing and verifying 
disbursement requests; supervising work and providing legal and administrative 
support to the subexecuting agencies in procurement processes; paying contractors 
and suppliers; coordinating all program activities with the provinces and other 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
beneficiaries; monitoring and evaluating project and program activities; and 
commissioning and serving as counterpart for the external audit. 

3.3 The program’s execution is governed by the program Operating Regulations, which 
contain the details required to guide and regulate program operations, including the 
requirements for transferring resources to the provincial projects. The program 
Operating Regulations and their annexes also describe the specific execution 
mechanism for each component. As a special condition precedent to the first 
disbursement of loan proceeds, the executing agency, through the URC, will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the ESM. The review 
will include updating the description of the program’s components and excluding 
investment projects with Category “A” socioenvironmental impacts under the 
environmental and social safeguard policies from eligibility. 

3.4 Component 1 of the program is executed through the URC’s Program and Project 
Management area and its Infrastructure and Services unit, which coordinates the 
relationships with the liaison entities and the units executing the projects at the 
provincial level, as established in the program Operating Regulations. For each 
case, specific planning, execution, monitoring, and evaluation functions are 
established for the projects. Component 2 of the program is executed by the 
Program and Project Management area through its Competitiveness unit and 
through NRC. The process for executing this component includes the following 
phases: identification and eligibility of clusters and territorial initiatives based on 
prioritization criteria; preparation and evaluation of specific plans for improving 
competitiveness; and implementation, monitoring, and technical evaluation of the 
projects. The execution of both components is supported by the following 
crosscutting areas of the URC: institutional development, environmental 
management, legal issues, internal control, finance and accounting, procurement, 
and management oversight and outcomes. 

3.5 Furthermore, the main fiduciary measures to be applied to the proposed operation 
were agreed upon during preparation. These measures are described in Annex III 
and include aspects of disbursements and audits, as well as thresholds for 
procurement processes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies and procedures as 
set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.6 Monitoring. The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. During project 
execution, the executing agency will prepare and send the Bank a monitoring report 
no later than 60 days from the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus 
on fulfillment of the output indicators and progress on outcomes, identifying 
problems encountered, and corrective measures taken. No later than during the last 
quarter of each year during project execution, the executing agency will submit the 
AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction. 

3.7 Evaluation. The executing agency will conduct two independent evaluations funded 
by the loan proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no 
later than 90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed or two years 
have passed from the date of the Bank’s first disbursement of the loan proceeds, 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756


 - 17 - 
 
 

 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% 
of the loan proceeds have been disbursed by the Bank. These reports will include: 
(i) an evaluation of the quality of the data provided by the monitoring system; (ii) the 
level of fulfillment of the expected outputs, outcomes, and progress on the expected 
impacts as established in the Results Matrix; and (iii) the level of compliance with 
the ESMPs for the program and the investment projects, including a summary of the 
socioenvironmental audits and the progress in the social and environmental 
indicators. 

3.8 Impact evaluation. Evaluation of the program’s impact will have two parts. The 
proposed impact evaluation for public infrastructure will be conducted for two 
irrigation systems and a rural road. Impact estimates will be based on the difference 
in differences method applied to a panel of homes divided into a treatment group 
and a control group. For this, two surveys—a baseline and a final evaluation—are 
planned. The sample size for the treatment group will be 465, as well as 465 for the 
control group (total for the three projects). For the beneficiaries of the public 
investment projects, the control group will be comprised of farmers with no access 
to irrigation systems and/or improved roads. Farmers will be selected at random 
from the lists available in the executing agency’s archives.  

3.9 To evaluate the impact of the NRCs and clusters, the phase-in and difference in 
differences methods will be used. The implementation strategy will identify a 
treatment/control group based on the year in which producers enter the program. 
NRC not involving pressurized irrigation will be included in the evaluation (as they 
are included in the evaluation of public works investment). Thus, 220 NRCs will be 
evaluated. The sample will be 155 producers, selected at random from among the 
NRC. The control group will be defined based on farms that requested NRC but did 
not receive funding. 



Annex I - AR-L1198

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2687

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following 

dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to approval to increase the 

likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the 

project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Accounting and Reporting, External control.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of the rural economies through the implementation of individual programs. This third individual operation seeks to improve productivity levels, increase sales and value added of small and medium-scale 

farmers, with a focus on building resilience to climate change. The program will implement two components: (i) competitiveness support, which includes the strengthening of public infrastructure via major works (rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage, fire prevention in forests, and tertiary rural 

roads), and a sub-component for minor works (public works and community improvement); and (ii) support services for competitiveness comprising: a technological modernization fund, territorial development initiatives and institutional strengthening and pre-investment.

The documentation is well structured, with a solid diagnosis of the problems faced by the prioritized areas and small- and medium-scale producers.

The proposed solution is related to the magnitude of the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the program objectives and shows a clear vertical logic for each component. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis. The lower-

level indicators reflect the design of the two components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact, outcome and output levels with their respective reference values, targets and means for collecting the information. The documentation alludes to rigorous empirical evidence on the 

effectiveness of similar interventions in other countries and Argentina, specifically on the PROSAP.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-benefit analysis for the major works for irrigation and rural roads and for the small works for fire control, and support to the private sector. The study provides results for each intervention, as well as a weighted average which yields a 20.6% IRR, and a 

NPV of US$77.7 million. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on key variables that can affect the benefits and major cost. The conservative scenario finds an IRR of 15.5% with an NPV of US$28.3 million.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes quasi-experimental evaluations to measure the impact of the irrigation systems, rural roads, and the non-reimbursable funds. The strategy is to measure the impact of these interventions, also the incremental impact of receiving two types of 

treatment (irrigation + non-reimbursable funds). Importantly, no rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, country and 

Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and are classified as medium risks.  All of them include mitigation actions and performance indicators.

Gender action plans will be prepared for each major public work in order to facilitate the 

participation of women in training and technical assistance.

No rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for 

multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge 

base of the sector, country and Bank.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and Evaluation National System.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises financed (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)

-Roads built or upgraded  (km)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public service 

delivery (#)

Aligned

Improvement of rural infrastructure in regional economies, principally irrigation and drainage, that 

contribute to improving productivity and access to markets

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

SUMMARY RESULTS MATRIX 

(SEE COMPLETE RESULTS MATRIX) 

 

General objective: To contribute to the competitiveness and development of regional rural economies. 

 

Specific objective: To improve productivity and increase sales and value-added for small and medium-sized producers, with a focus on 
strengthening resilience to climate change. 

 

Impact Units 
Baseline Target* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Impact 1: Higher per-farmer annual 
gross production value in the area 
of influence of the selected projects 

US$/farm 50,032 2016 75,561 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Reports on major and 
minor works design; NRC; 
target reflects the target 
group 

Impact 2: Decreased production 
losses associated with drought  

% of total 
production/ 
farm/year 

20.5% 2016 15% 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Irrigation systems selected 
for impact evaluation (San 
Juan and Salta). Climate 
change is the main cause 
of increased drought in the 
program’s intervention 
area 

*  Target by program end. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929


Annex II 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

1. Improved productivity for 
producers served by financed 
irrigation systems  

       

Indicator: 

Average increase in land 
productivity (including both 
agriculture and livestock 
producers) 

US$/Ha 5,408 2016 6,866 2020 

Program monitoring and 
evaluation reports; 
baseline survey and 
ex post evaluations 

The assessment of 
physical productivity per 
hectare using the baseline 
product price for each 
project 

2. Greater irrigation water use 
efficiency by rehabilitated 
systems 

      
 

Indicator: 

Volume of water delivered to the 
farms / Volume of water that 
enters the system. 

% 66 2016 90 2020 

Individual project 
completion reports; final 
evaluation; impact 
assessment 

Includes all four irrigation 
systems 

3. Improved rural accessibility on 
Route 13 in the province of 
Corrientes 

       

Indicator: 

Lower number of impassable 
days 

Days 80 2016 30 2020 
Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline and 
final program surveys 

 

4. Reduction of the average area 
affected annually by fire 

      
 

Indicator:  

Average area affected by fire in 
the province of Chubut 

Ha 1,439.03 2016 719.5 2020 
Provincial firefighting 
service 

 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

5. Diversification of markets 
and/or products in regions 
served by the program. 

       

Indicator: 

Number of business initiatives 
that increase sales by at least 
20%. 

Initiatives 0 2016 22 2020 

Cluster diagnostic 
reports; design of 
productive initiatives; 
baseline and end-of-
program surveys 

Includes initiatives 
financed by: (i) the 
technology modernization 
fund; and (ii) territorial 
development initiatives 

6. Users who adopt technologies 
for adapting to climate change. 

      
Beneficiaries of major 
irrigation projects with 
support from Component 2 
or another source of 
financing for in-field 
investments. Pressurized 
irrigation includes drip 
irrigation, micro spray, 
spray, and hose 

Indicator: 

Number of agricultural and 
livestock producers adopting 
pressurized irrigation 
technologies 

People 0 2016 1,600 2020 
Project design reports; 
final evaluation report; 
URC reports 

 
 
 
 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: Argentina 

Project number: AR-1198 

Name: Provincial Agricultural Services Program – PROSAP IV 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Prepared by: Marisol Pinto Bernal (FMP/CAR), Teodoro Noel (FMP/CAR), 
and Carlos Carpizo (FMP/CAR) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The Provincial Agricultural Services Program (PROSAP IV) will be executed by the 
Ministry of Agroindustry through the PROSAP Execution Unit, supervised by the Unit 
for Rural Change (URC) created by MAGyP Resolution 45 of 9 December 2009, 
which have the experience and installed capacity to execute projects partially 
financed with Bank resources. 

1.2 PROSAP IV is the third PROSAP operation to be executed by the URC under CLIPP 
AR-X1006. The plan is to simultaneously execute two programs—PROSAP III 
(2573/OC-AR) and PROSAP IV—for several months until the first operation 
concludes in mid-2017.  

1.3 The risk assessment for this operation was performed in the framework of a Project 
Risk Management (PRM) workshop with the executing agency. The results of the 
methodology returned a medium level of financial management risk and a medium 
level of procurement risk. 

1.4 There were no plans to conduct a new institutional capacity assessment because 
the URC maintains the same internal structure and technical and management 
team, ensuring the adequate capacity it has demonstrated during execution of 
PROSAP III (2573/OC-AR) and three other IDB operations currently being executed 
(2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, and 3255/OC-AR). The URC’s adequate institutional 
capacity has also been verified continually through oversight visits by the Bank’s 
fiduciary team.  

1.5 The program does not include financing from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. A number of different actors are involved in 
execution and are coordinated by the URC/PROSAP.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 As noted, the URC has a long track record of executing IDB-financed programs. 
Starting in 2009, the URC satisfactorily completed execution of two IDB operations 
(1956/OC-AR PROSAP II and 2086/OC-AR PROVIAR). Counting completed 
programs and programs currently being executed, the URC has managed a total of 
six Bank-financed projects.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

2.2 The fiduciary systems used for program execution are the budgetary system via the 
Integrated Financial Information System (IFIS) and the Information and Accounting 
System (UEPEX). 

2.3 As far as procurement of goods and services, the URC/PROSAP uses Bank policies 
for centralized purchases and verifies the application of those policies for the 
purchasing conducted at the provincial level. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 For analysis of the project’s fiduciary risks, the Bank’s PRM methodology was used 
to identify and rate fiduciary risks, and the project RMM was developed. The project’s 
fiduciary risk (financial and procurement) was determined to be medium and is 
related to the processes of interaction between the national and provincial levels, 
which are often complex. Nevertheless, experience has demonstrated that the 
executing agency has adequate execution capacity and has been able to manage 
the risks effectively.  

3.2 The supervision modality applicable to financial management and procurement has 
been determined based on the risks identified, although it could change during 
project execution pursuant to the evaluations conducted.  

 

Institutional Capacity and Fiduciary Risk 

Institutional Capacity N/A Tool: N/A 

Fiduciary risks Medium Tool: PRM 

Type 
of risk1 

Risk Rating Mitigation Actions 

FM 
Delays in submitting 
accounting information 

Medium 

Prepare and execute a plan for financial 
management staff to conduct annual visits 
to the execution unit to proactively identify 
delays in execution by coexecuting 
agencies. 

Apply the permanent 65% flexibility for 
justification of expenses for disbursement 
of advances of funds. 

P 

Delays in procurement 
processes due to weak 
planning that prevents early 
identification of appropriate 
procurement strategy 

Medium 

Comprehensive planning of the operation 
to coordinate the AWP with the 
procurement plan. 

Updating and management of the 
procurement plan as set forth in Article 
6.01(c) of the General Conditions. 

 

Delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by 
the provinces and deficient 
quality thereof 

Medium 
Implementation of the Provincial 
Institutional Strengthening subcomponent. 

 

                                                
1  Financial Management (FM); Procurement (P). 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 To expedite negotiation of the contract by the project team, and the Legal 
Department in particular, the following is a list of agreements and requirements that, 
where applicable, will be taken into consideration in the Special Provisions or the 
Annex. They may be updated or changed during program execution, if necessary, 
with the corresponding documentation and authorization from the Bank. 

a. Conditions precedent to the first disbursement: The executing agency will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the Environmental 
and Social Manual (ESM).  

b. Disbursement management: The executing agency will submit the program’s 
financial planning in keeping with the guidelines agreed upon by the Bank and 
the country. The minimum percentage required for replenishment of an 
advance of funds will be 65%, as this is a decentralized program with complex 
execution (permanent flexibility). 

c. Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, 
the parties agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the one indicated in 
paragraph (b)(i) of that Article. For the purposes of determining the equivalent 
of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the local contribution or 
reimbursement of expenses charged to the loan, the agreed-upon exchange 
rate will be the rate established by the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic 
on the first working day of the month in which the borrower, the executing 
agency, or any other individual or legal entity delegated the authority to incur 
expenditures makes the corresponding payment to the contractor, supplier, or 
beneficiary. In addition, the exchange rate indicated in paragraph (b)(i) of 
Article 4.10 of the General Conditions will be used to determine the 
equivalence of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the 
proceeds of the loan and the local contribution.  

d. Financial oversight: For the purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the 
loan portfolio to the capacity of the Office of the National Auditor General (AGN) 
to conduct audits in a timely manner, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct audits of the program. 

e. Other specific requirements for the financial management of projects that 
will be established in the contract or agreement to be signed with the Bank: 
Disbursements will be made in accordance with the provisions of Articles 4.03, 
4.04, 4.05, 4.06, and 4.07 of the General Conditions of the loan contract. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 Procurement execution 

5.1 The March 2011 Policy for the procurement of works and goods financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the March 2011 
Policy for selection and contracting of consultants financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9) will be applied. It has also been agreed 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

with the executing agency that the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) will 
be used for the program’s procurement planning administration and management. 

5.2 Management of the proceeds from the transfers to be made under the program2 will 
be decentralized and under the supervision of the URC/PROSEP, in accordance 
with the program Operating Regulations. The URC/PROSAP will be responsible for 
following the guidelines established in the loan contract for all procurement under 
the program, both centralized and decentralized. 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Works, goods, 
and nonconsulting services contracts3 arising under the project and subject to 
international competitive bidding (ICB) will be executed using the Bank’s 
standard bidding documents (SBDs). Bidding processes subject to national 
competitive bidding (NCB) will be executed using national bidding documents 
acceptable to the Bank. The program’s sector specialist is responsible for 
reviewing the technical specifications for procurement when selection 
processes are being prepared. No direct contracting is provided for in these 
categories, but any direct contracting provided for during the course of the 
program will be identified in the procurement plans along with the 
corresponding justification. Selection processes requiring prequalification of 
bidders will also be identified.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Consulting services contracted 
under the project will be included in the procurement plan and executed using 
the standard request for proposals (SRP) issued by the Bank. 

 Selection of individual consultants: In cases identified in the procurement 
plans, individual consultants will be contracted pursuant to the provisions of 
document GN-2350-9, Section V, paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4. For URC/PROSAP 
operations, consultants may be hired by direct selection if, at that time, they 
are performing work under contracts financed by other programs being 
executed by the unit.  

 Training: The procurement plan details the processes that are applied and 
contracted as consulting or nonconsulting services on a case-by-case basis. 

c. Incremental URC expenses: Incremental expenses required during the 
program will include: leasing and services; maintenance; common expenses; 
office supplies, courier and postage, cleaning services, computer supplies, 
insurance, telephone, and minor expenses required for operation of the 
URC/PROSAP that will be financed by the program counterpart and incurred 
in compliance with the administrative procedures of the executing agency. 
These operating expenses do not include salaries for civil servants. Fees, 
travel expenses, per diem, and health insurance expenses required for the 
regular performance of activities and consulting assignments contracted by the 
program will be charged to the loan proceeds under the corresponding 
component.  

                                                
2  Transfers refer to nonreimbursable contributions (NRCs) that are granted to different types of beneficiaries 

selected via the mechanisms described in the program Operating Regulations. 
3  Policies for the procurement of works and goods financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

d. Advance procurement/Retroactive financing: No advance procurement or 
retroactive financing are anticipated. 

e. National preference: For contracts subject to international competitive 
bidding, bids offering goods originating in Argentina will be subject to a price 
preference—pending Bank approval—equivalent to 15%. 

f. Appropriateness of expenditures: The appropriateness of an expenditure—
that is, its terms of reference, technical specifications, and the program 
procurement budget—will be the responsibility of the Project Team Leader and 
will always require no objection prior to the start of the procurement and 
pursuant to the Project Team Leader’s operational discretion. 

g. Other: There are no special provisions regarding grants, land acquisitions, 
rights, or rights-of-way needed for project execution. 

 

Thresholds for International Competitive Bidding and International Shortlists (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist for 

consulting services 

Threshold ≥5,000,000 ≥500,000 ≥500,000 

Note: (1) In addition, contracts worth more than US$200,000 will be listed on the UNDB and Bank websites. 
(2) Goods worth less than US$100,000 can be procured through shopping, as can works for less than 
US$350,000. 

 

 Main procurement items: 

5.3 The following table provides a list of the main procurement items identified for the 
program thus far. 

 

Main Procurement Items 

Activity 
Selection 
method 

Estimated 
tender/announcement 

date 

Estimated 
amount 

Works       

Irrigation works – Tala River, Tucumán 
province. 

ICB 1 May 2017 16,242,821.00 

Irrigation works – Cacique Guaymallen – 
Jocoli system – Mendoza Province. 

ICB 1 February 2017 19,691,407.00 

Road work RP 13 – Corrientes Province ICB 30 October 2016 9,436,386.00 

* To view the 18-month procurement plan, click here. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

5.4 Procurement will be subject to ex post supervision for processes below the NCB 
thresholds for works, goods, and non-consulting services, as well as for consulting 
services of less than US$200,000 All ICB processes, direct contracting, and 

file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313


Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

consulting services of greater than or equal to US$200,000 will be subject to ex ante 
review, as will processes whose complexity or risk justify ex ante supervision. 

5.5 For individual consultants, all contracting for amounts over US$50,000 will be 
subject to ex ante review. Contracting for less than that amount will be subject to 
ex post review. 

5.6 For contracting in the framework of the transfers, the URC/PROSAP will supervise 
to ensure they meet the provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating 
Regulations.  

5.7 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan by reviewing a sample extracted from all the processes carried out 
during the review period. The ex post review reports will include at least one physical 
inspection visit,4 selected from the procurement processes subject to ex post review.  

 

Ex Post Review Threshold 

Works 
Goods and nonconsulting 

services 
Consulting services 

<5,000,000 <500,000 <200,000 

Note: (1) The thresholds established for ex post review are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary 
execution capacity and may be modified by the Bank to the extent that this capacity changes. (2) Goods of less 
than US$100,000 may be procured through shopping, as can works for less than US$350,000. In both cases, 
review will be conducted on an ex post basis. 

 

 Special provisions 

a. Measures to reduce the likelihood of corruption: The provisions set forth in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 on prohibited practices will be followed. 
The executing agency is also responsible for checking the list of firms and 
individuals prohibited from participating in processes financed by multilateral 
development banks. 

b. Other special procedures: Keep the procurement plan updated in 
accordance with project needs and coordinated with project planning. The 
processes carried out under the program will be included in the procurement 
plan approved by the Bank before the public tender is announced. 

 Records and files 

5.8 The contracting area will be in charge of maintaining files on the project procurement 
conducted in the URC/PROSAP, while for procurement in the provinces, the original 
files will be maintained. 

                                                
4  The inspection verifies the existence of the acquisitions, leaving verification of quality and compliance with 

specifications to the sector specialist. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

 Programming and budget  

6.1 The budget of the executing agency includes programmatic categories and other 
classifications by expenditure purpose (line items), including: personnel expenses; 
consumer goods; nonpersonnel services; fixed assets; transfers; financial assets; 
debt service and reduction in other liabilities; and other expenses.  

6.2 The URC is responsible for annual budget preparation and programming. It is in 
charge of carrying out all the procedures involved in preparing the annual budget for 
approval. As the need arises for expanding or reallocated budget items, the URC 
requests the changes and is in charge of securing their approval. The budgeted 
funds are executed via quarterly and monthly accrual quotas assigned by the 
National Budget Office (Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance). 

6.3 No problems are expected in terms of budget management, timeliness of local 
counterpart contributions, or system delays affecting execution.  

 Treasury and disbursement management 

6.4 The National Treasury transfers the local counterpart funds to the URC, into an 
account opened for the program for the exclusive use of this loan, as it is a program 
cofinanced with Bank resources. 

6.5 Disbursements will be made based on a detailed financial plan. Its model has been 
agreed upon with officials from the Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance and 
the Cabinet Leadership. 

 Accounting, information systems, and reporting 

6.6 The URC will use UEPEX as its financial management system. Cash-basis 
accounting will be used and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) will 
be followed when applicable in accordance with established national criteria. The 
following financial reports will be required: (i) financial execution plan for up to 
180 days following a request for an advance of funds; (ii) audited annual financial 
statements as stipulated in Article 7.03 paragraph (a) of the General Conditions of 
the loan contract; and (iii) other reports required by the fiduciary specialists.  

 Internal control and internal audit 

6.7 The national internal control body is the Sindicatura General de la Nación [Office of 
the Comptroller General] (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is 
performed through the Internal Audit Unit. The unit, which reports directly to the 
minister, is in charge of conducting audits and making recommendations pursuant 
to the powers granted under Law 24,156 (Financial Administration Act).  

 External control: External financial audit and project reports 

6.8 In 2011, the Bank concluded a diagnostic on the government auditing practices of 
the AGN, the result of which was to validate the AGN as auditor of Bank projects. 

6.9 However, based on the track record of the promptness of audit submissions, in 
October 2014, it was agreed with Argentina to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to match 
its real compliance capacity. Programs 2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, 3255/OC-AR, 
and 2573/OC-AR are being audited by the AGN. 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

6.10 For purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the loan portfolio to the capacity 
of the AGN to conduct timely audits, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct program audits. 

6.11 Audits will be conducted based on the new terms of reference prepared by the Bank 
in 2014. 

 Financial supervision of the project5 

6.12 The initial financial supervision plan is based on risk and fiduciary capacity 
evaluations conducted on the basis of onsite and desk reviews of the program, and 
includes the scope of operational, financial, and accounting actions; compliance and 
legal considerations; frequency; and identification of responsible parties.  

6.13 In addition to the reports required for processing disbursements and the annual 
audit, another report that will be required for conducting financial supervision will be 
the financial plan.  

 Execution arrangements 

6.14 The details of program execution can be found in the draft Operating Regulations 
and the Proposal for Operation Development. 

 Other financial management agreements and requirements 

6.15 N/A. 

 

                                                
5  See Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Project (OP-273-6) Annex I on application of the 

financial management principles and requirements, requirement 4 on financial oversight.  



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/16 
 
 
 

Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Provincial Agricultural Services 
Program - PROSAP IV. Third Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line 

for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Argentine Republic, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a 
financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Provincial Agricultural Services Program -
PROSAP IV, which constitutes the third individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line 
for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 approved on 16 January 2008 by Resolution 
DE-6/08. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$100,000,000, from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2016) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CSC/IDBDOCS: 40712797 
Pipeline No.: AR-L1198 





