















































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Caroline Bidault (RND/CHA), Team Leader; 

Bruno Jacquet, Marie Bonnard (RND/CHA); Lina Salazar, Carmine Paolo De Salvo, Michele Lemay 

(INE/RND); Romina Emanuela Kirkagacli, Marise Etienne Salnave (FMP/CHA); Louis-François Chrétien 

(LEG/SGO); Régine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); and Lisa Restrepo (INE/RND). 

 

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 

distributed to the Bank´s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 

approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 

made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version. 



CONTENT 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY………………………………………………………………………..1 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................... 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification ........................................... 2 

B. Objective, Components and Cost ...................................................................... 9 

C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................... 11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .................................................................. 11 

A. Financing Instruments ..................................................................................... 11 

B. Economic Analysis .......................................................................................... 11 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks .................................................... 12 

D. Fiduciary Risk ................................................................................................. 12 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks ............................................................................. 13 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 13 

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements........................................................ 13 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................ 16 

 



- ii - 

Annexes 
Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

Electronic Links 

Required 

1. The Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908  

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894 

4. Procurement Plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989 

Optional  

1. Economic Analysis of the Program 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897 

2. Detailed Budget per Output 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908 

3. Diagnostic of the fishery sector in Haiti Southern regions 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157  

4. A snapshot view of the fishery associated with Fishing Aggregating Devices (FADs) in 
selected communes of the Southeast, South and Grande Anse Departments, Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185  

5. Micro-study of the Fishery Sector in the South and Grand Anse Departments of Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888


ACRONYMS 

 

AECID 
Spanish Agency of International Cooperation for Development (Agence 

Espagnole de Coopération Internationale pour le Développement ) 

AOP Annual Operation Plan 

BAC Agricultural Communal Office (Bureau Agricole Communal) 

CITES 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 

Flora 

DDA 
Departmental Agricultural Directorate (Direction Départementale de 

l’Agriculture) 

EA Executing Agency 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

FD Fishery Directorate 

FY Fiscal Year  

GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in Resources of the IDB 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GoH Government of Haiti 

Ha Hectare 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

MDE Ministry of Environment (Ministère de l’Environnement)  

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation  

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

MT Metric Ton 

OM Operation Manual 

PDPM 
Marine Fisheries Development Program (Programme de Développement de la 

Pêche Maritime) 

PR Progress Report 

SC Steering Committee 

UE European Union 

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 

UPMP Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 

 

 
 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542996/R


                                                                                    Annex I - HA-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.6 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.2 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector 

entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps 

in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

The general objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable development of artisanal fisheries. The 

project aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improve sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the 

quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme.  A diagnosis of the opportunities and challenges of developing sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti is provided, although some key empirical evidence related to resource sustainability is missing. Cognizant 

of this, the project emphasizes the gathering of socio-economic and resource information and in general the interventions and their sequencing respond to the needs identified.

The vertical logic of the project recognizes and embeds both the need to establish sustainable management practices and to enhance income generating opportunities for fishers and merchants. Indicators at all levels 

are SMART and baseline values, yearly targets, and the means for collecting the information is provided. 

The ex-ante economic analysis is in general adequate, although some assumptions are not fully justified. The monitoring and evaluation plan is complete and follows the DEM guidelines. Given the lack of rigorous 

evidence on the effectiveness of the type of interventions promoted by the project, the non-experimental approach proposed for the evaluation is particularly relevant, especially if similar project interventions are 

to be expanded to other parts of the country.

The program will finance public infrastructure, training and matching grants 

targeted towards female merchants (see components II and III). Also, the impact 

evaluation design will allow to measure the specific impact on women 

merchants. 

The project will improve environmental sustaibability of artisanal fishing. See 

paragraph 1.23 of the POD.

The impact evaluation will be conducted by implementing a quasi-experimental 

approach of Difference in Differences combined with Propensity Score 

Matching. This analysis will allow measuring the project effectiveness on 

improving income and environmental sustainability by increasing access to 

productive capital (boats, new fishing techniques, etc.), human capital 

(trainings)  and public infrastructure.  In addition, this evaluation will allow 

comparing the effectiveness of providing matching grants that partially finance 

the cost of productive capital versus providing grants that fully finance access to 

productive capital. Also, the impact evaluation design will allow measuring  the 

specific impact on women merchants. 

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Regional and sub-regional integration agreements and cooperation initiatives supported

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Increase agriculture income in targeted areas

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

-Trade openness (trade as percent of GDP)

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support regional cooperation and integration

I. Strategic Alignment



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 1 of 5 

 

RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Objective: The general objective is to increase revenues of artisanal fishermen in the three southern regions of Haiti through the development of sustainable artisanal 

fishing. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability and improved sanitary and food 

safety conditionsfor marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal 

fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. 

IMPACTS Baseline 2015 End of Project 

Target 

Comments 

IMPACT 1: Increase net revenues of artisanal 

fishers 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys, Associations 

monitoring system, Fisheries information system  
Indicator 1.1: Increase average total net revenues 

from fishing and fishing-related activities by 

household 

US$1,640  US$2,458  

IMPACT 2: Improve the environmental 

sustainability of artisanal fishing 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys. Shore=continental 

plateau. 
Indicator 2.1: % of fishers fishing exclusively on the 

shore out of total number of fishers 

75% 50%  

Indicator 2.2: Establishment of at least one no-take 

zone in the coastal area associated with the scope of 

the project 

0 1 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 1: Strengthen 

the institutional management 

of the fisheries sector for 

resource management 

       Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015.International 

conventions  have to be ratified by the parliament. For the FAO 

agreement the verification will be done with documentation 

provided by the Ministry.  

Means of verification: At least 3 from the list below : 

  · The Internation Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic 

Tunas (ICCAT) is responsible for the conservation of tunas and 

other related species in the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas 

(1969) 

  · The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 

of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES; 1973) 

  · UN Agreement relating to the Conservation and Management of    

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995) 

  · Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS; 1974) 

  · The Ramsar Convention (1971) 

  · Convention on Biological Diversity (1993) 

Indicator 1.1: Membership to 

international conventions on 

sustainable fishing (unit: 

number of conventions) 

 

0   1  2 3 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 2 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

· Convention on marine pollution (MARPOL; 1983) 

  · International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate 

Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (INN)  

OUTCOME 2: Improve 

health conditions of fishing 

products 

        
Source and year of baseline: OIE fisheries report, 2008-2009  

Means of verification: OIE reports 

Indicator 2.1: Number of 

health certificates for exports 

given to firms (OIE) 

666   800   1000 

OUTPUTS 

Output 1: Revision and 

formulation of judicial 

instruments for the drafting of 

a framework law on fisheries 

0   1   1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR , DPAQ 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 2: FD offices built and 

equipped (unit: infrastructure) 

0   3   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. 

One office for Fisheries Directorate in Damiens and 2 buildings in 

Pestel and in Les Cayes 

Output 3: Study on 

operational implementation of 

a control and monitoring 

system of marine fisheries 

(unit : study) 

0  1    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Rapport semestriel du projet 

Control and monitoring system of marine fisheries, pilot towards a 

rights-based fisheries control system 

Output 4: Implementation 

plans for a system of 

monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases as well 

as for a health control system 

for fishing products drafted 

(OSAPISA) (unit: plan) 

0  2    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports;  

(ii) Implementation plan for a system of monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases; and (iii) Implementation plan for a health 

control system for fishing products  

Output 5: Additional FD staff 

at decentralized DDA (South, 

South East and Grande Anse) 

in place (unit: staff) 

0 26     26 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Proof of recruitment (contractual term 

prior to first disbursement) 

Additional DDA managers (8) and technicians (18) in departments 

of intervention (Sud, Grande Anse and Sud Est) 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 3 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

Output 6: Managers and 

technicians trained (unit: 

people trained) 

0 2 45   2 49 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Staff trained in : masters ; short term training for DDA managers, 

DPAQ managers and technicians; training of aquatic pathology 

service. 

Output 7: Study on new 

potential markets prepared 

(unit: study) 

0 1   0  1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, Study 

Output 8: Outreach campaigns 

conducted (unit: campaign)  

0  2 1   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports; (ii) National 

outreach campaign on the use of ice and health norms;               

(iii) National outreach campaign promoting the consumption of 

fishing products; and (iv) National outreach campaign on 

endangered species. 

Output 9: Fisheries 

information system in place 

(unit: system in place) 

0  1    1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

This system includes: software development ; data collection 

system 

Output 10: Census of 

fishermen conducted (unit: 

census) 

0 1     1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, census report, 

dataset 

The census of fishermen will take place nationally and will include 

data on equipment and boats. 

Output 11: Studies  on fishery 

resources and new fishing 

techniques completed (unit: 

study) 

0 3 1 1 1  6 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

3 fisheries resources evaluation campaigns (experimental fishing) 

Research on new fishing techniques including artifical reefs, FAD 

(including study of impacts) 
 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOME 3: Increase 

quality of fish sold  

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator3.1: Value of weekly 

sales of fish per woman 

merchant 

US$54       US$74 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 4 of 5 

 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTPUTS 

Output 12: Fish 

reception/unloading areas with 

water supply and wastewater 

disposal systems built (unit: 
infrastructure and equipment) 

0  1 1   2 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Marigot and Anse d’Hainault 

Includes: 300m2 warehouse, 1 floating pontoon, 1 3000L tank, 2 

manual water pump systems, 1 insulated container. 

Output 13: Fish cleaning areas 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

built (unit: infrastructures and 

equipment) 

0  10 7   17 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. One by commune of intervention except Jacmel 

Includes: 30m2 warehouse, 1 2000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system, 1 20m3 insulated chamber. 

Output 14: Communal public 

markets built and equipped 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

(unit: infrastructure and 

equipment) 

0 2  2   4 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Work acceptance report + visual 

observation during IDB inspection visits. 

Belle Anse (improvement of existing market), Bainet, Aquin, St 

Jean du Sud (local/regional distribution centers) 

Includes: 90m2 warehouse, 1 3000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system. 

Output 15: Landing areas 

improved (unit: infrastructure 

and equipment) 

0  21 20 28  69 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Beaching trolleys; improvement of accesses on board and 

boat shelters. 

Output 16: Technical 

assistance to the MARNDR for 

the monitoring of the public 

infrastructure works (unit: 

technical assistance) 

0 1     1 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Proof of recruitment (contractual term prior 

to first disbursement),  progress reports, supervision visit reports. 

 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 4: 

Establishment of rights based 

management systems  

       Source and year of baseline: Macias, 2014  

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys  

Note: The targeted area is composed by five fishing basins defined 

as fishing geographic area with a homogeneity in terms of fisheries 

perspective (eg narrow continental shelf, sandy bottoms, 

techniques and material) that the fishers usually operate together. 

Indicator 4.1: Fishing basins 

with rights based fishery 

management  established (unit: 

number) 

0     2 2 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 5 of 5 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 5: Increase 

artisanal fishing productivity 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys 

(Total catches of pelagic fishes per boat / total number of fishing 

trips per month) / number of fishers per boat 

Indicator 5.1: Catches of 

pelagic fishes by trip and by 

fisher (unit: KG) 

0.373      1 

OUTCOME 6: Reduce 

economic losses 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator 6.1: Percentage of 

total catches sold fresh (%) 

69%      78.3% 

OUTPUTS 

Output 17: Fishers 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  40 15   55 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of fishers are men 

Output 18: Merchants 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  10  15  25  Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of the beneficiaries of the merchant training will be women 

Output 19: Fishers and 

Merchants associations having 

access to technologies through 

matching grant system (unit: 

association) 

0   20 20 15 55 Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Associations will be able to choose from a list of predefined 

technologies. 

Output 20: Pilot on new 

fishing techniques 

implemented in the targeted 

area and rights based 

management fishery system 

(unit=pilot) 

0     1 1 Source and year of baseline: the implementation of this pilot will 

be based on the studies conducted in component I.  

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 20.1: Number of 

beneficiaries of improved 

management and sustainable 

use of natural and cultural 

capital 

0     4490 4490 Core Sector Indicator (CSI) 

Number of total beneficiairies in the associations. To be 

desagregated as follows: 

2829 fishers (men) and 1661 merchants (women) 

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 1 of 8 

 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 

 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROJECT Nº :  HA-L1096 

NAME:  Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) 

FIDUCIARY TEAM:  Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. Executive Summary 
 

1.1 The objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grand Anse) through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and 

Rural Development (MARNDR) will execute the project through its Fishery Directorate 

(FD). Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit while the Central Procurement Unit of the Ministry 

(“Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics” - UPMP for its French acronym) will execute 

all procurement activities.  

 

1.2 The project amount is US$16,500,000 financed by the IDB Grant Facility up to the 
amount of US$15,000,000 and the national counterpart up to the amount of 

US$1,500,000. 

 

II. General Context of National Financial Management and Procurement Systems 
 

2.1 The most recent evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic   
of Haiti is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 

assessment report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. Country financial 

management systems and external control mechanism, as evidenced by this latest 

diagnostic, would require further improvements to conform to levels consistent with 

fiduciary management of Bank’s funded projects. As a result, no country systems will be 

used for the financial management of the project.  

 

2.2 An evaluation of the National Procurement System was performed in 2013, applying the 
methodology established by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development (OECD/DAC). A certain number of recommendations were identified 

through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system; 

however, the implementation of this plan still needs to be initiated. Based on the current 

situation and the need to align the national system to international standards and best 

practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement activities foreseen 

under this program. 

2.3 To mitigate these risks the Bank will continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on 
special project execution units for the execution of all projects; and (ii) to implement 

special fiduciary arrangements for the implementation of its projects and to conduct close 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 2 of 8 

 

 

operation supervision of project execution units. External control will be performed for 

all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance with 

the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

 

III. Executing Agency´s Fiduciary Context  
 

3.1 The MARNDR will execute the project through its FD and will be responsible for the 
overall management of the project including the preparation of the PEP and POA, 

technical supervision of activities as well as the monitoring and evaluation of project 

results. Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit which has extensive experience in the financial 

management of Bank financed operations
1
 and will report to the Director of the FD. 

BCP-ProGEBA will be responsible for the overall administrative and financial 

management of project resources including budgeting, accounting and reporting on use of 

funds, payments and disbursement requests and the recruitment project auditors.  The 

implementation of this new project will result in an increase in workload which may have 

an impact on project execution.  

 

3.2 The UPMP, created through the Ministerial Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” 
on September 17, 2013, has been in place and operational since early 2014. Based on 

findings of the technical assistance conducted by the Bank’s procurement team, this Unit 

has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge in the application of Bank’s 

procurement policies. The Coordinator of the Unit, a Senior Procurement Specialist who 

has worked in specific Bank projects in the past, has been handling all procurement 

activities of the Ministry with a high focus on the quality of the processes and an 

increased collaboration with the technical teams. The Unit is composed of several 

procurement specialists and has an organized system to treat purchase requests and 

conduct procurement processes and is now working on the establishment of an improved 

filing system. With an increased number of projects handled by this Unit, the 

management of the workload may have an impact on execution. 

 

IV. Fiduciary Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Actions  
 

4.1 The latest assessment of BCP-ProGEBA was updated in July 2014 and confirms 
improvement in its financial management risk rating from medium to low.                 

BCP-ProGEBA has updated its accounting system and its accounting manual to include 

mechanisms followed for the monitoring of budget, the safeguarding of financial 

information, and the management of fixed assets. Nonetheless, due to the increase in 

volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the fiduciary team of         

BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1050 and HA-L1096), the Bank considers financial management 

risk rating to be medium and to mitigate this risk recommends the strengthening of its 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an administrative 

assistant dedicated to the implementation of this new project. In addition the operation 

                                                 
1
  The unit has successfully executed operations HA0016, HA-L1021 in the Artibonite Valley and is currently 

implementing HA-L1087. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 3 of 8 

 

 

manual of the project will include among other sections: (i) procedures for the approval 

and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy and procedures for 

inventory administration. The hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the 

administrative assistant and the approval of the project’s operation manual will be 

condition prior to first disbursements. In addition, during the first year of the project, 

Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual basis to review the 

execution of financial plan, the preparation of financial reports and the review of project 

expenses and documentation. 

 

4.2 The fiduciary risk level for procurement under this project is defined as medium mainly 
due to the workload that is being handled by the UPMP through the procurement 

execution of several projects. The following specific risks and related mitigation 

measures have been identified: (i) clearance of all procurement processes is currently 

centralized with the coordinator of the Unit which can result in delays in procurement 

execution. Mitigation: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be 

hired in order to support the additional workload of the Unit; (ii) with a centralized 

structure, the high number of transactions may also negatively impact the execution 

timeframe. Mitigation: The Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans in order to 

improve its planning capacity and identify recurrent purchases so as to reduce 

transactional costs and achieve best value for money; (iii) the increased number of 

contracts handled by the Unit may impede the effectiveness of contract management. 

Mitigation: Identify a mechanism to ensure proper follow up on contract management 

matters; (iv) the technical staff has not executed Bank’s projects previously and is new to 

Bank’s procurement policies and procedures. Mitigation: As for all other projects, it is 

recommended that the technical staff is trained on procurement matters such as: 

preparation of Terms of Reference, establishment of selection criteria, evaluation of 

technical and financial offers and contract monitoring during execution; and (v) while a 

filing system has been put in place, the Unit does not have a dedicated space to stock 

archives and does not have a person dedicated to the management of files. Mitigation: 

Recruitment of a dedicated person for the management of archives. 

 

V. Aspects to be Considered in the Special Conditions of Contract 
 

1. Special conditions precedent to first disbursement: 
 

5.1 Special Accounts: FD will open two separate bank accounts (in US dollars and in local 
currency) for the management of grant resources. Local counterpart funds will be 

processed through the Compte Unique du Trésor (CUT- according to its French acronym) 

the MARNDR single treasury account which became operational in October 2014 for 

funds disbursed by the Government of Haiti. 

 

5.2 The preparation of an operation manual to include: (i) procedures for the approval and 
disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) inventory, equipment and 

consumable stocks management and fuel consumption control procedures.  

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 4 of 8 

 

 

5.3 The Central Bank exchange rate at the day of transaction will be used at the reference 
rate. 

 

5.4 Procurement: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be hired in 
order to support the workload of the UPMP. 

 

5.5 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) Audit of project: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the program 

as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit the internal 

control processes and the review of procurement processes to be submitted within 120 

days following the end of each fiscal year and a final financial audit of the program to be 

submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  For accounting and 

audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of 

execution, the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after 

the end of each quarter. For the following years, the frequency for the submission of 

unaudited reports will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision 

missions. 

 

5.6 Special disbursement: An initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 
extent the beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in grant agreements, except for (i) the 

submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable financial 

information systems and internal control mechanism. US$125,000 will enable the 

executing agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first disbursement and shall include: 

(i) the hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the administrative assistant to 

strengthen the fiduciary team of the BCP-ProGEBA; (ii) the hiring of a procurement 

specialist to support the Coordinator of the UPMP; (iii) the selection of a consultant 

responsible for elaborating the operation manual of the program; (iv) the hiring of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist to support the FD Coordinator; (v) the 

hiring of a consultant for the formatting of the BCP-ProGEBA accounting system to 

include the chart of accounts of this new operation and the financial reports to be 

submitted to the Bank including the training of new accounting personnel; and (vi) the 

purchase of office and Information Technology (IT) equipment. 

 

VI. Fiduciary Arrangements for Procurement Execution  
 

6.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the project. 

 

1. Procurement Execution  
 

6.2 All project related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit following the Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the 

Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 5 of 8 

 

 

the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9) and the Special Procurement 

Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654). 

 

a. Procurement of works, goods and non-consulting services: The contracts for works, 
goods, and non-consulting services

2
 generated under the project and subject to 

International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the Standard 

Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to National 

Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National Bidding 

Documents agreed to by the Bank. The technical specifications review during the 

preparation of the selection process, is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

Some contracts for the purchase of equipment will be executed using matching grant 

mechanisms (the cost of the equipment will be borne by the project and partially through 

beneficiaries’ contributions). As such, specific contractual modalities will be identified in 

order to reflect this specific execution mechanism. A contract with a financial institution 

is foreseen to allow the purchase of this equipment by fishermen associations through a 

voucher system.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: The consulting services contracts generated 
under this project will be executed through the use of the Standard Request for Proposals 

(SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. The terms of reference review for the selection 

of consulting services is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

c. Selection of individual consultants: The selection will be made in accordance with 
Bank’s Procurement rules and procedures and will consist in evaluating the capacity of at 

least three candidates against set and agreed Terms of References.  

d. Direct contracting: No Direct Contracting is foreseen under this project for the time 
being. Should any direct contracting be required during the execution of the operation, a 

revised Procurement Plan will reflect this change and will be submitted to the Bank for 

non-objection. 

2. Thresholds (thousands US$) 
 

6.3 The thresholds established in the Special Procurement Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654), 
until these will be in place, will be applied to the procurement activities foreseen under 

this operation, as detailed in the following table: 

 
Table 1. Thresholds in force since January 1, 2012 (In thousands of US$) 

HAITI   

Works Goods Consulting Services 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

Short list of national 

firms only 

>1.000 <1.000 >100 <100 <100 

 
 

                                                 
2
  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: The services 

different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of goods. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 6 of 8 

 

 

3. Main Procurement Activities 

Table 2. Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Procureme

nt Method 

Estimated 

Date 

Estimated Amount 

thousands US$ 

Goods    

Purchase of  70 boats ICB Feb-2016 385,000 

Purchase of  80 engines ICB Feb-2016 320,000  

Purchase of 930  coolers for fish merchants ICB Feb-2016 210,000  

Works    

Construction of 23 fisheries infrastructures  
ICB Jan-2016 1,700,000  

Construction of  2 docks  (Marigot et Anse d'Hainault) ICB Jan-2016 510,000  

Services    

Contract with financial institution for the provision of vouchers to 

fishers’ associations 

NCB Jan-2016 60,000 

Preparation of a national census of fishermen ICB Jan-2016 400,000 

Firms    

Supervision of fisheries infrastructure works QCS Jan-2016 1,756,000  

Operators to strengthen fishermen’s associations QCS Mar-2016 1,200,000  

Communication campaign QCS Mar-2016 525,000  

Design and implementation of an  information system for 

fisheries 

QCS April-2016 450,000  

*To access the 18 month procurement plan, click here  

 

4. Procurement Supervision 
 

6.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 

activities using the shopping method for goods and for works falling below the threshold 

of US$200,000 and the recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive 

method will be subject to ex post review. The external audit firm recruited under this 

operation as per paragraph 4.2 will conduct the ex-post review on these contracts, on 

behalf of the Bank. 

 

5. Records and Files 
 

6.5 The executing agency will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement 
related activities financed by the Bank in their office in accordance with the Bank’s 

procurement rules and procedures and to the project’s operational rules in such a way that 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542989/R


ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 7 of 8 

 

 

it be available for supervision visit by the fiduciary team. It is also recommended that the 

executing agency develops electronic filing so as to ensure the efficiency of the system. It 

is important however to note that the national legislation in Haiti does not recognize 

electronic documents, hence this filing method should not replace paper files. 

 

VII. Financial Management 
 

A. Programming and Budget 
 

7.1 Programming and budget execution and monitoring at the project level will rely on the 
Bank’s project financial management formats and procedures. The FD will prepare 

annually, an operation plan (AOP) which includes a procurement plan and a            

twelve-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans will respect the budget lines 

defined in the grant agreement (investment categories). During the first year of execution, 

the program’s financial plans will be reviewed on a quarterly basis.  

 

B. Accounting and Information Systems 
 

7.2 BCP-ProGEBA’s financial management systems will be used for the financial 
management of the project. The system will be programmed to generate income and 

expense reports by investment categories and source of funds and to generate financial 

statements required by bank. 

 

C. Disbursements and Funds Flow  
 

7.3 Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of project funds for an 
amount equivalent to three-month funding needs.  The FD will open separate bank 

accounts for the management of grant resources. Disbursement Supervision will be 

expost. As specified in section 5.6 above, an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 

will be made by the Bank grant to fulfill conditions prior to first disbursements. No 

financial resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of the 

program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishermen and 

sellers through their association to be implemented by Departmental Agricultural 

Directorate (DDA) via a technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator 

(one operator per department in the South and Grand’Anse) to be financed under 

Component III of the program. The local national counterpart will be used to finance 

operation costs including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at the 

decentralized level; managerial (eight) and technical (18) staff. GoH funding will be 

processed through the MARNDR single treasury account. The project will also subsidize 

the purchase of equipment through matching grants based on eligible criteria is to be 

defined in the operation manual. Funds will be used for the purchase of improve 

productive equipment. Each association will contribute to a certain percentage of the cost 

based on their financial capacity and further defined in the operation manual. Exchange 

rate valid at the day of transaction will be used to record all expenses made in local 

currency. The Central Bank exchange rate will be used at the reference rate.  



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 8 of 8 

 

 

 

D. Internal Control and Audit 
 

7.4 The internal auditor of MARNDR will fulfill the internal audit function. The internal 
control environment of the project will be strengthened with the preparation and 

implementation of the project operation manual referred to in section 4.2. 

 

E. External Control and Reporting 
 

7.5 Audits will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for Financial Reports and 
External Audits as described in point 4.5. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB 

grant and estimated at US$200,000. The program financial statements will correspond to 

the fiscal year. The audit firm will carry out audit on the basis of specific terms of 

reference to be agreed between the FD and the Bank. During the first year of execution, 

the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of 

each quarter. The frequency for the submission of unaudited report, for subsequent years, 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

 

F. Financial Supervision Plan 
 

7.6 During the first year of execution, Fiduciary staff will review the execution of financial 
plan on a quarterly basis and on a semi-annual basis for the following years. Semi-annual 

inspection visit will be performed by financial management specialist, during the first 

year of execution however frequency of visit are subject to change based on findings 

raised during supervision missions. 

 

G. Execution Mechanism 
 

7.7 The FD will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare AOPs (see 
7.1.) indicating cash flow needs for the execution of program’s activities. The        

twelve-month financial plan will serve as the basis for advance of funds disbursements. 

Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs required 

for three months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in point 

7.3. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 

 

 

 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 

Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

 

 

 

The Board of Executive Directors 

 

RESOLVES: 

 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 

in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility (hereinafter 

referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with 

the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing 

to cooperate in the execution of the Artisanal Fisheries Development Program. Such 

nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000, which form part 

of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 

Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 

 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2015) 

 

 

 
LEG/SGO/HA/IDBDOCS#39566710 
HA-L1096 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR) 
and Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; César Falconi (CSD/RND); 
Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR); Fernando Balcázar (RND/CCO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Alberto 
Villalba (VPS/ESG); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components and cost ................................................................. 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 

 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 

2. Annual work plan 

3. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic analysis of the program 

2. Institutional capacity assessment  

3. Draft Operating Regulations for the program 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670736
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670729
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BSE Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
CAO Cámara Agropecuaria del Oriente 
DALY Disability-adjusted life year 
EGDI E-Government Development Index 
FMD  Foot and mouth disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
IBCE Instituto Boliviano de Comercio Exterior [Bolivian Foreign Trade 

Institute] 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICB International competitive bidding 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística [National Statistics Institute] 
IPPC International Plant Protection Convention 
IRR Internal rate of return 
NB-SABS Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios 

[Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management System] 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PVS OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services 
RASFF Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 
SCF Single Currency Facility 
SENASAG Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria 

[National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] 
SIAP-BID Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco [Administration 

System for Bank Projects] 
SICOES Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [Public Procurement System] 
SIGEP Sistema Integrado de Gestión Pública [Integrated Public Management 

System] 
UDAPE Unidad de Análisis de Políticas Sociales y Económicas [Economic and 

Social Policy Analysis Unit] 
 
 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 



Annex I -BO-L1179 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or 

country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.7 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 4.0

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 1.9

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Intraregional trade in goods (%)

-Government effectiveness (average LAC percentile) 

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Economic Integration

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Public agencies' processing times of international trade of goods and services 

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve 

public service delivery (#)

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector by reducing production losses due to livestock and crop diseases, facilitating access to international markets, and improving the service to users 

of the national animal health system. The Program will implement four components: (i) Strengthening of user services; (ii) Strengthening of the animal health system; (iii) Strengthening of the plant health system; and (iv) 

Strengthening the food safety system. 

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the major challenges faced by the sector that contribute to low levels of productivity, including the significant losses of agricultural production due to animal and 

plant diseases, the difficulty of accessing key markets due to phytosanitary restrictions, scarce information about food safety due to limited diagnostic capabilities of national laboratories, as well as the inefficiency and low 

quality of service provision by the animal health system. The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified. While the results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program, a clear vertical 

logic cannot be established due to an incomplete discussion of the current political restrictions on the exports of animal products which may inhibit market access even if domestic sanitary conditions are improved. The key 

outcome indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the four components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact (except for 

one), outcomes (except for one) and outputs with their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a Cost-Benefit Analysis that compares the expected benefits generated by the distinct program components (reduced production losses, improved market access, improved efficiency of 

the animal health system) with program costs (main investments and costs of operation, personnel, and maintenance). In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; however, the analysis fails to address the concerns of 

export restrictions that may considerably limit expected benefits of market access. The CBA estimates an IRR of 23.5%. A sensitivity analysis presents four alternate scenarios: (i) if costs increase to 20% above budget, the IRR 

is reduced to 17%; (ii) if adoption rates among farmers affected by the Fruit Fly and Newcastle disease drop to 70%, the IRR is 17.3%; (iii) if only 40% of all service procedures in the animal health system are improved, the 

IRR drops to 20.5%; and (iv) if only 40% of all market access improving measures are achieved, the IRR drops to 18.3%.

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy for the evaluation of the pilot program for Fruit Fly eradication. The robust identification strategy proposes both a 

difference-in-difference approach (with propensity score matching) using an untreated municipality as a reasonable counterfactual, as well as randomized offering within the treated municipality to increase participation and 

adoption rates and identify the optimal design of the program. The evaluation also allows for the quantification of potentially important spillover effects. Given the scant literature on the effectiveness of plant health 

interventions, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable; eight are classified as Medium and five are classified as Low. It includes mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The program will generate valuable information on the causal link between the 

control of the fruit fly and the increase of income of UPAS and agricultural yields.



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 
(see detailed/complete results matrix) 

Objective: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce 
production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

 

Impacts 
Baseline 

(2016) 
Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Observations 

Impact: Increased exports of agricultural 
products  

  
  

Indicator: Annual export value of agricultural 
products (US$ millions) 

1,488  
(2015) 

1,963 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: Projection of the average 
growth rate for 2010-2015 over the 
period 2016-2021. 

Impact: Increased economic value of livestock 
sector production 

Indicator: Gross value of annual production of 
the livestock sector (cattle, poultry, and swine) 
(US$ millions) 

    

Impact: Higher agricultural yields      

Indicator: Difference between average 
agricultural yields per hectare among 
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the fruit 
fly pilot program (in kilograms per hectare). 

1,293  
(2015) 

1,815 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: gross estimate based on 
2010-2015 trend and projection of 
sector benchmarks. 

Baseline by type of product     

Mandarins 8,174 9,809 Impact evaluation to be 
performed under the program. 

- The baseline value comes from 
departmental government and 
SENASAG studies. They will be 
revised in light of the baseline 
surveys. 

-  There is no information 
disaggregated between baseline 
data for the treatment and 
control groups. 

-  The target value comes from the 
technical estimates. 

Oranges 7,630 9,156 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40692440


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 1: Reduced losses in agricultural 
production caused by pests and diseases. 

Indicator:  

Difference between losses in production caused by 
the fruit fly (measured as percentages of harvest) 
among beneficiaries (B) and non-beneficiaries (NB) 
in the pilot project. 




















NB

2017

NB

2022

B

2017

B

2022 %QP%QP%QP%QP  

30% 15% 

Baseline survey of 
producers. 

Annual reports of 
SENASAG based on the 
technical report monitoring 
program execution. 

Producer survey for 
evaluation of impact at the 
end of program. 

Production losses  
Baseline: 
30% (Santa Cruz) 
36% (La Paz) 

Target: 
15% (Santa Cruz) 
18% (La Paz) 

LB: SENASAG technical 
evaluation based on 
departmental data  

QP: production losses by volume. 

Outcome 2: Fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and 
agrifood products. 

Indicator:  

 New international agreements validating health 
status and safety of Bolivian agricultural products 
(quantity). 

0 20 

SENASAG based on IBCA 
and INE sector information 
and statistics. 
Evidence: international 
agreements signed by 
SENASAG. 

International agreements are 
instruments such as bilateral or 
multilateral agreements, 
protocols between countries, or 
similar instruments. They involve 
the opening of a new country for 
exportation of an agricultural 
product (e.g. chicken to Ecuador, 
citrus fruits to Brazil) 

Outcome 3: Improved zoosanitary conditions in the 
country  

  

SENASAG based on 
evaluations, resolutions, 
and OIE methodology. 

BSE: application presented to 
OIE. 

Indicator:  

 maintenance of Bolivia’s FMD-free status  
1 1 

 self-declaration of zones free of Newcastle 
disease 

0 2 

Outcome 4: Improved phytosanitary conditions in 
the country  

  
SENASAG based on 
technical studies of 
progress under the fruit fly 
pilot project. 

Based on IPPC international 
standards for phytosanitary 
measures. 

Indicator:  

 Declaration of zones of low prevalence of fruit fly 
pests 

0 2 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 5: Improved service to users with 
incorporation of the Virtual Office and Electronic 
Signature.  

  

Program execution unit 
report with details from 
administrative records, 
based on the Gran Paitití 
processing system and 
help desks. 

Average time includes user 
waiting time. 

It does not include the time 
needed to complete the forms. 

Indicator:  

 Average wait time for in-person service 
(submission of requirements and delivery of 
permit/certificate) in two selected services (food 
safety permit for importation, phytosanitary 
certificate for exportation) (minutes). 

36 0 

 Average processing time for approval of business 
registration (days)  

32 20 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

Country: Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project: BO-L1179 Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

Executing agency: National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero and Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the Institutional 
Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) review of SENASAG. 

1.2 Accounting activities, budgetary management, and cash management will be 
carried out using the Integrated Public Management System (SIGEP) and 
SENASAG’s institutional accounting system (VISUAL). For the financial reports 
required by the Bank, the SIAP-BID1 will be used. For tendering processes, the 
standard bidding documents of the Bank or those agreed upon with the Office of 
the Deputy Minister of Public Investment and External Finance (VIPFE) will be 
used and made available through the Public Procurement System (SICOES),2 
where calls for proposals and the results of national bidding processes will be 
published. 

1.3 At present, the Bolivian government and the Bank are preparing an agreement to 
adopt partial use of the Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management 
System (NB-SABS) in operations financed by the Bank in Bolivia. This program 
could apply that agreement once it is signed and in effect. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY  

2.1 SENASAG was created on 16 March 2000 by Law 2061 as an operational 
structure of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands. It is 
responsible for administering the Agricultural Health and Food Safety System, in 
the framework of Article 9 of the Law on Organization of the Executive Branch. 
Supreme Decree 25729 of 7 April 2000 regulates the organization and powers of 
the SENASAG and also establishes its technical, administrative, and managerial 
independence, and its competencies, jurisdiction, and presence throughout Bolivia, 
in accordance with Law 1178 on Governmental Administration and Control, 3 
approved on 20 July 1990. 

                                                
1 Administration System for Bank Projects, developed by the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 
2 Public Procurement System. A set of bidding documents agreed upon between the Bank and the VIPFE 

for use in processes below the threshold for international competitive bidding (ICB). 
3 This law governs the systems for administration and control of funds of the Plurinational State of Bolivia 

and their linkages with the national planning and public investment systems. 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

2.2 For procurements, SENASAG applies the NB-SABS or the rules indicated in 
external financing agreements. 

2.3 Financial transactions are handled in the SIGEP and in SENASAG’s institutional 
system, which provides secure and reliable information on budget execution. This 
system produces financial information in the official currency, classified for 
accounting purposes by expenditure item. In addition, the entity has implemented 
the PLANEA system, which is the primary register for budgetary control and use of 
resources. The accounting records will be kept in accordance with the government 
accounting system. The financial reports required by the Bank will be prepared in 
SIAP-BID until the SIGEP accounting module for external resources enters into 
effect. 

2.4 Project contracting and payments will be conducted by SENASAG, through the 
execution unit, which will work exclusively on program execution and will be 
formally created within the organizational structure of that entity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES  

3.1 The ICAS review of SENASAG indicates an adequate degree of development and 
institutional capacity from the viewpoint of administrative definitions, regulations, 
etc. However, the analysis of risks associated with the program’s fiduciary 
management yields a medium risk classification. 

3.2 To mitigate the risk factors, three specific measures have been planned for 
program execution in order to strengthen fiduciary management: (i) the SENASAG 
team will be reinforced with professional personnel specialized in financial 
management and procurement management for program execution; 
(ii) administrative and internal control processes adapted to program needs for 
adequate financial and administrative management of procurements and 
contracting, including control mechanisms and targets for processing times, will be 
incorporated into the program Operating Regulations; (iii) SENASAG will adopt in 
full the national systems for integrated financial management currently used for 
planning, budgeting, accounting, and cash management functions, including the 
SIGEP, PLANEA, and VISUAL platforms, to ensure access to financial information 
in real time; and (iv) with respect to technical matters, staff capabilities will be 
strengthened in the areas of animal health, plant health, and food safety so as to 
ensure technical soundness in the preparation of technical specifications, terms of 
reference, and other basic inputs for procurement activities. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT  

4.1 Operating Regulations. These will cover the execution mechanism, procedures, 
and information flows, as previously agreed between the executing agency and the 
Bank. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for financial 
reporting. The exchange rate used will be the rate in effect in the country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the program 
disbursement period, audited financial statements for the program will be 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the 
executing agency. The statements will be duly audited by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank 
within 120 days following the date stipulated for the final disbursement. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the firm of independent auditors will 
be subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs stemming from 
the International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the 
program and other tasks. The scope will be governed by the Financial 
Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6) and the 
Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements and External Audits. 

4.5 Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the policies set 
forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9, with partial use of the NB-SABS 
(paragraph 1.3). 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION  

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement processes for the program will be detailed 
in the procurement plan approved by the Bank and will be conducted within the 
framework of the policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 (with 
no exceptions anticipated), or through partial use of the NB-SABS. 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services. In the case of 
international competitive bidding (ICB), the current standard bidding documents 
issued by the Bank will be used. For other processes, the documents available in 
the SICOES will be used. Any changes to those documents will require the Bank’s 
no objection. 

5.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services will 
be executed considering the following: 

(i) Selection of consulting firms. The Bank’s standard request for 
proposals will be used. For contracts in amounts of less than 
US$200,000, the documents available in SICOES will be used. Any 
changes to these documents will require the Bank’s no objection. 

(ii) Short list of consulting firms. This may be composed entirely of 
local firms for contracts where the value is less than the US$200,000 
threshold established for Bolivia. 

(iii) Selection of individual consultants. This will be based on 
qualifications for the assignment, comparing the CVs of at least three 
candidates, and as a rule no interviews will be held. When the 
assignments are linked to other specific advisory services, consulting 
firms will be used, except in circumstances (to be analyzed case-by-
case) where it is deemed appropriate to provide backup support to the 
individual consultant.  

5.4 Procurement planning. Program execution will adhere to the procurement plan 
administered by SENASAG and agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 
SENASAG will publish the procurement plan in the Procurement Plan Execution 
System (SEPA) and will update it annually or as needed.  



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

5.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. No advance procurement that 
would require retroactive recognition of financing is anticipated. 

5.6 National preference. The application of national preference will not be considered 
in procurement processes. 

5.7 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The Project Team Leader is 
responsible for reviewing the criteria for the selection of shortlists, terms of 
reference, and technical specifications, which will be agreed upon with the 
executing agency prior to execution of the processes. 

5.8 Table of threshold amounts. 

 
Table 1. Threshold amounts (US$000) 

Works Goods Consulting firms 

ICB NCB Shopping ICB NCB Shopping 
International 

publicity* 
National 

publicity** 

More than 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$1,500 

More 
than 

US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

Less than 
or equal 

to US$50 

More than 
US$200 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$200 

* Shortlist with maximum of two firms of the same nationality. 
** Shortlist may be 100% national. 

5.9 Main procurement processes. These are detailed in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Planning of main procurement item 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Consulting firms    

3 contracts with international firms to prepare designs for the works and conduct 
the program impact evaluation  

CQS/ 

QCBS 
TBD 359 

3 contracts with local firms to develop the data warehouse, supervise the works, 
and perform the external financial audit of the program  

CQS/ 
QCBS 

TBD 377 

Works    

Construction of the food quality control module, and upgrade of infrastructure 
according to ISO 17025 for LIDIVET facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 904 

Refurbishment of installations and upgrade of infrastructure according to 
ISO 17025 for LIDIVECO facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 215 

Construction and improvements of infrastructure for the district office; diagnostic 
rooms; and plant health and pest control diagnostic laboratory in Santa Cruz 
(3 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 3,228 

Installation of plant and animal health demonstration plots  Shopping TBD 104 

Installation of border control posts for entry and exit of fruit  Shopping TBD 42 

Goods    

Computer equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,101 

4x4 vehicles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,870 

Motorcycles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,231 

Other equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,128 

Laboratory equipment, materials, and inputs (various purchases during execution), TBD TBD 7,044 

Furnishings (various purchases during execution)  TBD TBD 154 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

*Click here for the procurement plan for the first 18 months. 

 

5.10 Procurement supervision. Annual supervision visits will be conducted. If 
necessary, annual ex post review visits will be held. 

5.11 The thresholds for ex post review are shown in Tables 3 and 4 (direct contracting 
and unlisted procurements will be subject to ex ante review). The external audit 
firm will perform the ex post review. 

 
Table 3. Thresholds for ex post review of procurement (US$000) 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting 
services 

Consulting firms 
Individual 

consultants 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$1,500 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$200 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$50 

Those that are not 
considered key and 
are not part of the 

execution unit 

 

5.12 Operating or recurring expenses.4 These will be agreed upon with the Project 
Team Leader, recorded in the project budget, and included in the procurement 
plan. They will be contracted using the NB-SABS. The Bank may decline to 
finance these expenses if it finds that they have violated the basic principles of 
competition, efficiency, and economy. The external audit firm will be responsible 
for reviewing the supporting documentation for these expenses. 

5.13 Records and files. SENASAG will be responsible for establishing the supporting 
documentation, procedures and controls necessary to safeguard the 
documentation generated by the program. The Bank may, at any time, verify the 
standards for organization, control, and security of files. 

                                                
4 Operating or recurring expenses encompass leasing of premises, notifications, announcements, or 

communications made on radio, in the written press, or on television, translations, bank fees, office 
supplies, photocopies, postage, fuel, maintenance, short courses, and travel for line personnel. 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Individual consultants    

Program execution unit staff including coordination, planning, finance, 
procurement (2), legal, environmental and social management, and coordination 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, and administrative assistance 
in support of program execution  

NICQ TBD 766 

Technical team to develop the online web applications in the framework of “Gran 
Paitití” 

NICQ TBD 754 

13 international professionals to provide technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

IICQ TBD 305 

10 national professionals to carry out technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

NICQ TBD 133 

Nonconsulting services    

About 48 contracts for training services and awareness-raising workshops; 
equipment maintenance and calibration; validation of methods; site visits; etc. 

Shopping/ 
NCB 

TBD 2,947 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738


Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. SENASAG will handle both the formulation of the 
budget and any future changes, on the basis of the approved annual work plan, 
and will arrange to have the program recorded as an investment budget to be 
reported in the SIGEP. As an institutional tool, it has the PLANEA system for 
monitoring the institutional budget and the program.  

6.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded in 
the SIGEP. The system integrates the different accounting stages in a single file 
and complies with the requirements for budgeting (budget execution), accounts 
(allocation of assets, liabilities, equity, and results), and cash management (cash 
transfer), on an accrual accounting basis. In addition, for purposes of program 
accounts, a chart of accounts will be prepared that will identify expenditures made 
at each step on a cash basis, harmonizing the program’s investment categories 
with the budgetary items and their respective accounts. In addition, the executing 
agency will use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis as a supplement for 
issuing the program financial reports, until the SIGEP accounting management 
module enters into effect. 

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. Loan proceeds will be disbursed as advances of 
funds and direct payments, on the basis of the financial program, which will be 
periodically updated by SENASAG. The Bank will process a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances has been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars and subsequently 
transferred to a different account in local currency, both within the CUT.5  

6.4 Internal control and internal audit. The financial management of the executing 
agency is subject to an annual reliability review by the Internal Audit Unit, and the 
program is expected to be included in this type of review. As a strategic activity 
within its mandate, the Bank will hold regular coordination meetings with the 
Internal Audit Unit to identify program monitoring needs. 

6.5 External control and reports. The SENASAG will contract a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank on an annual basis, following Bank policies. This 
will be a multiyear contract (covering at least three fiscal years), in order to avoid 
transaction costs and ensure continuity in the work of the auditors, as well as to 
guarantee timely interventions that will allow for preliminary reviews at semiannual 
intervals. 

6.6 The terms of reference for contracting the firm of independent auditors will have 
the Bank’s no objection. 

6.7 Financial supervision plan. Activities may be adjusted on the basis of the 
program’s risk assessment conducted by the fiduciary team with the executing 
agency, and the external audit reports. Expenditures will be supervised on an 
ex post basis. However, at a minimum, the annual supervision plan will provide for 
a comprehensive visit (procurement and finances) by the Bank.  

                                                
5 Cuenta Única del Tesoro (CUT) [Single Treasury Account]. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$21,250,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ _________ 201_) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/ CAN/IDBDOCS#40715591-16 
Pipeline No. BO-L1179 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$3,750,000 from the resources of 
the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of 
the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to 
the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project 
Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 201_ 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40714969-16 
BO-L1179 


	RES-final-version-con-cambios-vps_lp---resoluciones-legales-ingls---bo-l1179.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40715591-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-OC
	IDBDOCS-#40714969-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-FOE





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Lina Salazar (INE/RND) and 
Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders. Project team members: 
Fernando Balcazar (RND/CCO); Pedro Martel (INE/RND); L. Hernando Hintze (RND/CEC); 
Joseph Milewski (RND/CGU); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Mario González and Paul Winters (SPD/SDV); Catalina Mihotek 
(GDI/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Julián Aramburu and Elizabeth Chavez (INE/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive 
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board 
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus 
superseding and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES ............................................................................... 1 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design .................. 1 
B. Conceptual design ........................................................................................ 3 
C. Objectives, components, and costs .............................................................. 5 
D. Results Matrix and key indicators ................................................................. 7 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS ......................................................................... 8 

A. Financing instrument .................................................................................... 8 
B. Economic viability ......................................................................................... 9 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 10 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
E. Other risks .................................................................................................. 11 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Implementation and management .............................................................. 11 
B. Monitoring and evaluation plan ................................................................... 12 

 
  

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283 

2.  Work plan for the first 18 months of implementation (AWP) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579 

3. Monitoring plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418 

4. Impact evaluation plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707 

5. Procurement plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic appraisal 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784 

2. Itemized budget 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566 

3. Operating Regulations 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853 

4. Institutional capacity assessment (ICAS) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081 

5. Initial technology menu – Subcomponent 1 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555 

6. Analysis and design of Subcomponent 2 - Technical assistance 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944 

7. Baseline study 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551 

8. Environmental and social strategy 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives (Project I) 
CUMAT Capacidad de Uso Mayor de la Tierra [Capacity for Greater Land-use] 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 
INIAF Instituto Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria y Forestal [National 

Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation] 
IPD-SA Institución Pública Desconcentrada Soberanía Alimentaria 

[Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty] 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural and Land Development 
NPV Net present value 
PCEU Program coordination and execution unit  
PCU Project coordinating unit 
SIGESEVA Sistema de Gestión, Seguimiento y Evaluación [Management, 

Monitoring, and Evaluation System] (CRIAR project information system) 
SIGMA Sistema Integrado de Gestión y Modernización Administrativa 

[Integrated System of Management and Administrative Modernization] 
VAM Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (food insecurity) 

 



 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 



Annex I - BO-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2631-1

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project
Yes

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or 

in the evaluation plan

Yes

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

The objective of the program is to increase the incomes of small Bolivian farmers, through the promotion of technologies that increase productivity, helping to reduce levels of 

vulnerability to food insecurity. For this, the program will finance the provision of nonrefundable subsidies to partially cover the costs of adopting a selected technology. It is expected 

that the number of beneficiaries of the program ascend to 45,500 producers. The program is a continuation of the 2223/BL-BO operation, currently in its final stages of execution.

Project documentation contains a solid and well-structured diagnosis on the low productivity of the agricultural sector and its contributing factors, including the lack of innovation and 

technology transfer, and presents some evidence that validates the effectiveness of the proposed intervention. The results matrix reflects the objectives and activities of the project 

and has a clear vertical logic. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the evaluation of CRIAR I and an ex-ante economic analysis. Lower-level indicators reflect 

the project design. SMART indicators at the level of impact, results and products, with their respective baseline and target values are provided and the means of collecting the 

information are noted.

The economic analysis presented is based on increases in the margins of agricultural production expected by technology. In general, assumptions seem reasonable, and are largely 

anchored in the evaluation findings of CRIAR I. The sensitivity analysis is differentiated by technology, thus avoiding that the relative high profitability of irrigation diversification 

camouflage sensitivity to relatively minor changes in the variables of interest of other less profitable technologies.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes an identification strategy based on experimental methods, with random selection at the level of municipalities and beneficiary 

communities, allowing for the capture of spillover effects that in these types of interventions are often substantial, and therefore important to measure.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and include compliance indicators, as well as defining responsibility and dates for monitoring.

The project will track specific gender indicators and has 

cross-cutting activities to promote the participation of 

women.

The project promotes the adoption of technologies with 

positive or neutral environmental impacts.

BO-T1207 supported the design of the project.

The Impact Evaluation proposal will provide rigorous 

empirical evidence (experimental methodology) on the 

impact of technology transfer programs in the short, 

medium and long term.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

C

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Adaptation to climate change.

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational 

Program.

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support climate change initiatives, renewable energy and environmental 

sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II  
Page 1 of 3 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

          

General objective 
The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity.  

Specific objective 
The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, and 
productive efficiency. 

Impact 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

(2013) 
Target 
(2019) 

Observations 

Impact: Increase in family farming income of 

small-scale agricultural producers (male and 
female) 

 

   

Means of verification: Randomization ensures that the initial difference between 

the beneficiaries and the control group will be zero. The target value is drawn from 
the CRIAR baseline study, which analyzed impact on income of beneficiaries 
versus a control group. This study found an income differential between the two 
groups of US$133 (939 bolivianos), or about 12% of total income (US$1,090, 
National Institute of Statistics (2011)). This is a conservative scenario, since the 
study in question was conducted during the agricultural cycle immediately 
following the technology transfer. 
Observations: These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring 

surveys for the impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Percentage difference in the 

increase in agricultural income among 
beneficiary versus control producers  

% 0 
 

12 
 

Impact: Improvement in level of food security 

among small-scale agricultural producers (male 
and female). 

  
  

Means of verification: The baseline value is zero because randomization 

ensures that the difference between the beneficiaries and the control group will be 
zero. The target value is drawn from the short-term impact evaluation of CRIAR, 
which found a change of 6% in the program’s first year.  
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who are 
not food insecure according to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization’s food security index. 

% 0 8 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 

Outcomes 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

(2013) 
Target Observations 

Final outcome: Increase in agricultural 

productivity of small-scale producers (male and 
female) 

 

      Means of verification: 
- The baseline value is an average of the crops used for the economic appraisal, 

the calculations for which were based on data from the CRIAR impact evaluation, 
FAOSTAT, consultant reports, and the state-owned food production support 
enterprise EMAPA.  

- The target value is drawn from estimates in the economic appraisal. 
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 
  

Indicator 1: Value of agricultural production 

(median value per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

840 2,686 

Indicator 2: Average gross production margin 

per hectare for agricultural activities (median 
U.S. dollars per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

420 1,643 

Intermediate outcome 1: Increase in 

technology adoption by participating producers 
(male and female) 

      

Observations: The percentage reflects the number of farmers who use the 

purchased technology during the last two agricultural cycles under the program 
and is based on the data collected by CIES Internacional for the impact evaluation 
of CRIAR.  

 

Means of verification: The target value is drawn from the data collected for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR and from existing literature.  

- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who utilize 
the technologies promoted by the program 

% 0 75 

Intermediate outcome 2: Improved 

association-building among beneficiary 
producers (male and female) 

      
Means of verification: Charter of the producers’ association, signed by the 

community or by the Organización Económica Comunitaria [Community Economic 
Organization] (OECOM). Randomization ensures that the difference between the 
beneficiaries and the control group will be zero in the baseline.  

Indicator: Percentage of participating producers 

(male and female) who form new associations 

 

% 0 5 

  



Annex II  
Page 3 of 3 

 

Component: Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies 

  Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3  Year 4 Year 5 Target Observations 

Output 1: Technologies delivered to 
participating producers (male and female) 

  
            

 Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Milestone 1: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

beneficiary producers (male and female) 
 0 10,500  12,000  15,000  8,000   45,500  Voucher exchange will occur during the fairs, and 

occurs when the beneficiary pays the counterpart 
contribution.  
  

Milestone 2: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

female heads of household 
 0 1,500 2,500  3,500 4,000   11,500 

Milestone 3: Number of technologies installed 

on beneficiary producers’ plots (male 
 and female) 

0  8,000  11,500 12,500  11,000 2,500  45,500 Corresponds to the time of request by the supplier. 

Milestone 4: Number of participating producers 

(male and female) who have received training in 
technology maintenance and use 

0 8,000 11,500 12,500 11,000 2,500 45,500 
This training will be given directly by the technology 
provider. 

Indicator 1.1: Number of technologies for 

participating producers (male and female) paid 
for by the PCEU 

0 0 6,500 8,000 10,000 21,000 45,500 
Refers to the technologies for which the PCEU has paid 
suppliers as the final step in the process. This number 
includes the verified technologies. 

Output 2: Participating producers (male and 
female) having received technical assistance  

              Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Indicator: Number of beneficiary producers 

(male and female) who have received technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and 
association management during an agricultural 
cycle 

0 0 4,000 8,500  14,000  19,000  45,500   

  



Annex III  
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project No./Name: BO-L1096 – Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural 
Agrifood Initiatives II  (CRIAR II) 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land Development 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the following in 
determining the level of fiduciary risk associated with the project: (i) the institutional 
capacity assessment of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 2223/BO-BL; 
and (ii) the fiduciary supervision by financial management and procurement 
specialists at the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (FMP/CBO) during the execution 
of loan 2223/BO-BL.

1
 

1.2 Program execution will fall to a program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) 
attached to the new Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty 
(IPD-SA) under the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be kept in the Integrated System of 
Management and Administrative Modernization (SIGMA).

2
 SIAP-BID

3
 will be used 

for financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s Standard Bidding Documents 
or other documents agreed with the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing and made available through SICOES

4
 will be used for 

execution of this operation; SICOES will also be used for the publication of specific 
procurement notices. 

1.4 Use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services Management System 
(NB-SABS) is acceptable to the Bank

5
 as relates to the National Production and 

Employment Support (ANPE) procurement modality for: (i) works contracts for 
amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the shopping 
method (for reference: US$250,000); (ii) contracts for goods and nonconsulting 
services for amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the 
shopping method (for reference: US$50,000); (iii) all individual consulting 
 

                                                 
1
   The PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the project 

coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 
2
   The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed the Sistema de Gestión Pública [Public 

Management System] (SIGEP), which in the medium term will replace SIGMA. 
3
   Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System]. 

4
   A national procurement subsystem that has been approved for use in Bank operations. 

5
   See document GN-2538-11 for what the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates 

to acceptance of the partial use of the country procurement system in Bolivia. The agreement for the 
implementation and use of country systems in IDB-financed operations is currently being finalized, and 
will be applied once it enters into force. 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

contracts;
6
 and (iv) use of the SICOES system

7
 as a mechanism for advertising 

requests for proposals and the results of national bidding processes and simplified 
procurement processes in Bolivia.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

2.1 As a government agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 
for Government Administration and Control (SAFCO). This law regulates the 
administrative and control systems for government finances, and their relationship 
with country planning and public investment systems. 

2.2 The MDRyT uses SIGMA for all of its financial records.
8
 SIGMA offers secure and 

reliable access to budget execution information. It does not provide data in foreign 
currency, or on the basis of the investment categories established in the program 
costs table. The MEFP

9
 has, however, with Bank support, developed the 

Accounting Management Module, which allows reports to be issued based on the 
financing structures and the currency of loans from international development 
partners, meaning that these limitations should be overcome. Despite this, until 
such time as this module has been fully implemented, it has been agreed that the 
PCEU will use SIAP-BID

10
 as a supplementary accounting and reporting system for 

rendering accounts and financial reporting. As a state agency, the MDRyT is 
supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 The institutional capacity assessment, together with the observations of the 
FMP/CBO team during execution of loan 2223/BL-BO, indicate an ADEQUATE 
level of institutional development and capacity, and a LOW level of fiduciary risk.  

3.2 Coordination. To ensure optimum overall coordination, the program Operating 
Regulations will include flow charts featuring independent and exclusive 
administrative and legal functions, as well as the coordination mechanism that will 
govern participants under the this program. It is recommended that the MDRyT 
maintain the structure established for the PCU, which, as executing agency for 
current loan 2223/BO-BL, has acquired the knowledge and experience needed to 
ensure compliance with the fiduciary agreements and requirements set out in this 
document. 

3.3 Procurement. Although the level of turnover among local authorities and 
administrative personnel (including high-, mid-, and low-level management 
procurement personnel) is generally high in the country, this has not been the case 
with the PCU.  To avoid adversely affecting the transfer and strengthening of 
procurement-related knowledge or the pace of execution, efforts should continue to 

                                                 
6
   Except in rare cases in which the Bank authorizes the use of the policy set forth in document 

GN-2350-9. 
7
   Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [State Procurement System] www.sicoes.gob.bo  

8
  The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed SIGEP, which in the medium term will replace 

SIGMA. 
9
   Ministry of Economy and Public Finance. 

10
  Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System], developed by 

Country Department Andean Group staff in the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

 

 

retain for the PCEU fiduciary staff (procurement and financial management 
specialists) who currently work in the PCU

11
 for loan 2223/BO-BL.  

3.4 Internal legal and administrative processes and procedures. It is highly 
recommended that the staff of the legal and administrative departments of the 
MDRyT and the IPD-SA continue to strengthen their knowledge of fiduciary 
management according to IDB guidelines, and that they participate in the early 
stages of procurement processes (preparation of bidding documents, draft or 
model contracts, etc.). Accordingly, the Bank will continue to provide training to 
agency staff (PCEU and other entities), supplemented by training offered by the 
Bank in the use program management tools (GRP, PM4R, MS Program). 

3.5 Public financial management. The PCEU will have access to SIGMA for the 
timely recording of payment requests and financial records. In addition, until such 
time as the SIGEP Accounting Management Module has entered into operation, 
SIAP-BID will be used as a supplementary system for recording program 
transactions. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. Based on prior agreement between the Bank and the 
parties, the Operating Regulations will include details of execution arrangements, 
procedures, and information flows. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed on with the executing agency for financial reporting. 
The exchange rate used will be the prevailing rate in the borrowing country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. Each year, for the duration of 
the loan disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the close of the executing agency’s 
fiscal year. These statements will be duly audited by an independent audit firm 
acceptable to the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the independent audit firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs consistent with the 
International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the program 
and related audit tasks. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be conducted consistent with what the 
Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates to the acceptance of 
the partial use of the country procurement system of Bolivia (document 
GN-2538-11) once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
systems in Bank-financed operations enters into force; and with the policies in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for everything not covered in document 
GN-2538-11 and the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations. 

                                                 
11

  Note that the PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Program-related 
contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services subject to international 
competitive bidding will be carried out using the Standard Bidding Documents 
issued by the Bank.  

5.3 Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) will be carried out 
using national bidding documents agreed on with the Bank (or satisfactory to the 
Bank) for amounts up to US$400,000, as such contracts can be fulfilled by local 
vendors and because it has been observed that contracts for amounts below 
US$400,000 have not generated interest among foreign bidders in recent years. 
Shopping will be applied in those cases indicated in the procurement plan, using 
the bidding documents agreed on with the Bank, or the ANPE procurement 
modality once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations has entered into force. Calls for bids may 
be published in the SICOES.   

5.4 This program does not envisage the contracting of works. If required, however, 
works valued at or below US$1 million will be contracted using the shopping 
method.  

5.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
under the program will be listed in the initial procurement plan, and will be 
executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals or one agreed 
with the Bank (or satisfactory to the Bank if no agreement has been reached). 

a. Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms will be selected for the 
program using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals. 

b. Shortlist of consulting firms. For contracts valued below the thresholds 
established by the Bank for the country, the shortlist may comprise entirely 
(100%) Bolivian firms.

12
 For Bolivia this threshold is US$200,000. 

c. Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be selected 
taking into account their qualifications for the assignment, based on a 
comparison of the qualifications of at least three candidates. As a rule, no 
interviews will take place. When the work necessitates the involvement of 
additional persons, to provide specific support and advisory services, 
consulting firms should normally be used. In circumstances where two or three 
persons would provide this support, the suitability of relying on individual 
consultants with complementary services will be analyzed on a case-by-case 
basis. The ANPE procurement modality may be used once the agreement for 
the implementation and use of country subsystems in Bank-financed 
operations has entered into force. Requests for proposals may be published in 
the SICOES. 

5.6 Procurement planning. The PCEU will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once a 
year, or as necessary to reflect the program’s actual progress and requirements for 
execution. 

5.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively 
recognize eligible expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing 

                                                 
12

  Includes nonconsulting services. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

 

amount, provided that they meet requirements substantially similar to those set out 
in the loan contract. These expenditures must have been incurred during the 
18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank. The following will be 
considered eligible expenses: (i) preliminary studies for execution of the 
subcomponents; (ii) set-up of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key 
PCEU personnel as stipulated in the procurement plan.

13
   

5.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement of goods envisaged for this operation. 

5.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The project team leader will 
review terms of reference and/or technical specifications. 

5.10 Table of threshold amounts (thousands of U.S. dollars). 

 

Works Goods and nonconsulting services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
advertising  

Shortlist 
100% 

national  

Greater than 
US$5,000 

Less than or 
equal to 

US$5,000 

Less than 
US$1,000 

Greater than 
US$400 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$400 

Less than 
or equal 

to 
US$200 

Greater than 
US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

 

5.11 Main procurements. The main procurements for this operation are detailed 
below:* 

*To access and review the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click: (here). 

5.12 Procurement supervision. The thresholds for post review are set based on the 
fiduciary capacity of the executing agency, the complexity of procurement, and/or 

                                                 
13

  Key personnel include: (i) national project coordinator; (ii) technical specialist I, PCEU; (iii) information 
technology expert; (iv) officer IV, planning, monitoring, and evaluation; (v) officer IV, legal affairs; 
(vi) officer III, agrifood technologies; (vii) officer III, voucher management; (viii) officer IV, SIGESEVA 
management and monitoring; (ix) officer IV, communications and training; (x) administrative specialist I, 
PCEU; and (xi) officer IV, goods and services (procurement specialist). 

Activity 
Bidding 
process 

Estimated 
date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Goods or nonconsulting services    

Engagement of several service providers/firms to 
verify that technical assistance was provided to 
beneficiaries (US$365,000 average contract) 

NCB Q3-2015 1,820 

Engagement of two service providers/firms to design 
and implement the program’s information campaign 

NCB Q1-2015 500 

Engagement of three service providers/firms to verify 
the installation of technology for program beneficiaries 

NCB Q2-2015 1,365 

Purchase of transport units Shopping Q2-2015 200 

Consulting services    

Engagement of several consulting firms (eight 
contracts on average) to provide technical assistance 
to program beneficiaries 

FBS Q2-2015 9,100 

Consultancy for the program impact evaluation QCBS 
Q4-2019  
Q2-2019 

500 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556


Annex III  
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

external factors that may affect the timeliness and manner of procurement 
execution. Given the current fiduciary management capabilities of the PCU (the 
PCEU for project BO-L1096) as relate to procurement, the program may be 
executed using ex post review for procurement processes worth up to 100% of the 
threshold for NCB, as set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and 
procurements not listed in the table will be subject to ex ante review). Based on the 
matrix of risks identified for the program, the level of fiduciary risk in relation to 
program procurement is LOW. Accordingly, annual procurement supervision visits 
and ex post review visits will be made with a view to updating the level of fiduciary 
risk and monitoring progress in procurement management under the program.  

 

Threshold for ex post review 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting services 

Consulting services - 
Firms 

Shortlist may be 100% 
national 

Consulting 
services - 
Individual 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$5,000,000 

Contracts for amounts less 
than or equal to 
US$400,000 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$200,000 

No threshold 
amount 

5.13 Operating expenses. Operating expenses are recurring and maintenance 
expenses needed for program implementation. These will be agreed on with the 
project team leader and included in the procurement plan. Procurement relating to 
recurring expenses will be governed by the executing agency’s administrative 
procedures (generally the NB-SABS regulations), as referenced in the Operating 
Regulations. 

5.14 Direct contracting. Under this program, direct contracting may be used in the 
following cases: (i) key PCU personnel executing loan 2223/BO-BL (CRIAR); and 
(ii) contracts valued at less than US$500 individually, or US$5,000 when bundled, 
may be contracted directly in order to ensure efficient, timely execution. This must 
be approved by the project team leader, and the procurement plan must also be 
updated. 

5.15 Records and files. The PCEU for operation BO-L1096 will establish the 
supporting documentation, procedures, and controls necessary for project 
execution, and maintain them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract 
and local laws.  

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. The PCU for loan 2223/BO-BL, which is currently in 
operation, has an administrative department

14
 within which the project will be set 

up, thus allowing budget records to be kept with individual identification of the 
sources of financing and funds used in project execution. Inclusion in the budget as 
well as future budget modifications (requested via ministerial resolution) must go 
through the Bureau of Administrative Affairs (DGAA), based on the annual work 
plan and the project execution plan agreed with the Bank, thus ensuring that the 

                                                 
14

  Under SIGMA’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative department may include several 
projects with independent records and controls.  



Annex III  
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

 

 

funds required for each year of project execution will be available. Budget 
modifications also must be submitted to the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing, for approval via a ministerial resolution from the Ministry of 
Development Planning. 

6.2 Accounting and information systems. The PCEU for the proposed program 
(BO-L1096) will record project transactions in SIGMA. This system combines in a 
single registry the following accounting records: Budget (budget execution), Net 
worth (assets, liabilities, equity, and earnings), and Treasury (cash transfers), on 
an accrual basis. In addition, for project accounting purposes, a chart of accounts 
will be prepared to allow the identification of expenditures incurred by transaction 
on a cash basis, aligning the project’s investment categories with the respective 
budget line items and accounts. In addition, until such time as the SIGEP 
Accounting Management Module (currently SIGMA) is in operation, the PCEU will 
use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis for program accounting and as a 
supplementary accounting system for financial reporting.  

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will be disbursed in the form of 
independent advances of funds to the PCEU. The frequency of advances will be 
determined as a function of the project’s financial programming, which will be 
updated periodically by the PCEU. The Bank may make a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in an independent account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency, both under the 
CUT.

15
 The MDRyT, through the PCEU, will be responsible for the management of 

funds disbursed to it.  

6.4 Internal controls and audits. Financial management by the PCEU is subject to 
yearly reliability reviews by the Internal Audit Unit; the project is expected to be 
included in this type of review. As a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank 
will organize annual workshops for the MDRyT Internal Audit Unit, with a view to 
strengthening its knowledge of project execution. These activities are coordinated 
with the Office of the Comptroller General (CGE). Additionally, the Bank has been 
supporting the CGE with a technical-cooperation operation that is seeking to 
strengthen the internal control system. With internal audit units as the main 
participants, it is equipping them with review tools and improving the application of 
their regulations. 

6.5 External controls and reporting. To meet the requirement of annual submittal of 
the project’s audited financial statements, the PCEU will need to hire an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies. A multiyear 
contract (spanning at least three fiscal periods) should be used so as to avoid 
transaction costs and give continuity to the auditors’ work, while also ensuring 
timely interventions that will enable preliminary reviews at semiannual cutoff points. 

6.6 Financial supervision plan. Supervision plans and timetables will be designed 
based on identified fiduciary risks. At a minimum, the following annual activities are 
envisaged: (i) a comprehensive visit (covering procurement and disbursements) by 
the external audit firm hired to review the project’s financial statements; (ii) a site 
visit to the areas targeted for investment under the loan; and (iii) a visit to verify 

                                                 
15

  CUT: Cuenta Única del Tesoro [General Treasury Account]. 



Annex III  
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

compliance with agreements based on the internal control recommendations 
issued by the project’s external auditor. 

6.7 Execution mechanism. Given that loan 2223/BO-BL is currently being executed 
by the PCU, no changes are anticipated in this area. The current structure, 
procedures, and arrangements will therefore be maintained for execution of the 
proposed operation, as will the PCU, along with its administrative, financial, and 
management autonomy. The PCEU for proposed project BO-L1096 will assume 
direct responsibility for implementation and will be devoted full-time to project 
execution. Its duties will include project planning, management, and monitoring, 
development of planning instruments, channeling of funds for execution, 
authorization and transfer of voucher payments, and consolidation and submittal to 
the Bank of financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, among 
others set forth in the Operating Regulations. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ___/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$49,600,000 
from the resources of the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds 
to a parallel loan within the framework of  the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance 
reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765860 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$12,400,000 
from the resources of the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan 
within the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, 
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765884 

 
 





