

















































LOAN NUMBER 3731-BAN

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 13 JANUARY 2019

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 13 January 2019 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 
OF BANGLADESH (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a.project design advance agreement dated 5 July 2016 between ADB . 
and the Borrower (“PDA Agreement"), ADB provided a project design advance concessional 
loan (“PDA Loan") from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in an amount in various currencies 
equivalent to one million four hundred twenty-four thousand Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR1,424,000) for the purposes of preparatory activities for the Project;

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“Concessional Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
(“Concessional Loan") from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million 
Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Concessional Loan") to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
expenditures of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED") of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives (“MOLGRDC"), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to LGED 
the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; 
and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Development Framework" or “CPF” means the community 
development framework, including any update thereto, as .agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds .of the Loan and the Concessional Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) "Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) "Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services such 
as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance;

(h) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Concessional 
Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 17 
September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
17 September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policyr 



3

the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy* means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) . “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which' is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities* means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
Implementation of and compliance with the EMP, Including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 34 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services and 
project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000), as such 



4

amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period’1 as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal tothe sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0,60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0,15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Sec tion 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a "Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 



5

Loan Regulations, and shall be effected In accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02, (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (lv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
Inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01, The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Concessional Loan has become 
liable for suspension or cancellation for any reason whatsoever.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: either 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6,01. The following Is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement has been duly executed and delivered, and 
all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement) has been fulfilled or arrangements satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been made for the fulfillment thereof within a period of time satisfactory to ADB.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations,



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional 
Secretary or Chief, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh

Facsimile Number:

(880)2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2340,



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE’S . REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

MONOWAR AHMED 
Secretary 

Economic Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

MANMOHAN PARKASH 
Country Director 

Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) (i) improving the condition of approximately 1,700 km of rural roads to
all-weather standards which incorporate climate resilience and safety 
features; and (ii) maintaining approximately 242 km of such rural roads 
for a period of five years after completion of the Works;

(b) (i) provision of training for LGED on road asset management, road
safety, contract management, financial management and climate- 
resilient road design and construction; (ii) raising the awareness of road 
users on road safety, human trafficking, and prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections; and (iii) enhancing the skills of women workers 
on road construction and maintenance; and

(c) . upgrading the rural road masterplan for the entire territory of the 
Borrower, using a geographic information system for selecting priority 
rural roads.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023. This is
expected to cover approximately 3 out of the 5 years under the maintenance period as referred 
to in paragraph 2(a) above.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.



2, If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall, be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to In paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable oh any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal,

4, Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount In its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 



12

Schedule 2

said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines; 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated In more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table,)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2, Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion Of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower,

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 80,105,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
2 Equipment and Vehicles 3,375,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
3 Consulting Services 9,700,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
4 Equipment Operation 

and Maintenance 
(Project Management)

1,140,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

5 Unallocated 5,680,000
TOTAL 100,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED. to ensure that the Project is
implemented In accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
. accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 

Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements, The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications  set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

must.be

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED does not award any Works or
Nonconsulting Services contracts which Involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.

Community Participation Framework

4. The Borrower shall, or shall cause LGED to, implement the CPF as agreed with
ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower.



16

Schedule 4

5. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause LGED to ensure, no section or part thereof
under any works contract awarded for the relevant Subproject shall be handed over to the 
contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been Implemented in full.

Operation and Maintenance

6. The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to LGED on a timely basis for the same purpose. This shall 
include providing financing for the remainder of the 5-year maintenance period under the 
maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the Concessional Loan after Project completion.

7. In relation to the 5-year maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the
Concessional Loan;

(a) the Borrower shall exercise its rights under such contract in such a 
manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB and to 
accomplish the purposes of the Loan or the Concessional Loan, as 
applicable; and

(b) in the event that a contractor fails to perform the maintenance of the 
Project roads required under such contract, the Borrower, through 
LGED, shall assume the maintenance responsibility by providing 
sufficient funds and making appropriate implementation arrangements.

Environment

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction/implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the Project does hot
have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects 
and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any such impacts, the 
Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available or cause LGED to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(c) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(d) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(e) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the IEE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(f) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(g) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at . 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall cause LGED to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

13, The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.



18

Schedule 4

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED includes specific provisions In the 
bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall cause LGED to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 14 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts Include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) target at least 40% women participants in project orientation seminars 
and planning of project roads; (il) provide on-the-job training to all women workers on basic 
construction, improvement, reconstruction works and maintenance skills; (iii) target at least 
20% women workers to be employed for road improvement works; (iv) conduct awareness on 
sexually-transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS, and anti-human-trafficking to at least 40% 
of students, teachers and parents along the project roads; (v) implement core labor standards 
with' gender-inclusive provisions and women-friendly work environments; (vi) conduct road 
safety awareness programs to at least 40% of students, teachers and parents along the project 
roads; and (vil) conduct technical training of LGED staff including 30% women staff.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities
arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18, The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that LGED, (a) complies with ADB’s.
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



19

Schedule 4

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and. contracts, Including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3737-UZB(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Horticulture Value Chain Infrastructure Project) 

between

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED MAY 2019

UZB 51041



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated May 2019 between REPUBLIC OF
UZBEKISTAN (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by AIFSA (as hereinafter defined), and for 
this purpose the Borrower will make available to AIFSA the proceeds of the loan provided for 
herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement to be entered into between ADB and the ALC Management Company (as 
hereinafter defined);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement between ADB and 
ALC Management Company, as such agreement may be amended from 
time to time; and such project agreement includes all schedules to the 
project agreement; and

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term “ALC Management Company”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “AIFSA” means the Agency for Implementation of. Projects in the Field, 
of Agro-industry and Food Security of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) “ALCs” means the agro-logistic centers to be established under the 
Project in Andijian and Samarkand regions of the Borrower; and “ALC” 
means either of them;

(c) “ALC Management Company" means a special purpose vehicle to be 
established as a limited liability company to operate and manage the 
ALCs, which shall be fully owned by the Borrower;

(d) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(e) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(f) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, 
but excluding Consulting Services; .

(j) “iee” means an initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “LARP” means a land acquisition and resettlement plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);



3

(n) “MlFT” means the Ministry of Investment and Foreign Trade of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Output” means an output of the Project;

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 11 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the'Project dated 
11 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means AIFSA or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(t) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMPs and the LARPs, 
including any corrective and preventative actions;

(u) “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(v) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred ninety-seven million Dollars 
($197,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available to AIFSA upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower and shall 
cause AIFSA to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing ofexpendituresonthe Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries of 
ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible 
sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. (a) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to (i) maintain
separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the 
Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (Hi) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than six months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, 
to discuss the financial statements for the Project and AIFSA’s financial affairs where they 
relate to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of AIFSA, unless AIFSA shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the ALC Management Company to perform its obligations under 
the Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates AIFSA as its agent for 
the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted under 
Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.05 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 
5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by 
AIFSA pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 6.01 of this Loan Agreement shall.be 
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the 
Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on AIFSA under Section 6.01 of 
this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower and 
ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
29 Istiqlol Street
Tashkent 100008
Republic of Uzbekistan



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(998-71)239-1128 
(998-71)239-1252.

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 636-2444 
(63-2)636-2017.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ELYAR GANIEV 
Deputy Prime Minister

Vice President (Operations 1)



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase the production and value addition of
horticulture products in the territory of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs:

(a) Output 1: Establishment of ALCs. This Output comprises:

(i) the establishment of an ALC in Andijan region with (A) 
approximately 25,000 square meters (m2) of trading area split 
evenly between wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an 
annual throughput of approximately 425,000 tons; (B) 
approximately 60,000 cubic meters (m3) of cold storage with an 
annual capacity of approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) 
approximately 12 processing lines with an approximate annual 
throughput of 600,000 tons for export and 80,000 tons for the 
domestic market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of 
the ALC for an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or 
trading, storage and processing of alternative food products; and

(ii) the establishment of an ALC in Samarkand with: (A) 
approximately 35,600 m2 of trading area split evenly between 
wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an annual 
throughput of approximately 550,000 tons; (B) approximately 
60,000 m3 of cold storage with an annual capacity of 
approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) approximately 17 
processing lines with an approximate annual throughput of 
850,000 tons for export and 150,000 tons for the domestic 
market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of the ALC for 
an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or trading, 
storage and processing of alternative food products.

(b) Output 2: Improvement of ALC Management Capacity. This Output 
comprises the development of institutional and operational capacity of 
various stakeholders in the horticulture value chain, including the 
assistance to MIFT in (i) establishing the ALC Management Company 
in accordance with best international practices; (ii) preparing operation 
and management guidelines for the ALCs; (iii) conducting training in 
management, operation, and maintenance of the ALCs; (iv) conducting 
training in horticulture business development and management; and (v) 
learning from successful international agro-logistic models.

3. The Project shall include the provision of Consulting Services for activities,
including those specified in paragraph 2(b) above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



10

• * The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
expressed in US Dollars*

15 May 2042
15 November 2042
15 May 2043
15 November 2043

4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000

Total 197,000,000



12

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all. agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawal
shall be made from the Loan Account in respect of Goods and Works (Turnkey Contract) until:

(a) the ALC Management Company has been duly established and is 
adequately staffed and fully operational in accordance with the laws of 
the Borrower;



13
Schedule 3

(b) the ALC Management Company has entered into the Project Agreement 
with ADB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(c) ADB has received a satisfactory legal opinion confirming that the Project 
Agreement referred to in paragraph 5(b) above has been duly 
authorized by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally 
binding upon the ALC Management Company in accordance with its 
terms.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
** Subject to the conditions of withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

$ 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Goods and Works 
(Turnkey Contract) ** 187,119,707

100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2

Other Expenditures, 
including for:
(a) Project Management 

and Supervision 
Consultants;

(b) Project Management;
(c) Resettlement;
(d) Project Financial 

Audit; and
(e) Environmental 

Management

9,880,293 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

TOTAL 197,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. The Borrower shall not award and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works
contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the relevant environmental authority of the Borrower has granted the 
final approval of the applicable I EE; and

(b) AIFSA has incorporated the relevant provisions from the applicable 
EMP into the Works contract.

6. The Borrower shall not and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works contract
which involves involuntary resettlement impacts, until AIFSA has prepared and submitted to 
ADB the final LARPs based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of 
such LARPs.

Consulting Services

7. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.



16
Schedule 4

8. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Least-Cost Selection for financial auditing.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

9. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

10. The Borrower shall ensure that ail ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB's Review of Procurement Decisions

11. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

12. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of one month or more, or which is likely to require an 
extension of the Loan Closing Date, and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 
change under such contract).

13. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than one month after the receipt of the required 
document.

14. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within one month following amendment 
of the contract.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and AIFSA shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
AIFSA, and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, 
the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

Environment

2. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in each LARP, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
each LARP, the Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with each LARP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with each LARP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take and shall cause AIFSA to take all 
steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of 
the Borrower and with the SPS.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the lEEs, 
the EMPs, and the LARPs (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the LARPs promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards,, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HlV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

11. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure strictly monitor compliance
with the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

12. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) promote jobs'for female workers in the ALCs; (ii) 
improve entrepreneurial abilities for existing and potential women entrepreneurs; (iii) monitor 
employment cheated by the ALCs for female workers, and agribusiness start-ups by female 
entrepreneurs; (iv) recruit national social and gender officer in the project management office; 
(v) identify gender focal points in the ALC Management Company; and (vi) ensure collection 
of sex-disaggregated baseline and end-line information, and monitor trends on number of 
female beneficiaries.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

13. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to ensure that a joint safeguards grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established in accordance with the provisions of the 
lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs at the project management office, within three months of the 
Effective Date, to consider safeguards complaints.

14. The safeguards grievance redress mechanism referred to in paragraph 13
above shall function to (a) review and document eligible complaints of Project stakeholders; 
(b) proactively address grievances; (c) provide the complainants with notice of the chosen 



20
Schedule 5

mechanism and/or action; and (d) prepare and make available to ADB upon request periodic 
reports to summarize (i) the number of complaints received and resolved;, (ii) chosen actions; 
and (iii) final outcomes of the grievances.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available requisite counterpart support, including,
without limitation, by exempting taxes and duties imposed on the Goods and within the territory 
of the Borrower for the timely, smooth and successful implementation of the Project. In 
addition, the Borrower shall ensure that AIFSA, at all times, have sufficient funds to satisfy its 
obligations arising from any Goods, Works or Consulting Services contract.

Financial/Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall cause MIFT to establish the ALC Management Company
on or before 31 December 2019 to ensure professional, independent, efficient and smooth 
operations of the ALCs.

17. To enable the ALC Management Company to be operationally and
commercially autonomous, and free from any interference by state agencies and local 
administrations, the Borrower shall and shall cause MIFT to ensure that the ALC Management 
Company, among others, has:

(a) independent decision-making powers;

(b) the ability to own its assets;

(c) the power to incur liabilities, for and on its own behalf, and accept and 
enter into future obligations and commitments;

(d) the capacity to implement an appropriate accounting system to enable 
it to submit its accounts to the national tax authorities in accordance with 
the applicable laws of the Borrower;

(e) ’ the power to borrow and raise funds;

(f) the ability to function in a manner that shall generate sufficient revenue 
to keep the ALCs in good working conditions and to enable them to meet 
the commercial, social, and environmental criteria applicable to such 
ALCs;

(g) no involvement in trading activities at the ALCs; and

(h) capacity to comply with prevailing legal and regulatory requirements.

18. For the purposes of monitoring the performance of the ALC Management
Company, the Borrower shall cause MIFT to carry out an annual assessment of the ALC 
Management Company, starting from the second year after commencement of commercial 
operations of the ALCs, by employing, among others, a combination of following financial and 
physical indicators: (a) Financial - return on assets (of at least equal to annual inflation rate of 



21
Schedule 5

the reporting year plus 2%); and debt to equity (not exceeding 1.5 times); and (b) Physical - 
occupancy rate of the wholesale market area (of not less than 65%); occupancy rate of the 
small-farmers’ market area for each ALC (of no less than 70%); total processing throughput in 
each. ALC for export and domestic sales (of no less than 700,000 tons); and utilization rate of 
cold storage capacity in each ALC (of no less than 900,000 tons).

19. The Borrower shall ensure that ADB’s written consent is obtained at least three
months prior to the implementation of any of the following: (a) change in the ownership of the 
ALC Management Company, any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project; (b) 
sale, transfer or assignment of interest or control in the ALC Management Company, any asset, 
facility or structure constructed under the Project; (c) creation of a lien or charge on any asset 
of the ALC Management Company as security to borrow or raise funds; or (d) lease or other 
contract or modification of the functions and authority of the ALC Management Company over 
the operation and maintenance of any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project. 
The Borrower shall ensure that ADB is promptly notified of any proposal to implement any such 
changes and that the notification includes sufficient details regarding the change to be 
implemented. The Borrower shall ensure that any such change shall be carried out in a legal 
and transparent manner.

Governance and Corruption

20. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

21. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of AIFSA, the implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, 
and other service providers as they relate to the Project.




































































48098-002: Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3700-PAK(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project)

. between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

PAK 48098



LOAN AGREEMENT
{Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 7 ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB"}. '

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan, and to the Japan Fund for 
Poverty Reduction ("JFPR1’) and the High-Level Technology Fund ("HLTF") for grants to be 
administered by ADB, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from JFPR (“JFPR Grant”) in 
the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of 
financing expenditures under Part B of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“HLTF Grant 
Agreement" and, together with the JFPR Grant Agreement, “Grant Agreements”), ADB has 
agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from HLTF (“HLTF Grant” and, together with the JFPR 
Grant, “Grants") in the amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) available to the Borrower for 
the purposes of financing expenditures under Part C of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by Balochistan, and, for this purpose, the 
Borrower will make available to Balochistan the proceeds of the Grants and the loan provided 
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement between ADB and Balochistan;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein

Section 1.02. ' Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used In this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “ACD" means the Agriculture and Cooperatives Department of 
Balochistan, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) "Balochistan” means the Province of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(c) "Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(d) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) "EARF" or "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework" means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 

' including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) ' "EIA" or "Environmental Impact Assessment" means the environmental
impact assessment for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements 
set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(g) "EMP" or "Environmental Management Plan" means the environmental 
management plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, for the Subproject;

(h) "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable), of the 
SPS;

(i) . "IEE” or "Initial Environmental Examination" means the initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable), of the SPS;

(k) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(I) "Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(m) "ID” means the Irrigation Department of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;



3

(n) "LARF" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework" means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(o) "LARP" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan" means the land 
acquisition and resettlement plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the LARF and cleared by ADB;

(p) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(q) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) "Procurement Guidelines” means ADB's Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(s) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(t) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreements) means Balochistan, acting through ID, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the Project;

(u) "Project and Subproject facilities" means the facilities to be constructed, 
improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted, protected or 
provided under the Project;

(v) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower.to ADB that describes progress with the 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the LARPs (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(w) "SPS" or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) "Subproject" means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set out in the PAM; and

(y) “Works” means construction or- civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including services such as drilling 
or mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 



4

single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services,

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2,01, (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter,

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04, The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available 'to Balochistan upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and shall cause 
Balochistan to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



5

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement,

Section 3,04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 . 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4,01,. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project and Subproject facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all 
obligations set forth in Schedule 5.to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

. Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. .

Section 4.03. ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial 
statements for the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 
days of the date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

Section 4,04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable Balochistan to perform its obligations under the Project 
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance 
of such obligations.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for the 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
JFPR Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
HLTF Grant Agreement,

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for the 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the JFPR Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) that the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) that the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower In accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Delegation of Authority

Section 7.01. The Borrower hereby designates Balochistan as its agent
for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted 
under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 
5.03 and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7,02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by
Balochistan pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement 
shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by 
the Borrower.



7

Section 7.03. The authority conferred on Balochistan under Section
7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower 
and ADB.

ARTICLE VIII

Miscellaneous

Section 8.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the 
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 8.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.Q1 of the Loan Regulations: . ’

For the Borrower

Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51) 910 4016.

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto,. acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased agricultural productivity in the Zhob
and Mula river basins in the Province of Balochistan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Part A

(a) the construction and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
watershed protection, including the construction, upgrade and 
rehabilitation of the Siri Toi Dam with a storage of approximately 
36,000,000 cubic meters including a spillway and water intake; weirs 
and infiltration galleries; approximately 276 kilometers of irrigation 
network; infrastructure to reduce flood risks to irrigation canals and the 
command area; facilities to increase women’s access to water for 
domestic use; and watershed protection for approximately 4,145 
hectares;

(b) the establishment and improvement of command areas, including the 
development of approximately 16,592 hectares of command area 
(including approximately 1,839 hectares for rainwater harvesting 
(khuskaba) farming); and

(c) the strengthening of institutional capacity, including the provision of 
training to ID and ACD on project management, financial management, 
procurement, disbursement, gender and social and environmental 
safeguards, and the development of infrastructure for improved project 
management and training;

Part B

(d) . further to the establishment and improvement of command areas, the 
pilot testing of approximately 130 hectares of high-value agriculture in 
the Project area; and

Part C

(e) further to the strengthening of institutional capacity, the procurement of 
hydrometeorological equipment to strengthen information collection and 
water use monitoring.

Part A shall be financed by ADB; Part B shall be financed by JFPR; and Part C shall be 
financed by HLTF, all In accordance with the terms and conditions of this Loan Agreement, the 
JFPR Grant Agreement, and the HLTF Grant Agreement.



10

Schedule 1

3. The Project shall include the provision of consulting services for detailed
engineering design, construction supervision, and implementation support, including the 
provision of training.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled .to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Schedule's

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement, in connection with the Consulting Services for 
detailed design, construction supervision and Implementation support to the Project; Goods 
and Works; and provision of training, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the 
Loan amount,



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal from 

the Loan Account
Category

1 Civil Works 88,350,000 87.5% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Goods 1,150,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

. 3 Consulting Services 
and Training 6,000,000

83% of total expenditure 
claimed

4 Recurrent Cost - Project Management 1,280,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Interest Charge 3,220,000 100% of amounts due
TOTAL 100,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree. Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines,'as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement oJ Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services

4. Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services may also be procured under Parts
A and C of the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding;

(c) Shopping; and

(d) Community Participation in Procurement.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of-any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrowers national competitive 
bidding procedures are .consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and1 ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



17

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works
contracts for command area development, watershed management, farmers managed small 
private irrigation systems and farm irrigation systems improvement, and high value agriculture 
as may be provided .in, and in accordance with the agreed procedures set out in, the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until Balochistan has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, from 
the relevant environment authority of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB- 
the final LARP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained 
ADB's clearance of such LARP.

Consulting Services

10. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

11, The Borrower shall recruit the Individual consultants for the Siri Toi Dam panel
of experts in, accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts, for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate of infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



18

Schedule 4

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14, Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan,

15. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB's prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of 1 month or more, or which is likely to require an extension 
of the Loan Closing Date or the Grant Closing Date (as indicated in the 
Grant Agreements); and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 

. change under such contract).

16. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower’as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 month after the receipt of the required 
document.

17. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within 1 month following amendment of 
the contract.



19

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and Balochistan shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after the approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM, on the one hand, and this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreements or the Project Agreement, on the other, the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement, the Grant Agreements and the Project Agreement shall prevail. As more 
particularly described in the PAM, Balochistan shall implement the Project through ID and ACD 
and their respective responsibilities shall be as set out in the PAM.

2. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, (i) ID will appoint and engage a financial 
management specialist for the Project management office in ID; and (II) each of iD and ACD 
will adopt a financial management manual for the Project with detailed procedures on 
budgeting and planning, funds withdrawal and management, bank account management, 
expenditure management, accounting and bookkeeping, financial reporting, and fixed asset 
management, as may be acceptable to ADB.

3. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that ID and ACD
will consult ADB regarding all significant matters related to the management and 
implementation of the Project, including the selection, appointment or change of the Project 
Director at the Project management office in ID or the Deputy Project Director at the Project 
implementation office in ACD to ensure continuity, transparency, and efficiency in the 
management of the Project.

Environment

4. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities comply with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan relating to environment, health, and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the ElAs, I EEs and EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

5. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all land and all
rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities 
are made available to each Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under 
the relevant Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
Balochistan relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the LARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the relevant LARP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards



20

Schedule 5

Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall also ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all 
land acquisition and resettlement activities will comply with the specific Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards arrangements and requirements set out in the PAM. For the 
avoidance of doubt, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no land 
is acquired, for the purposes of the Project or any Subproject, under the emergency acquisition 
provisions of the Borrower's Land Acquisition Act (1894), as amended from time to time.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or any LARP, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and all Subprojects do not have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the 
Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that the Project or any Subproject does have any 
such impact, the Borrower shall take and cause Balochistan to take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project or the Subproject, as the case may be, complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and with the Safeguard Policy Statement.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available or cause Balochistan to make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant EIA or iEE (as the case may be), EMP and LARP 
(to the extent they concern impacts, on affected people during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set out in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any



21

Schedule 5

Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or I EE (as the 
case.may be), EMP or LARP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

. (e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following or cause Balochistan to do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB during the 
construction of the Project and the Subprojects and until their 
completion, and, thereafter, submit annual reports to ADB during their 
operation, and disclose the relevant information from such reports to 
affected persons promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any 
Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or IEE (as the 
case may be), EMP or LARP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than the date that is 3 months from and after the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement, engage qualified and experienced external 
experts or qualified NGOs under a selection process and terms of 
reference acceptable to ADB to verify information produced through the 
Project monitoring process, and facilitate the carrying out of any 
verification activities by such external experts;

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or LARP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. ■ The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no proceeds
of the Loan or Grants are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the core labor
standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan are 



22

Schedule 5

complied with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include or cause Balochistan 
to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under 
the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the applicable 
labor law and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining ; and (f) disseminate,, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including H1V/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the 
Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area and Subproject 
areas, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor or cause Balochistan to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for the implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on the 
Implementation of the GAP, including progress towards achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) at least 30% of all consultations held during the design and 
construction phase of each Subproject are held with women groups; (ii) at least 30% of all 
Subprojects have facilities for increased access by women to water for domestic use, for 
instance washing facilities and water collection points; (iii) at least 200 women and girls are 
trained in kitchen gardening skills; (iv) at least 250 women are trained for income-generating 
high-value agri-businesses; and (v) at least 22 women-led small-scale income-generating agri­
businesses are launched.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to make available all counterpart funds
required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of 
funds or cost overrun, through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable 
funds in a timely manner. In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to 
Balochistan and ensure that Balochistan has sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from 
any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract under the Project

Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the selection
of sites for the feasibility study of potential subprojects, and the selection of sites for the 
implementation of Subprojects, will be undertaken in accordance with such criteria and 
procedures as may be agreed upon between Balochistan and ADB. The Borrower shall cause 
Balochistan to select all Subprojects in accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in 
the PAM.



23

Schedule 5

17. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no Subproject
will involve, and no proceeds of the Loan or the Grants will be used to support, groundwater 
extraction by deep tubewells, turbine pumps, or tapping of karezes.

18. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, for each
Subproject, the local communities in the Subproject area will be fully involved in the planning, 
design, implementation and maintenance of the Subproject and related initiatives in the areas 
of integrated water resources management, command area development, and agricultural 
support services. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that both male 
and female members of the local communities will be consulted and involved.

19. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and each Subproject will be implemented in accordance with applicable design and technical 
specifications and construction norms satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, 
quality control and contract management shall be performed in accordance with international 
and national standards.

20. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, ID will appoint an independent dam 
safety panel of eminent national engineers which will review the detailed design of proposed 
subprojects involving the construction of dams, oversee dam construction, and confirm to ADB 
that the design and construction of the dams meet international safety standards.

21. (a) The Borrower shall ensure and . cause Balochistan to ensure that all
Project and Subproject facilities will be operated and maintained, in an effective and 
sustainable manner, in accordance with the applicable laws, regulations and standards of the 
Borrower and Balochistan and, in other respects not covered by such laws, regulations and 
standards, in accordance with best international industry practice.

(b) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to develop, approve and adopt 
an operation and maintenance plan, including an annual budget, for all Works to be 
constructed, improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the 
Project, including the water resources information system to be established with assistance 
from the Project, prior to their completion.

(c) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to ensure that budgetary and 
other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as necessary and appropriate for 
the operation and maintenance of the Project and Subproject facilities, and, at any given time, 
the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall not be less than the total sum required, 
at that time, to cover and defray the operation and maintenance expenditures indicated in the 
then current annual budget referenced in sub-paragraph (b).

(d) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to review its irrigation tariff policy 
and prepare draft reforms for the policy, which include the Introduction of irrigation tariffs for 
small irrigation systems, on or before 31 December 2020.

(e) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to timely and promptly prepare 
operation and maintenance manuals and provide operation and maintenance training to the 
farmer communities and organizations that will assume the operation and maintenance of the 



24

Schedule 5

small irrigation systems and on-farm irrigation facilities that will be constructed, Improved, 
upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the Project.

Security

22. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure (through the
political administration of the relevant local governments in the Project area and Subproject 
areas) that adequate security is provided for the smooth and uninterrupted implementation of 
the Project and the Subprojects. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan .to ensure 
that (i) all Works contracts under the Project include a security plan to ensure the safety of 
Project contractors’ personnel and consultants, and each such security plan allocates sufficient 
budget under the relevant Works contract or through Balochistan’s counterpart funding; and 
(ii) all relevant permits are issued and all access and other necessary requirements are 
provided so that all security plans will be successfully implemented.

Governance and Anti corrupt! on

23. The Borrower and Balochistan shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

24. The Borrower and Balochistan shall' ensure that anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and Implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

25. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to provide updated information on the
Project on its website, including information on performance, business opportunities, bidding 
process and guidelines, outcorhe of biddings, and summary progress reports.



























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3877-CAM: Irrigated Agricuture Improvement Project 


LOAN NUMBER 3877-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

{Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 DECEMBER 2019

CAM 51159



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 December 2019 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower11) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("ADB Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a grant in the amount of two million 
one hundred and sixty thousand Dollars ($2,160,000) from ADB's Special Funds resources to 
assist in financing a part of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("HLTF Grant Agreement "), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the High-Level 
Technology Fund ("HLTF’) in the amount equivalent to one million and six hundred thousand 
Dollars ($1,600,000) for the purpose of cofinancing certain activities under the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows;

ARTICLE I 

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations’1), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(b) “Data Center" means the National Water Resources Data Management 
Center to be established in MOWRAM, as further described in the PAM;



2

(c) “EIA" means the environmental impact assessment for the Stung Chinit 
South Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "EMP"' means the environmental management plan for each Subproject, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case 
may be;

(e) 'Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) "FWUC1" means farmer water user communities;

(g) J'GAPJ" means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower, and cleared 
by ADB;

(h) ' Goods1’ means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(I) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

0) "IBBA” means the Important Bird and Biodiversity Area, as more fully 
described in the PAM;

(k) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Subprojects 
other that Stung Chinit South Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(I) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) "Kam pi ng Pouy Subproject” means a subproject located in Battambang
province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and 
the PAM;

(n) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) "MOWRAM" means the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology 
of the Borrower or any successor thereto;

(p) "Nonconsulting Services’" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

(q) "O&M" means operation and maintenance;

(r) PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 7 
October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the Procurement Manual under the 
standard operating procedures prepared by the Borrower and endorsed 
by ADB, which sets forth the procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(t) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
7 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB 
(which include the Standard Operating Procedures and the 
Procurement Manual as updated from time to time);

(u) 'Procurement Policy* means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

{v) ^Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services {2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency1’ for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of the Loan Regulations means MOWRAM or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying cut of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means ail facilities incorporating or using Goods or 
Works;

(y) “RP’1 means the resettlement plan for the Kamping Pouy Subproject,
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the BMP and the RP, including 
any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) ’Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS* means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(cc) "SRP” means sustainable rice platform, a multi-stakeholder platform 
established by the United Nations Environment Program and the 
International Rice Research Institute in December 2011;



4

{dd) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the Standard Operating 
Procedures of the Borrower (sub-decree no. 74 ANK.BK dated 22 May 
2012, as amended from time to time) providing the procedures 
applicable to all externally financed projects and programs;

(ee) "Stung Chinit South Subproject" means the subproject located in 
Kampong Thom province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(ff) ‘ Subproject' means a subproject under the Project, as further described
in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(gg) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract; and

(hh) WRIS” means the water resources information system to be developed 
under the Project, as further described in the PAM.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2 01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADBJs
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventeen million Dollars 
($117,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02 The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 June and 1 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03{a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Bo Tower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) pre pa re annual financial 
statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; 
(iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, In accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of AD B’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADBJs website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon AD B’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8 01(m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the ADB Grant Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the events 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

{a) the ADB Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to 



7

their effectiveness (other then a condition requiring the effectiveness of 
this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02 The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9 02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the ADB Grant Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement shall have 
each been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and are legally 
binding in accordance with their terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+355 23 427-798
+855 23 438-424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers.

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF

By_________
H.E. DR. A^N PORNMONIROTH

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SUNNIYA DURRANI-JAMAL
Country Director 

Cambodia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1, The objective of the Project is to enhance water and agriculture productivity in
the provinces of Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Thom and Takeo {“Project Areas11).

2. The Project shall comprise the following:

Component 1: Efficiency and climate resilience of irrigation systems 
enhanced - this includes the modernization and climate-proofing of four 
irrigation Subprojects in each of the Project Areas through (a) remodeling and 
improving reservoir embankment, pumping stations, canals and drains as well 
as appurtenant structures; (b) improving water sharing arrangements between 
linked systems; (c) strengthening existing FWUCs and forming additional 
FWUCs to improve the sustain ability of the operations and maintenance 
scheme; (d) piloting an irrigation asset management information system to 
improve operations and maintenance budgeting and procedures; and (e) 
formulating an SRP for the Stung Chinit South Subproject. The Subprojects to 
be financed under this Component comprise:

(a) Kamping Pouy Subproject in Battambang province;

(b) Prek Po Subproject in Kampong Cham province;

(c) Stung Chinit South Subproject in Kampong Thom province; and

(d) Canal 15 Subproject in Takec Province.

Component 2: Water resources management improved - this includes (a) 
installing hydromet stations; (b) capacity training for government staff, including 
MOWRAM and fts provincial departments, and FWUCs; (c) establishing a Data 
Center; and (d) developing a WRIS.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.





Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to ‘'Category1' in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each Hem of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed in the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for 

ADB 
Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
Account

1 Works (Stung Chinit South 
Subproject)

31,100,000 93.5% of total expenditure claimed

2 Works (Other Subprojects) 68,070,000 100% of total expenditures claimed

3 Consulting Services (the 
Data Center)

580,000 26.6% of total expenditures claimed*

4 Consulting Services 
(Others)

6,550,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5 Goods 7,450.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

a
Capacity building, 
incremental operating 
costs

3,250,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 117,000,000
'AALaL-a / ■. ____ ____________ _^1.'■. ■■!



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project is implemented
in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change 
to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
MOWRAM, and ADB, In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in ths Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
AD B’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts which
involves environmental impacts until MOWRAM has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or the I EE, as the case may be, 
from the Borrower’s relevant authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

4. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts for a
Subproject involving involuntary resettlement impacts until the Borrower has prepared and 



15

Schedule 4

submitted to ADB the final RP based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADBs 
clearance of such RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall cause MOW RAM to ensure that the preparation, design,
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EIA or the 1EE, as the case may be, the EMP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Reports

6. For the Stung Chinit South Subproject, the Borrower shall, and shall cause
MOWRAM to, ensure that during and after the project implementation period, it (a) will not 
extend or permit the extension of any canals into the IBBA; and (b) will not permit any third 
party pumping from command area canals.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that all land and ail rights-of-
way required for the Kamping Pouy Subproject and the Project facilities to be developed under 
the Kamping Pouy Subproject are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the RP based on all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition 
and involuntary resettlement; (b) the provisions of SPS relating to Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Reports.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the RP, the Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Kamping Pouy Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. If voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement is required, the Borrower
shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that such voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement 
shall be carried out in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
SPS.

Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement for Concerned Subprojects

10. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project does not have
any indigenous peoples impacts and the Subprojects other than the Kamping Pouy Subproject 
do not have any involuntary resettlement impacts, both within the meaning of the SPS. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 



16

Schedule 4

to ensure that the Project or any concerned Subproject complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

11. The Borrower shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism
acceptable to ADB is established at the project management unit in accordance with the 
provisions of the EIA, EMP and RP, within the timeframes specified in the relevant EIA, IEE, 
EMP and RP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. T he Bo rro wer shall make availa ble necessa ry bu d g eta ry a n d h uma n resou rces
to fully implement any EMP and RP

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
or the IEE, the EMP and the RP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP, and 
the RP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Bo Tower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB within one 
month after the reporting period at the end of each half of the calendar 
year, and disclose relevant information from such reports to affected 
persons promptly upon submission,

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP and RP, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan in accordance with the 
SPS;



17

Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP and the RP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach; and

(d) prior to the commencement of the Works, prepare and submit to ADB a 
handover letter which certifies that all activities, measures and 
requirements set forth in the RP are duly accomplished.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

16. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the core labor standards
and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and 
contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: 
(a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
tn respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

17, The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 16 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

18. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and(d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB using ADB's template.

Counterpart Support

19. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project 
Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Goods, Works, 
Goods and Services contract.



18

Schedule 4

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

20. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project facilities are
operated and maintained appropriately and in accordance with the standards and 
requirements prescribed by the applicable taws and regulations of the Borrower, and that 
adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such operation and 
maintenance.

Water Resources Management Scholarship. Internship, Training and Mentoring Program

21. The Borrower shall ensure compliance with the candidates’ selection criteria for
the water resources management program, as further specified in the PAM.

Governance and Anticornuption

22. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1993, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directlyr or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23, The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.




































































51242-002: Resilient Community Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3864-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Resilient Community Development Project)

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED £

MYA51242



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated £ between THE
REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
(“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in the amount often million Dollars ($10,000,000) (“ADF Grant”) for 
the purposes of the Resilient Community Development Project (“Project”), described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Japan Fund 
for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”) in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) (the “JFPR 
Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain expenditures under the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and ADB 
(“EU Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Asia Investment 
Facility of the European Union (EU), in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred fifty 
thousand Euros (€24,250,000) (“EU Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain 
expenditures under the Project;

(D) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein; and

(F) the Project will be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, 
and Irrigation (“MOALI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to MOALI the 
proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CDR” means climate and disaster risk;

(b) “Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “CPF” means the community participation framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(d) “DRD” means the Borrower’s Department of Rural Development within 
MOALI or any successor thereto;

(e) “EARF” means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project which includes the ECOP and a generic environmental 
management plan, including any updates thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(f) “ECOP” means environmental codes of practice for a Subproject with 
minimum or minor impacts;

(g) “EGDF” means the ethnic group development framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(h) “EGDP” means an ethnic group development plan for a Subproject, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EGDF;

(i) “EIA or IEE Type Project” means a project determined by the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation to have adverse 
impacts as per categorization criteria defined in Annex 1 of the 
Notification No. 616/2015 on environmental impact assessment 
procedure of the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar;

(j) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto;

(k) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter Vt Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(I) “GESIAP” means the gender equity and social inclusion action plan 
prepared for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(m) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(n) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “MOALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation;

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) “PIU” means a project implementation unit established at the township 
cluster level;

(t) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(u) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(v) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency” means the MOALI or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the overall supervision and 
execution of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be provided, constructed, 
operated, upgraded and maintained under the Project;

(y) Project Implementing Agency” means the DRD or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the day-to-day 
implementation of the Project;

V



4

(z) “Project Operations Manual” means the project operations manual, 
comprising sub-manuals (including sub-manuals on resilient 
communities infrastructure, resilient community livelihoods, community 
finance and procurement, implementing mechanism and project 
monitoring and evaluation), to guide the implementation of the 
Subprojects, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(aa) “Project Townships and Villages” means the townships and villages and
such other regions of the Borrower which may from time to time be 
designated as Project Townships and Villages by agreement between 
the Borrower and ADB;

(bb) Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(cc) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, 
EGDF and EGDP (as applicable), including any corrective and 
preventative actions;

(dd) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(ee) “Subproject” means a subproject as described in Output 1 and Output 2 
which is to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and which meets 
the selection and eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 
below and in the PAM;

(ff) “Subproject facilities” means, in respect of a Subproject, the equipment 
to be provided and the facilities to be installed, constructed, operated, 
upgraded and maintained under that Subproject;

(gg) “VDP” means a village development plan;

(hh) “VDP Process” means a VDP process led by the Project Implementing 
Agency which starts at the village level, then aggregates at village tract 
level, and informs the township level and which takes into account the 
climate risk and vulnerability assessments and market opportunity 
assessment in the process of prioritization of infrastructure and 
livelihood investments;

(ii) “Village Tract” means a group of villages in a contiguous territory;

(jj) “VTDSC” means a village tract development support committee 
responsible for community planning process and subproject cycle at the 
village tract level; and

(kk) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 



5

related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred eighty-five million Dollars 
($185,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



6

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. (a) Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(i) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(ii) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), items to be procured may also be 
procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this'Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual consolidated financial statements for 
the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



7

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligation under the 
ADF Grant Agreement, JFPR Grant Agreement or EU Grant Agreement; 
and

(b) the ADF Grant, JFPR Grant or the EU Grant shall have become liable 
for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a 



8

condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have 
been fulfilled; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon thd 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Borrower’s Union Minister or Deputy Minister of 
Planning and Finance is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of 
Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410198



9

For ADB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 8636-2444.



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

SI SI PYONE 
Director General 

Treasury Department 
Ministry of Planning, Finance 

and Industry

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
NEWIN SINSIRI
Country Director 

Myanmar Resident Mission



11

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to improve the standard of living and resilience
of selected communities.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Output 1: development of climate and disaster resilient community 
infrastructure subprojects, such as village access or farm roads, small 
bridges, water supply, electric grid connections and multipurpose 
centers, identified through the VDP process, based on selection criteria 
and funded through block grants;

(b) Output 2: development of resilient livelihood activities for poor men and 
women in the lowest four deciles of poor and vulnerable households in 
their villages, through livelihood subprojects identified through the VDP 
process, funded through block grants, such as new or improved climate­
smart agriculture, livestock, fisheries activities, among others; provision 
of access to vocational training particular for women and youth; and 
provision of training to poor households above the lowest four deciles to 
adapt to CDR; and

(c) Output 3: strengthening of the institutional and organizational capacity 
of communities and government by further developing their VDP 
process and building their capacity to assist villagers, through the 
formation of a DRD training unit along with associated training curricula 
in the areas of community-based planning, resilience building, gender, 
leadership and livelihood development, among others; and knowledge 
centers to promote CDR in agriculture, livestock, fishery and rural 
development.

3. The Project includes a disaster contingency feature. In the event of a disaster
affecting an entire township, and upon the request of the Project Executing Agency and 
approval by ADB, funds from the subsequent cycle of community subproject implementation 
may be advanced for reconstruction of the damaged infrastructure and recovery of livelihoods. 
The selection of infrastructure and livelihood subprojects will follow similar participatory 
processes and criteria as set out in Outputs 1 and 2 described above and detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.


SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
($)

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account

1 Community investment funds (other townships) 154,293,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Implementation support 23,341,000 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3
Facilitation and capacity 
building (other 
townships)

7,366,000 20.9% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 185,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
PIU and the township DRD offices involved in implementing the project are equipped with 
appropriately skilled staff, reasonable office space, equipment, and adequate financial 
resources required for implementation of the project throughout Project implementation.

Project Operations Manual

3. Not later than 6 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower, through the
Project Executing Agency, shall furnish to ADB the fully revised Project Operations Manual 
acceptable to ADB. The Borrower shall not amend, delete, suspend, or waive any part of the 
Project Operations Manual without the prior written approval of ADB.

Design and Construction Quality Management

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
Works under the Project are designed and constructed in accordance with all relevant national 
and local design codes and standards of the Borrower and that the construction supervision, 
quality control, contract management, and completion inspection and acceptance procedures 
will be in accordance with all applicable national laws and municipal and local regulations of 
the Borrower and the PAM.

Selection of Project Locations

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
selection of target Project locations is based on the following criteria, as set forth in detail in 
the PAM: (a) villages are poor and vulnerable to climate and disasters, based on objective 
information and data; and (b) villages have no ongoing or planned community development 
program or project. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
target Project locations will not be selected without ADB’s approval.

Subproject Selection and Eligibility Criteria

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
subproject meets the selection and eligibility criteria as set forth in detail in the PAM, including:

(a) not involve any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities attached hereto as Schedule 5 and the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent 



17
Schedule 4

not duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
list attached hereto as Schedule 5;

(b) not involve any subproject categorized as Category A for Environment, 
Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples under the SPS;

(c) not involve any subproject categorized as EIA Type Project or IEE Type 
Project under the Government of Myanmar Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015); and

(d) is a community development subproject that is technically, financially 
and environmentally viable, and socially and economically justified.

Block Grants Transfers for Subprojects

7. Prior to the release of a block grant from DRD to a VTDSC account, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the following conditions are 
met:

(a) all village development support committees (VDSCs) in the village tract 
and the VTDSC have been established and staffed as required;

(b) the VTDSCs’ finance sub-committee has been set up and trained;

(c) the VTDSC has opened a bank account at a local bank (condition
applicable for the first disbursement only); and

(d) the VTDSC has signed a block grant agreement for the current cycle 
with the township DRD office.

8. The VTDSC shall submit a request for disbursement to the DRD union office
through the DRD township office, which the DRD township office signs, confirming all 
conditions above have been fulfilled.

Counterpart Support

9. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds necessary for the Project is
provided on a timely basis. The Borrower shall ensure that additional counterpart funds are 
available to cover any funding shortfalls that may occur. In addition to the foregoing, the 
Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its 
liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance (“O&M”) of Subprojects

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
Subproject involving infrastructure has an O&M plan in place and takes into account the O&M 
costs. The processes for planning and implementing O&M activities shall include: 
(a) calculation of estimated costs and the allocation of responsibilities between the village and 
the DRD; (b) annual plan for the collection user/beneficiary contributions for O&M; (c) O&M 



18
Schedule 4

monthly schedule; (d) six-month O&M status report indicating the status of the work items in 
the last 6 months; and (e) routine inspections and maintenance.

Procurement

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations; and

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

12. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation has 
granted the final approval of the EARF; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from any ECOP 
and EMP into the Works contract.

13. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves voluntary land donation, until the Borrower has met the requirements described in the 
CPF.

14. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on ethnic groups, until the Borrower has met the requirements in the EGDF.

Environment

15. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 



19
Schedule 4

Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EARF, EMP or ECOP, as applicable, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under
the SPS or categorized as lEE or EIA Type Project under the Borrower’s Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015) is financed under the Project.

17. The Borrower shall ensure that each Subproject requiring an EMP under
section 24 of the Borrower’s Environmental Impact Assessment Procedure (2015) secures any 
required environmental approval by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation.

Land Acquisition

18. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject which has any involuntary
resettlement impacts, within the meaning of the SPS, shall be financed under the Project.

19. In the case of voluntary land donation for a Subproject, the Borrower, through
the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that: (a) eminent domain or other powers of the 
Borrower is not involved in the acquisition, (b) such voluntary land donation(s) are implemented 
in accordance with the CPF, (c) there was informed consent and power of choice of affected 
persons through a prior and informed consultation(s) with them, and (d) such voluntary 
donation(s) do not severely affect the living standards of the affected persons but benefit them 
directly.

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all land
and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor or 
villagers in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract.

21. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A or
Category B under the SPS is financed under theProject.

Indigenous Peoples

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EGDF and any subproject EGDP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure 
that no Subproject categorized as Category A or Category B resulting in negative impacts 
on ethnic groups as defined under the SPS is financed under the Project For the 
avoidance of doubt, a Subproject resulting in Category B due to positive impacts on ethnic 
groups as defined under the SPS shall be permitted to be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

23. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, EGDF and EGDP, as applicable.



20
Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

24. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors or 
villagers to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor or villager set forth 
in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF and the EGDF and 
any subproject EGDP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected 
people during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EGDF and any subproject EGDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF 
and the EGDF and any subproject EGDF, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EMGF and any subproject EMGP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.



21
Schedule 4

Grievance Redress Mechanism

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that
(a) safeguard grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in 
accordance with provisions in the EARF, CPF, and EGDF, at PMU, within the timeframes 
specified in the relevant EARF, CPF, and EGDF, to consider safeguards related complaints; 
and (b) a grievance redress mechanism, acceptable to ADB and in accordance with the PAM, 
is established and functioning effectively to (i) review and document eligible complaints,of 
project stakeholders; (ii) proactively address grievances; (iii) provide the complainants with 
notice of the chosen mechanism/action; and (d) prepare periodic reports to summarize the 
number of complaints received and resolved, chosen actions, and final outcomes of the 
grievances and make these reports available to ADB. Eligible complaints will include (a) those 
related to the project, (b) any of the service providers, (c) any person responsible for carrying 
out the project, (d) complaints on misuse of funds and other irregularities, and (e) grievances 
due to any safeguards and gender issues.

Prohibited List of Investments

27. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities attached hereto and the list 
of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent not 
duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities list attached hereto.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

29. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 28 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

30. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
GESIAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the 
GESIAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GESIAP; and 
(d) progress on implementation of the GESIAP, including progress toward achieving key 
gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.



22
Schedule 4

Public Awareness

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall undertake public
awareness campaigns through information disclosure, education and consultation on the 
Project and its benefits, including but not limited to information related to the CPF, EGDF, 
EARF, and GESIAP.

Good Governance and Anti corruption

32. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Project Implementing
Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

33. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Project Implementing
Agency shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all 
bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and 
examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in ADB- 
financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Project 
Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agency or ADB is or becomes aware or has a 
reasonable suspicion that any member of any Project Implementing Agency, PMU or PIU has 
engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anti corruption Policy under or 
in connection with the Project or the Loan, the Project Implementing Agency will take such 
timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

34. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Project Executing Agency shall create a Project webpage within 2 months 
of the Effective Date, accessible by the general public, to disclose various information 
concerning the Project including general information about the Project, public procurement 
related to the Project, Project progress and contact details in English and Myanmar. The 
website shall also provide a link to ADB’s Integrity Unit 
(http://www.adb.org/lntegrity/complaint.asp) for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations 
of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the 
website shall include information on, among others, the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract awarded, 
and the list of goods/services, including consulting services, procured. The Project Executing 
Agency shall ensure that the Project Implementing Agency permits any bidder to request an 
explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project Executing Agency shall respond 
within 20 working days. The webpage will be updated within three weeks after (a) each award 
of contract, and (b) each submission of the semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Report to ADB. 
In addition to the web-based disclosure, stakeholders, which include civil society and non­
governmental organizations, shall be provided by the Borrower with detailed information on 
procurement on public notice boards in their respective areas.



23

SCHEDULE 5

Prohibited investment Activities List

1. Production or activities involving harmful Or exploitative forms of forced labor or
child labor;

2. Production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under the laws
of Myanmar or regulations or international conventions and agreements or subject to 
international phaseouts or bans, such as (a) pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and herbicides, 
(b) ozone-depleting substances, (c) polychlorinated biphenyls and other hazardous chemicals, 
(d) wildlife or wildlife products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, and (e) transboundary trade in waste or waste 
products;

3. Production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary
materials;

4. Production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine;

5. Production of or trade in tobacco;

6. Gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises;

7. Production of or trade in radioactive materials, including nuclear reactors and
components thereof;

8. Production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers;

9. Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in
primary tropical moist forests or old-growth forests;

10. Marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing
and fine mesh net fishing, harmful to vulnerable and protected species in large numbers and 
damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats;

11. Road construction into protected areas;

12. Political and religious activities;

13. Development of new or expansion of existing settlements in critical habitats;

14. Activities that will require any compulsory acquisition of land or involuntary
resettlement; and

15. Activities that will have a negative impact on ethnic groups.




































































52256-001: Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program


LOAN NUMBER 3854-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED .2^ .2^$

KGZ 52256



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated $&£#?&&& Z0& between KYRGYZ 

REPUBLIC ("Borrowed) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”),

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
prog ram described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement (the ‘’Program");

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (:,ADF Grant 
Agreement'), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's Special Funds 
resources in an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars ($13700,000) 
(J'ADF Grant”) for the purpose of the Program;

(C) the Program will be carried out by DDWSSD (as defined hereinafter} as 
executing agency and ARIS (as defined hereinafter) as implementing agency; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Program Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and ARIS;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE [

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Sec tion 1.01. All the provisions of ADB?s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (v) is delated and the following is substituted therefor:

"Program" means the program for which ADB has agreed to 
make the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as such 
description may be amended from time to time by agreement 
between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) The term "Project?1 wherever It appears in the Loan Regulations shall be 
substituted by the term ‘'Program".

(c) Section 2.01 (x) Is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:



2

''Program Executing Agency" means the entity responsible for 
the carrying out of the Program as specified in the Loan 
Agree m ent;

(d) The term "Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations shall be' substituted by the term ^Program Executing 
Agency".

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ADB's Results-Based Lending Policy” means ADB's policy set out in 
the R-Paper on Piloting Results-Based Lending for Programs approved 
by ADB on 6 March 2013;

(b) "Antlcorruption Guidelines" means ADB's Guidelines to Prevent or 
Mitigate Fraud, Corruption and Other Prohibited Activities in Results- 
Based Lending for Programs as set forth in Appendix 7 to ADB's 
Results-Based Lending Policy;

(o) "ARIS" means the Community Development and investment Agency of 
the Kyrgyz Republic established for the purpose of implementing the 
Borrower's Investment programs;

(d) "DDWSSDH means the Department of Drnking Water Supply and 
Sewerage Development under the State Agency for Water Resources;

(e) "Deposit Account" means the account referred to in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

(f) “DLI" means each disbursement-linked indicator as set forth in the OLI 
Matrix;

{g) “DLI Matrix" means the DLI matrix for the Program as set forth in 
Attachment 2 of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as updated from 
time to time by the Borrower and ADB:

(h) £!DLI Verification Protocol” means the protocol for verifying the 
Borrowers achievement of each DLI, as set forth in the PID:

(i) "Eligible Expenditures" means the eligible expenditures referred to in 
paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(j) "Environmental Safeguards” means the objectives and policy principles 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the BPS;

(k) "FY” means the fiscal year of the Borrower, which runs from 1 January 
to 31 December of each year;



3

(I) "High-Value Contracts" means (i) procurement of works, turnkey and 
supply and installation contracts that cost S5 million equivalent or more 
per contract; (ii) procurement of goods contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or mors per contract; (iii) information technology or non­
consulting services contracts that cost $5 million equivalent or more per 
contract; and (iv) consulting services contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or more per contract;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth in Chapter V. Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth In Chapter V, Appendix 2. and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) "Naryn" means Naryn province {oblast);

(q) TAP" means the program action plan for the Program dated 
13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower and 
ADB;

(r) "PID’1 means the program impiementation document for the Program 
dated 13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower 
and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the procurement manual developed by 
ARIS which sets out the procurement processes forth© Program in line 
with international best practices and acceptable to ADB;

(t) "Program Actions" means the actions set out in the PAP:

(u) "Program Agreement7' means the program agreement of even date
herewith among ADB, Program Executing Agency and Program 
implementing Agency, as such agreement may be amended from time 
to time;

(v) ^Program Completion Date" means the date set out in paragraph 4 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement or such other date as the Borrower 
and ADB may agree;

(w) "Program Executing Agency” means the DDWSSD or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible \>r the overall 
monitoring of the results of the Program;

(x) ‘'Program implementing Agency" means ARIS or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the implementation of the 
Program;



4

(y) "SDWSSSS” means the Borrower's Strategy for Development of Water 
Supply and Sewerage Systems in Settlements of the Kyrgyz Republic 
until 2026, which is supported by the Program;

(z) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(aa) "Table" means the table on the allocation and withdrawal of Loan 
proceeds set forth in Attachment 1 of Schedule 3 to this Loan 
Agreement; and

(bb) "WSU:? means a water supplies and utilities services entity established 
and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, collectively 
“WSUs”.

ARTICLE 11

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($13,700,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
'ate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03, The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of ths principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shah' be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall apply the proceeds of the Loan to the 
financing of expenditures on the Program in accordance with the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3. 02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2028 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Program, the Borrower shall 
perform, or cause to be performed, alf obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreement and the Program Agreement

Section 4. 02. As part of the reports and information referred to in 
Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB (a) quarterly reports on the implementation of the Program, including the accomplishment 
of the DLls, the carrying out of the Program Actions and the Eligible Expenditures; and (b) as 
ADB shall reasonably request, additional Information in connection with the reports described 
in subsection (a) hereinabove and other information on Program implementation.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Program and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and



6

(b) the Program Implementing Agency shah have failed to perform any of 
its obligations under the Program Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, ar.d 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and ad conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled: and

(b) the Program Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to rts effectiveness 
(other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included h the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and rs legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the Program Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Program Executing Agency and Program 
Implementing Agency, and is legally binding upon the Program 
Executing Agency and Program Implementing Agency in accordance 
with its terms.

Section 6,03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement forth© purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. Ths Minister of Finance of We Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses ar© specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the.Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erkindik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2484.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1 . The objective of the Program is to support SDWSSSS's Implementation through
inclusive and reliable access to safe water supply and improved sanitation for rural 
communities in Naryn ob/asf

2 Part 1; Expanding water supply and sanitation infrastructure and piloting
of sanitation solutions comprising the following:

(a) safe water sources, water storage, and treatment and disinfection 
systems;

(b) distribution networks for the target population of approximately 64,000;

(c) gender-sensitive safe water and sanitation facilities In selected village 
kindergartens; schools and health facilities; and

(d) piloting non-networked household sanitation solutions.

3. Part 2: Strengthening institutional capacities for enhanced sustainability
in the rural water supply and sanitation sector comprising the following:

(a) establishing and strengthening WSUs with at least 20% female 
participation across all WSUs by 2025 and 40% female participation in 
WSU-related trainings and public consultations:

(b) delivering financial management training to further enhance ‘nternal 
control processes and procedures for Program Implementing Agency 
and WSUs;

(c) adopting and applying a procurement manual and a multi-year 
procurement action plan: and

(d) developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation framework to 
improve knowledge of the asset inventory and data management.

4. The Program is expected to be completed by 31 December 2027.





12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

f. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed rn accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Deposit Account

2. Prior to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the Loan
Account, the Borrower shall nominate an account established at a commercial bank, as the 
Deposit Account for the Program into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be 
deposited.

3. The Borrower shall maintain separate records in respect of the Deposit Account
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB.

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

4. (a) The Table sets out the Loan amounts allocated for withdrawal in respect
of a DLI upon the Borrowers achievement of the corresponding DLI targets as set out in the 
DLI Matrix. The years set out In the Table are Indicative. They do not restrict withdrawal on 
account of any DLI targets achieved whether ahead of, or later than, the indicated year, 
provided that such DLI targets are achieved on or before the Program Completion Date.

(b) ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate the Loan amounts set 
out in the Table within the same DLI or from one DLI to any other DLI.

5. Prior to submitting any application for withdrawal from the Loan Account in
respect of a DLI, the Borrower shall submit to ADB in accordance with the DLI Verification 
Protocol satisfactory evidence showing that: (a) such DLI has been fully achieved; or (b) for a 
DLI for which partial disbursement is allowed (as specified in the DLI Matrix), such DLI has 
been achieved to the extent required for partial disbursement under the DLI Verification 
Protocol. Upon ADBJs confirmation that the DLI has been achieved in full or in part, the 
Borrower may submit to ADB an application for withdrawal of the corresponding Loan amount 
for such DLI.

Advance Financing and Financing for Prior Results

6. (a) Prior to the achievement of the DLls. the Borrower may withdraw from
the Loan Account an advance financing amount for the purposes of meeting the Program’s 
financing requirements and supporting the achievement of such DLls, provided that the 
outstanding advance financing amount shall not, at any time, exceed 25% of the Loan amount. 
ADB shall deduct the outstanding advance financing amount, or anyportlon thereof, from the 
Loan proceeds to be disbursed upon achievement of the DLls,



13
Schedule 3

(b) The Borrower may withdraw from the Loan Account for DLls achieved 
prior to the Effective Date but not earlier than 12 months before the date of this Loan 
Agreement, provided that the aggregate of such withdrawals for prior results shall not exceed 
20% of the Loan amount

(c) The aggregate of the outstanding advance financing amount and the 
amount withdrawn for financing for prior results under subparagraphs (a) and (b) hereinabove 
shall not. at any time, exceed 30% of the Loan amount

Reconciliation

7. If any DLl has not been achieved by the Program Completion Date, the
Borrower shall, within 6 months of the Program Completion Date, provide a refund to ADB for 
any outstanding advance financing amount or part thereof for such DLl.

8. If the total Eligible Expenditures amount to less than the Loan amount
withdrawn by the Borrower, the Borrower shall provide a refund to ADB for an amount equal 
to the extent of the shortfall within 6 months of the Program Completion Date.



14
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
{$)

Disbu^eme 
nt- Linked 
Indicators

____ 1P_U)

Total ADB 
Financing 
Allocation

Financing 
for Prior 
Results

•

FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FY2D25 FY2026

DL] 1 4,110,000.00 1,438,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00

DU 2 1,370,000.00 548,000.00 274,000.00 548,000.00

DLi 3 274,000.00 39,144.00 39.143.00 39,143.00 39,143.00 78,284.00 39,143.00

Dl.t 4 4,521,000.00 ■ 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00

DUS 685,000.00 171.250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00

DUG 685,000.00 411,000.00 39,142.86 39,142.88 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39.142.86

□ Li 7 685,000.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250,00 171,250.00

DUB 1,370,000.00 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714,29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.24

TOTAL 13.700,000.00 411,000.00 1,520,701.14 3,335,950.14 2.685,200.14 2,787,950.14 2,279,091.14 274,000.14 406,107.14



15
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

DLI MATRIX

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results 2020

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

DL11; By 2026, at
: least 64,000 people 

in the villages of 
Naryn oblast use 
potable water

0 population 
use water 
from 
disinfected 
sources, 
2019

Potable water 
supoly & 
distribution 
network for 
4,500 
population 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network, for 
19,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network far 
45,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network for 
64,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

DLI 2: By 2026, at 
least an additional 
13 village schools/ 
kindergartens and 
8 health facilities 
are served by 
improved gender- 
sensitive water and 
sanitation facilities

0 additional 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
and hearth 
facilities, 
2019

(ij GSWS 
facilities in 3 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
commissioned 
(ii) GSW8 
facilities in 3 
health 
facil'ties 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities in 7 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 5 
hearth 
facilities 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities fa 13 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 8 
health 
facilities 
(oumulsiive) 
commissioned

□LI 3: By 2025, 
detailed design of 
infrastructure is 
completed for 43 
villages

0 completed P redesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
13 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
23 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
28 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
33 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
38 villages

Predesign 
activities 
and detailed 
design 
completed fa 
43 villages

□E I 4: By 2024, 
infrastructure

Infrastructure 
inadequate

Preparation of 
bidding

(QSafe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(I) Safe water 
source, J



16
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
I

2025 2026

components for 
water supply and 
distribution 
networks are in 
place for at least 
64,000 population

or non­
existent

documents to 
conduct 
tender for 
construction 
works to cover 
at least 4,500 
population

disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
Of 4 500 
population

(ii) WEjter 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 4,500 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 19,000 
population
(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 19.000 
population

disinfection, 
and storage

I system
I completed to 

cover needs 
of 45,000 
population
(ji) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 45,000 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 64,000 
population

(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 64,000 
population

DU 5: By 2023, 
non-networked, 
household 
sanitation solutions 
have been piloted 
in at least 2 villages 
with minimum 
combined total of 
660 households

Sanitation 
solutions not 
piloted

Feasibility 
study 
completed for 
pilot approach

List of target 
villages and 
households 
identified.

Detailed 
designs 
developed

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
250 
households

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
660 
households 
(cumulative)

□ t.l 6: Procurement 
manual developed 
and implemented 
for the RBL 
program from 2020

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS1 
procurement 
and contract 
management 
systems

Procurement 
manual and
MYP 
developed

2020 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2021 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2022 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2023 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2024 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2025 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2026 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

DLI 7: By 2026, 
100% of internal 
audit staff and

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS’s

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures i 
that at least I 
four internal |

J
ARIS 
ensures that 
st icast four



17

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and

Year

Prior 
Results 202D 2021

finance staff of 
ARIS are trained in 
internal audit and 
financial
management, 
respectively, by a 
nationally 
recognized institute

financial 
management 
system. The 
audit and 
financial 
management 
units have 3 
and 13 staff, 
respectively, 
without 
accreditation.

audit staff 
(female/msle) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

DLl 3: By 2026. 
WSUs fully 
operational and 
financially 
sustainable, with at 
least 20% female 
participation within 
WSUs, and at least 
40% female 
participation in 
WSU-related 
trainings and public 
consultations

No 
functioning 
structures for 
operations, 
maintenance, 
and 
management 
support

Scoping study 
conducted for 
jurisdiction, 
roles and 
responsibilities 
of raion and 
aiyl okmotu 
levels

(i) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 4,500 
population 
(ii) Tariff 
developed by 
aiyl okmotu 
tor 4,500 
population
(lit) “anff 
approved by 
aiyl kenesh 
for 4,500 
population



Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

audit staff 
(female/inafe) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

audit staff 
(female/male) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

I internal audit 
staff

: (female/male) 
' and finance
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively 
in audit and 
financial 
management

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2021 
(ir) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
19,000 
population
(Hi) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
for 19,000 
population.
(iv) Tariff 
approved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2022
(ir) Public 
ccnsLitt^inns 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
45,000 
population 
(ill) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 45,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 

_app roved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2023 (ii) 
Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% femaie 
participation, 
to cover 
64,000 
population 
(iti) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 54,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 
approved by _J

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(ii) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(li) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

s

f



18
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 f 2022
I

2023 2024 2025 2026

j aiy! kenesh 
i for 19,000 

population

aiyl kenesh 
for 45,000 
population

aiyl kenesh 
for 64,000 
population

ADB = Asian Development Bank, ARIS = Community Development and Investment Agency, BPM: Beneficiary Feedback Mechanism, DLl = 
disbursement-linked indicator, WSU = water supplies and utilities services entity established and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, 
MYP = Multi-Year Procurement Plan of Action.
Source; Asian Development Bank and Community Development and Investment Agency.



19

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Program

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program is implemented in accordance 
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PID. Any subsequent change to the PID shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADE. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PID and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency, ensure that the amount of Eligible Expenditures under the Program for 
any FY is equal to or exceeds the Loan proceeds withdrawn by the Borrower in the same FY. 
Such Eligible Expenditures are part of the expenditures Incurred under SDWSSSS, but they 
exclude any expenditures for (a) procurement of works, goods and services from countries 
which are not members of ADB; (b) procurement of works, goods and services from persons 
or entities debarred or suspended by ADB; (c) procurement involving High-Value Contracts; 
(d) any activities which are classified as category A for environmental impact under the SPS; 
and (e) any activities which are prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
EPS.

Independent Verification Agent

3. Within 240 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower, through DDWSSD, shall
have entered into an agreement with an independent verification agent, acceptable to ADB.

DLl Compliance and Program Dialogue

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all DLls achieved under the Program continue
to be complied with for the duration of SDWSSSS.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed of relevant discussions with other
multilateral or bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the implementation of 
SDWSSSS and shall provide ADB with an opportunity to comment on any resulting proposals. 
The Borrower shall give due consideration to ADB!s views before finalizing and implementing 
any such proposal.

Program Technical Aspects

6. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of technical requirements are implemented in a 
timely and efficient manner.



20
Schedule 4

Fiduciary

7. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of financial management and fiduciary are 
implemented in a timely and efficient manner.

Procurement

8. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of procurement are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Procurement Manual

9. The Borrower shall ensure that ARIS has the Procurement Manual in place for
institutional strengthening and improving procurement practices.

EhyLC°O.Tteritaj and Social Safeguards

10. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of environmental and social safeguards are 
implemented m a timely and efficient manner.

11. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that no construction or rehabilitation works under the Program involve significant 
adverse environmental impacts that may be classified as category A under the SPS. Prior to 
commencing any construction or rehabilitation works under the Program, the Borrower shall 
conduct, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to conduct, a screening to ensure that 
any works that may be classified as category A for environment impacts within the meaning of 
SPS are excluded from the Program.

12. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing
Agency to ensure, that before any activities are approved for financing under the Program, the 
following conditions are met relating to limiting asbestos use under the prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS: (a) an assessment is conducted on the existing 
structures that need to be demolished or removed to evaluate the risk of asbestos presence; 
and (b) a screening of procurement procedures be conducted to ensure that asbestos- 
containing materials are not used or financed under the Program (except for the purchase and 
use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20% as 
provided under the prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS).

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 
decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with: (a) all applicable laws, 
regulations and guidelines of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety: (b) the 
Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring 
requirements set forth in the Program Action Plan.

14. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 



21
Schedule 4

decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with; (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; 
and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set forth in the 
Program Action Plan.

15. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the Program does not involve any indigenous people risks or impacts within the 
meaning of ths SPS. If due to unforeseen circumstances, the Program Involves any such 
rmpacts, the Borrower shall ensure that the Program complies with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower refating to indigenous peoples; (b) Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set 
forth in the Program Action Plan.

Gender

16. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of gender equality are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Financial Support for WSUs

17. The Borrower shall, through the local governments, allocate, separate from any
tariff increases, through budgetary allocations or other means, counterpart funas on a timely 
basis to ensure that the WSUs have sufficient financial support for their operation and 
maintenance.

C cod Govern a nee and. Anti corru pt io n

18. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program Implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program complies with the 
Anti corruption Guidelines and that all appropriate and timely measures are taken to prevent, 
detect and respond to allegations of fraud, corruption or any other prohibited activities relating 
to the Program in accordance with the Anticorruption Guidelines.

19. The Borrower shall, or cause the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency to, (a) promptly inform ADB of any allegations of fraud, corruption or any 
other prohibited activities relating to the Program; and (b) cooperate fully with any investigation 
by ADB on such allegations and extend all necessary assistance, including providing access 
to all relevant records, for satisfactory completion of such investigation,

20. With 90 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower shall, or cause the Program
Implementing Agency to update its public website to (a) provide information on the progress 
of the Program; (b) post the audited annual financial statements *or the Program, as such 
financial statements become available; and (c) disseminate other relevant information on 
Program implementation.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3847-NEP(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Ope^at on? [Concessional]) 

(Food Safety and Agnculture Cornmerc alization Program) 

between

NEPAL 

and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 10 DECEMBER 20'9

NEP 48218



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT daled 10 Decerrber 2019 between NEPAL ("Borrower') 
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) ADB has received from the Borrower a development policy letter sales 
12 September 2C19 ('Policy Lottof), sod ng forth certain objectives, policies and actions 
described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement, dosigrod to develop the Borovzer's 
agriculture sector ("Program”);

(B) tne Borrower has applied to ADB tor a loan for the purposes o' the 
Program; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
AJB's ordinary capital resources upon tie terms and cond tions sot forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Ope'aticrs 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations*), are hereby 
mace applicable to this I can Agreement with Ihe same force and effect as if they were July 
set forth hemin, submet however, to the following mod fixations:

(a) Sec: on 2.01(v) s de etec and the following is substituted therefor:

“Program" means Ihe program for w-lch ADB has agreed to 
Ta<e the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as the 
description thereof may be amended from time to tme by 
agreement between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) Tho term ‘Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations shall bo 
substituted by the term^P-ogram’.

(c) Sect on 2.01(x) s de eted and the following is substituted tharefcr

■Program Executing Agency* means the entity or entitles 
responsible for the carrying out of the Program as specified h 
the Loor. Agreement:



2

fd) The term ‘Project Executing Agency’ wherever it appears n the Lean 
Regulations Shall be substituted by the term "Program Executing 
Agency"; and

(e) Section 5.0"{b) is cclctcd.

Section 1.02. Wherever used n this Lean Agreement tno several 
terns defined in the Loan Regelations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified he en or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) 'Counterpart Funds" means the loca currency generated Irom the Loan 
proceeds under the Program and refe'red to in oaragraphs 8 o' 
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(b) “Deposit Account’ means tits account referred to in paragraph 3 o' 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

fci "First Tranche" means tne purton of the proceeds of the I can in an 
amount equivalent tc $25,000,000 to be withdrawn pursuant to and 
subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to ths Loan 
Agreement;

fd} ":GANDAKI MOLMAC"’ means the Ministry of Land Management. 
Agriculture and Cooporatves in the Gandaki Province of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto

(e) HLC' means the High Level Committee, chaired by the Secretary of 
MOALD, which is established for the Program;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handcoo\" means ADBs Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017. as amended Irom time to time):

(qj “MOALD" moans the Borrower's- Ministry cl Agriculture and Livestock 
Development, or any successor thereto acceptable to AOB:

(h) ‘MOF’ means the Borrower's Ministry of Finance, or ony successor 
thereto:

(i) 'MOLMAC' means the Ministry of Land Management, Agriculture and 
CoopA'atives in any prov nee of the Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(j) NPCS" means the Borrowor's National Planning Commission 
Secretariat, or any Successor thereto;

(k) "Policy Matrix" means the policy matrix as agreed between the Borrower
and ADB. which sets forth actions accomplished or to be accomplished 
by the Borrower under the Program and is attached to too Policy Letter.

(I) "Program Executing Agency' fo' the purposes of. and wrhin the 
meaning of. the Loan Regulations means MOF or any successor thereto 



3

acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the caiyng OLt of the 
Program;

(m) "Province” means the Gandaki Province of tha Borcwer.

(n} "Second T'ancho" moans the balance of the p-oceeds of the Loan 
remaining in the Loan Account afie- the utilization o' the First Tranche 
to be withdrawn pursuant to and subject to the provisions of paragraph 
6 of Schedule 3 Io this Loan Agreement; and

(o} "Working Committee" means the working committco established under 
each of MOALD and GAhDAKI MOLMAC fcr tne Program as doscribad 
in paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to end to the Borrower from ADC’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fifty million Dollars (S5O.OOC.DOC).

(b> Tho Loan has a principal repayment period of '6 years, and a grace 
pcrod as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “g^ace period1 as usee in subsection (b) here nabove means 
the perod prior to the first Principal Payment Date in acco'dance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedue 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB ar interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Lean withdrawn from the Loan Account a^d outstanding from time to time

Section 2.03. The interest cha'go and any other charge on the Loan 
shall bo payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November n each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Laan Account in accordance with tne amort nation schedule set fodh 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal of the Loan 
and tho currency of payment of the interest charge ter tho purposes of Sections 4.03(a) and 
4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall bo the Dollar.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. I he Borrower shall cause the proceeds of tho Loan to be 
apolied to the financing of expenditures on the Program n accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 3 02. The proceeds of the Loan snail be withdrawn in 
accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Ag-eement. as such Schedule may 
bo amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrows- and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the otrposes of Section 8.02 
o' the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2021 or such other date as may from time to time be 
ag-eed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carry ng out of the Program, tho Borrower shal 
perform, or cause Io be performed all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 4. 02. (a) As part of the reports and information referred to
in Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrows' shal furnish, or cause to be furnished, 
to ADB all such raoorts and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning: (I) the 
Ccuntarpart Funds and the use thereof; ano (ii) the implementation of he Program, including 
tho accoTpilshmo('t of tho targets and carrying out of the actions set cut in the Policy Letter.

(b) Without limiting the generality ot the foregoing or Section 6.05 o' the 
Lean Regua’ons. the Borrower snail furnish, or cause to be turnsned, to ADB quarterly 
reports on 'he carrying out of the P-ogram and on the accomplishment of the largels and 
earn/ ng out of the actons set out r the Pol cy Latter.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days alle- the date ol this Loan Agreement is 
specified kr the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Socoon 9.04 pt ne 
Lean Regulations.



5

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Tne Secretary ur Joint Secrets^ (International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Div sion) o' the MOF is designatec as representative of lie Borrower 
for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Tfe follow ng addresses are specified far the purposes 
of Section 11.0' of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Singha Durbar
Kathmandu, Nepal

Facsimile Number

♦977 1 421-1 164

For APB

Asian Development Rank
6 ADB Avenue
Menoaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philipp nes

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2391



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties ncrctc, acting through their
rcsrosontativos thcroirto duly authorised, have caused this _oan Agroorront to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
pr ncipal office of ADB.

Secretary 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1. The ofnclpal objective of the Program is to improve food safely and commercial
competitiveness in the agriculture sector and the- scope induces (a) food safety arc quality 
monitoring systems improved; (bj agriculture commercialization promoted; and (c) Institutional 
capacity strengthened. Ine Program is described in more detail in the Policy Leiter.

2. The Program is expected Io be completed by 31 May 2021.




9

SCHEDULE 3

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

1. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB nay otherw se ag'ee the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed n acco'danco with the Loan Dsbursemenl Handbook

2. An appl cation for withdrawal from the Loan Acccunt shall be submitted lo ADB
oy the Borrower and shall bo in a form satisfactory to ADB.

3. (a) Pho' to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the
_oan Account, tho Borrower shall nominate ar account (the Deposit Account)al Nepal Rastra 
Bank into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be deposited. rhe Deposit 
Account shall bo established, managed and liquidated in accordance with the applicable 
regulations anc pxcecuresof tie Borrower.

fb) Separate accounts end records n respect of the Deposit Account shall 
be maintained n eccorcance w th accounting principles accep-.3ble to ADB. Upon ACB s 
request, the Borrower shall have tho financial statements lor the Deposit Account audited by 
independent auditors, whoso qualifications experience and terms o' rcfcrcnco are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing cr the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB. Promptly after their preparation but in any event not later than 6 months 
after tho date of ADB's tequest. copies of such audited financial statements anc the option of 
the auditors on the financial statements, in the Engl sr language, shall be turn shed to ADB

4. No Loan proceeds shall bo withdrawn to finance any item sDocrtod in
Allacmert 1 tc this Schedule.

5. The Borrower may wihdraw the First Tranche upon effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement

6. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Loan Agreement and except as
ADB may otherwise agree, nq withdrawals shall be inado from the Loan Account for tho 
Socono Tranche unless ADB Is sadsfiec. after consultation with the Borrower, that 
(a) sufficient progress has been achieves by Ihe Borrower n the carrying out of the Program. 
(b)tho policy actions that were met for me release of the F rat Tranche coni nue to be compl ed 
with by the Borower; and (c) Ihe Borrower has met the policy actions for tie release cf th*? 
tranche specified In Attachment 3 to this Schedule.



10
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

Negative List

No withdrawals of Loan proceeds wil be made tor the following;

(i) expenditures for goods included in the following groups or sud-qroups of the 
United Nations Standard International Trade Classification. Rov sion 3 (SITC. 
Rev. 3) or any successor groups or suc-groups jrdor future revisions to the 
SITC. as cesignatod by ADR by notice to the Borrower:

Tabic: ineligible Items

Chapter Heading Description of Items
112 Alcoholic beverages
121 Tobacco, unmanufactured: tobacco refuse
122 Tobacco, manufactured {whether or not containing tobacco 

substitute
525 Radioactive and associated materials
567 Pearls, precious and semiprecious stones, unw-orkee cr 

worked
718 7187 Nuclear reacto's. ard parts thereof, fuel elements 

(cartridges), nonirraciated for nuclear readore
728 728.43 Tobacco processing machinery
857 897.3 Jewelry of goid silver or plalinurn-group metals (except 

watches and watch cases) and goldsmiths' or silversmiths' 
wares (including set gems}

_ 971 ____
Source: United Nations.

Cold nonmonotaty (axclucing gold ore and coneenlrales)

(ii) expenditures in the currency of the Borrower o' for goods supplied from the 
territory of the Borrower;

(ii) expenditures for goods supplied under a contract that any national or 
international financing institution or agency will have financed or has agreed 1n 
finance, including any contract financed under any loan o' gran: from too ADB;

(ivy expenditures for goods intended fc a military or param litary purpose or (or 
luxury consumption;

(v) expenditures for narcotics;

(vl) expenditures for cnvkonmentally hazardous goods, the manufacture, use or 
import of which is prohibited unoer the laws of the Borrower or internatnrai 
agreements to which the Borrower is a party; and

(vi) expenditures on account of any payment prohibited by the Borrower in 
compliance with a dec sior of the United Nations Security Council takeh under 
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.



11
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Policy Actions for Release of the First Tranche

1. Cab net shall have endorsed Ihe draft Pestic de Management Bill 2075 (2018)
far submission to the Part ament, tc regulate production, sales, storage transpo'talicn and to 
discourage Ihe overuse of harmful chemicals.

2. MOALD shall nave suomittod a notification on the World Trade Organization
Notification Submission System for the Max mum Residue I mil (MRl i of pesticides in at bast 
10 fruits, vegetables and food items, far comments and suggestions by tracing partner 
countries.

3. Cab not shall have approved the National Food Safety Policy 2C76 (2019)
incorporating a aomp'onensive framework far food safety and quality. developing national food 
industry, and promote food exports.

4. MOALD shall have prepared a drart Food Safety and Quality Bill ar d suomitted
fa ‘tie Ministry ol Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs for review, Including provisions to 
align the certification system with International fooc safety standards.

5. MOALD snail have approved a roadmap lor international accred tat on of (a) the
Cental Arirral and Poultry Disease Investigation Laboratory, (b) National Avian Disease 
Investigator Laboratory, and (c) Veterinan/ Standards and Drug Administration Labo'atory

6. MOAl D shall have submitted a draft of the Agribusiness Promoter BII2075 to
the Cabinet to encoirage contract farming and agrieulturc marketing, with prcvsio?s on the 
participation and benefits of marginalizes and women farmers.

7. Cab net shall have enco'sod a draft amondmont to the Seed Act 2045 (1988)
for suemsson to Parliament, to ensure farmer protection and Io encourage private sector 
participation in seed business.

8. Cab not shall have endorsed the draft amendment to Plant Protection Act 2064
(2007) far submission to too Part ament to regulate protect reps ago nst nvasi’/o species 
and posts.

9. MOALD shall have conducted Agnculture Development Strategy (AOS)
orientation workshops in all provinces. to align sub nationa love agriculture strategies and 
p ans to the rational ADS.



12
Attachment 3 to Scnedule3

Policy Actions for Release of the Second Tranche

1. MOALD shall have endorsed □ d<aft Pesticide Manaqomont Regulation and
subm tied to the Ministry of Law. Justice and Pari amentary Abairs for consent.

2. MOALD shall have: (a) issued and published in Ine ofTiaal gazette the Max mum
Residuo Limit (MRL) of postiados in at least 10 rnjiis, vegetables and food items: and (b) 
submitted a notification on the World Trade Organization Ncti'ication Submisscr System for 
tho MRL of postic dos for at least 1C add tional fruits, vegetables and fooc items, for comments 
a^d suggestions by trading partner countries.

3. MOALD shall have: (a) developed pesticide residue test protocol and
surveillance plan for selected 2 vegetables: ard (b) conducted a pilot study of pesticide residue 
les! in the selected 2 vegetables.

4. MOALD shall have: (a) prepared a plan for upgrading existing food safety
laboratories urderthe Department of Food Technology & Qualty Control (DFTQC). and (b) 
completed all pre-requsr.es for ISO’lEC 17025 certification for either pyrethroid or caroarrate 
group pesticides testing in the Natonal Food and Feed Refe'erce Laboratory, h preparation 
for international accreditation.

5. MOALD shall have completed all pre-requ sites for ISO;EC 17025 certification
for molecular unit m the Central Animal ano Pojlt'y Disease Investigation Laboratory, m 
preparation for international accreditation.

6. MOALD shall have comoleted all pro-roqusites for ISOvEC 17025 certification
for new castle d.seosc vaccine production unit in the National Vacc ne Production -aboratory, 
in preparation for internal onal accreditation.

7. MOALD shall have competed all pre-requisites for ISO-IEC 17025 certification
'or PPR vaccine production unit in the National Vaccine Production Laboratory, in preparation 
'or International accreditation

8. GAN JAKI MOLMAC shall have approved and posted on government web $> les
operational guidelines for custom hiring of agricultural machinery, Including n'tor-salos service 
ard procedural -ecuirements: and approved sample business plans comprisng technical, 
financial. branding, and manceting aspects'or (a) custom hlrng of agricultural machinery, ano 
(b) al least two high-value commod tics

National Seed Board shall have approved min mum standards for establishing 
seed testing laborator a> of different categor es

11. MOALD shall have prepared a dralt Plant ^rotect on Regulation and submitted
’.o the Ministry of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Abairs fo' consent.

12 GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have formulated and subm tted Io provincial cabinet
gendor-and socially inclusive provincial strategic Investment plan for at least one prioritized 
commodity and aligned it w th the provlnc a medium-term expenditure''amework (MTEF).



13
Attachment 3 to Schedule 3

13. To st'-er,gtincn institutional capacity io implement gerder*$en$itive and socially
ndusive agri-bus ness reforms,

(a) GANDAKI MOLMAC shell have designated a focal oerson or unit with clearly 
defined job descriptor! lo oversee ma nslreamirg cl gender equally and social 
Inclusion practices in Gandaki MOLMAC operations:

(b) GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have published a training manual fcr promotion of 
improved agricultural practices and agribusiness development, and deivered 
Iraning to at least '5C farmers (including indigenous peoples, other 
marginalized groups, and a: least 50% wren); and

(c) MOALD shall have conducted ADS oriental on workshops for at least 50% of 
local levels (mun cipalilies and rural municipalities) of Gandaki province 
Including orientation on gender equality and social inclusion strategy of the 
ADS.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Program Implementation and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. MOF shall be lire Program Executing Agency. MOALO and GANDAKI MOLMAC
shall oc tho implementing agencies and shall be responsible for implementing their respective 
policy actions under the Program.

2. Within 60 days cf Ine Effective Dato., the Sorrower st all have expanded tho HLC
to induce representation from MOF and NPCS. which shall be responsible for overall 
supervision and coordination oftho implementation of the policy actions and other advdes for 
the Program.

3. With n 60 days of die Effective Date, the Borrower shall ensure that a separata
Working Committee is established under MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC. eacn of which shall 
bo responsible for coordination of tne implementation of their respective policy actions and 
activities under the Program.

Policy Actions and Dialogue

4. Tre Borrower shall ensure that all policy actions adopted under JicP'ogram.as
set forth n tno Policy Letter and the Policy Matrix, continue to be in effect for the duration o* 
the Program.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed Curing periodic reviews of polcy
d scuss ons with other multilateral and bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the 
imp ementation of lie Program and shall provide ADB with an oppertun ty to comment cn any 
resulting pol cy proposals. The Borrower shall take into account ADB's views cefcre finalizing 
and implement ng any such proposal.

6. The Borrower shall take all act ons wh ch shall be necessary on its pan to enable
the Province to perfoTi certain oblige: ons net are applicable to the Province as sot forth in 
the Polcy _et:er, and shall rot take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC to
ensure that the policy actions identified as hav ng potent al safeguards impacts are carried out 
In accordance with ADB s Safeguard Pol cy Statement (2QC9). Specifically, the training marual 
for promotion ol agribusiness and tho ensuing training shall have at least 50% women 
particicaton and shall ensure that nd gorous people are informed and 'epresented.

Use of Counterpart Funds

8 The Borrower shall ensure that the Counterpar Funds aro used to finance tho
Implementation Of Certain programs and activit cs oonsistort wit" the object ves ol the ^ogram.



15

Schedule 4

Governance and Articorruption

9. The Borrower, the Program Executing Agency. MOALD and GANDAKI
MO_MAC sha I (a) comply with ADB's Anticorrupticr Policy £1998. as amended to data) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive praodce rotating to the Program; and 
(b)coope'ale with any such invest galicn and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

Monitoring and Revew

10. The Borrower shall ensure that HLC meets at least sem-annually and. if
needed, on an ad hoe basis to: (I) monitor the progress of the Program, (ii) provide gu dance 
and (fraction for program mplementaton to the Working Committee, and (iii) recommend 
adjustments or supplementary measures to facilitate and ensure timely implementation of the 
Program. ADR shall be invited to allene all meetings of HLC as an observer. Dosed on the 
feedback 'rorr the Working Committee and ADB. HLC shall, if nocossary, amend a^d revise 
its work, p-ograms to ensure t mely and effective implementation of the Program.

11. ADB shall undertake periodic review missions to: (a} confirm progress and
fulfilment of policy actions for tranche release; £h) confirm release of adequate 'unds from the 
Borrower for Program-spcc fic activit os, (c) monitor continued applicability of the assumptions 
that might impact Program success, as wel as specifies risks and their mitlgat ng measures 
one (d) advise on actions to maintain effective mplementaVon within tie Program period.




































































50013-002: Sustainable Tourism Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3787-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Sustainable Tourism Development Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED. J2.lune 2.019

MON 50013



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between
MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for two loans for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(“Concessional Loan Agreement”) ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Ordinary Capital Resources, on concessional terms, nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000) in 
connection with the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, except 
that the term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 7.01 (a)(i), 9.01(d), 9.01(f), 
9.01(k), 10.01(c) and 10.02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall be substituted by the term "the 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism of Mongolia or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "CKTC" means the Chinggis Khaan Tourism Complex in OBNP, as 
further described in the PAM;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;



2

(c) “Environmental Management Plan" or "EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(d) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(e) “Goods’* means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(f) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(g) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE" means the initial 
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(h) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(i) “KLNP" means Khuvsgul Lake National Park;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “MoF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower or its successor;

(I) ‘'Nonconsulting Services'* means nonconsulting services as described In 
the Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;

(m) “OBNP” means Onon-Balj National Park;

(n) "PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) "PILI" means the project implementation unit to be established at the 
Project Executing Agency as described in the PAM;

(p) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;



3

(q) "Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(r) “Procurement Regulations” means Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting Services and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(s) “Project Executing Agency” means the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism of the Borrower or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(t) “Project Implementing Agencies" means the Department of Protected 
Area Management and Department of Tourism Policy Coordination 
under the Project Executing Agency or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB;

(u) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(v) “SGAP" means the social and gender action plan for the Project 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(w) “SPS” or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009); and

(x) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000), as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3,03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement,

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) . The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the Procurement Plan.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opin ion (s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Concessional Loan Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower and shall have become fully effective and binding upon the Borrower 
in accordance with its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MoF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S. Danzan Street 5/1 
Ulaanbaatar 15160 
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

+976 51 267-468

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444 
+63 2 636-2534.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly.authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is the achievement of sustainable and inclusive
tourism in the KLNP and OBNP.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Component 1: Enhance inclusive planning and capacity for community based 
tourism through strengthening the institutional framework for tourism planning 
and increasing the number of local beneficiaries from tourism by: (a) revising 
development plans for the three largest settlements at the KLNP and OBNP (two 
at the KLNP and one at the OBNP) to include livelihood targets, natural resource 
use and spatial planning for residents; (b) developing and implementing two 
tourism concession manuals, and an ecotourism certification program, for KLNP 
and OBNP; (c) strengthening the KLNP tourism council and creating a tourism 
council at OBNP; (d) installing information facilities in the Khuvsgul Aimag capital 
to promote KLNP products and services; and (e) increasing employment and 
business opportunities for local residents by providing vocational training for 
small businesses and installing tourist markets.

Component 2: Construct enabling infrastructure for tourism, comprising: (a) at 
KLNP (i) upgrade unsealed roads, (ii) construct car parks and (iii) improve traffic 
control and safety; and (b) at OBNP (i) construct the CKTC, (ii) establish 
supporting infrastructure, (iii) upgrade an access road and (iv) extend a power 
line to the CKTC site.

Component 3: Scale up waste management, including: (a) plan and coordinate 
the installation, operation and maintenance of low-cost sanitation systems at 
KLNP and OBNP; (b) construct three wastewater treatment plants suitable for 
cold climate; and (c) upgrade three landfill sites and establish new procedures 
for recycling and for leachate and waste management.

Component 4: Strengthen park management by: (a) constructing a KLNP 
headquarters and visitor center, two fee collection stations and a road control 
station; (b) rehabilitating public trails; (c) revising KLNP's and OBNP’s 
management plans; (d) preparing an action plan for each of KLNP and OBNP; 
and (e) training park and soum government staff to implement the revised plans.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by 
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

Date Payment 
Due



2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates failing on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 



12
Schedule 2

prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project, ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4, Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (I) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until ail 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account until the PIU has been established and has engaged a 
qualified project coordinator, financial specialist and procurement specialist.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.
** Proceeds of the Concessional Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to 
disbursement of this loan for this category

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

................... (S)........
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works* 13,870,238 100.0% of total expenditure 
claimed**

2

Goods, Consulting 
Services, Community 
Contracts, Workshops, 
PIU operating costs*

3,614,862 100.0% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Interest and
Commitment Charges 1,514,900 100.0% of amounts due

TOTAL 19,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure close
coordination in implementing the Project with all relevant ministries, relating especially to the 
ministries that will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the project roads, landfill 
sites, wastewater treatment plants, and power lines. Without limiting the foregoing, a steering 
committee for the project shall be established by the Project Executing Agency and shall meet 
not less than quarterly during Project Implementation to oversee and ensure well-coordinated 
implementation of the Project. The steering committee shall be chaired by the State Secretary 
of the Project Executing Agency and shall comprise high-level officers from at least the 
ministries responsible for roads and transport, construction, urban development and energy, 
as well as from relevant departments of the Project Executing Agency,

Project Specific Assurances

Supporting Project Implementation

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Khuvsgul Aimag government and the Khentii Aimag government 
will not issue any commercial tourism licenses or land entitlements for business activities within 
the KLNP or OBNP (including the OBNP buffer zone in Dada I Soum) until the following have 
been (a) completed, (b) approved by the Project Executing Agency, the aimag and soum 
governments, and ADB, (c) adopted by the Project Executing Agency and/or local government, 
and (d) commenced implementation: (i) tourism concession manuals for KLNP and OBNP; 
(ii) the Khankh Soum development plan for KLNP; and (iii) revised Khatgal Town development 
plan for KLNP and revised Dadal Soum development plan for OBNP.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall provide or cause to
be provided adequate start-up capital to establish the holding company for the CKTC, as 
described in the PAM, to cover the costs of at least the first year of CKTC's operation and to 
cover further costs of operating CKTC until visitor revenue is sufficient to fund CKTC’s 
operating expenses.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the Khentii Aimag power station and the power
transmission line from Ondorkhaan Town (also known as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal 
Soum, are upgraded before the completion of construction of the CKTC to the extent necessary 
to ensure an adequate and reliable power supply to operate the CKTC.



17
Schedule 4

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the road from Onddrkhaan Town (also known
as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal Soum is upgraded to repair the most damaged sections of 
the existing, unpaved, portions of the road and shall further exert best efforts to ensure paving 
and upgrading of the entire road (including the section of road from the Dadal Soum center to 
the CKTC) in close consultation with the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing 
Agencies and the PIU so as to ensure coordination and planning with the needs of the Project.

Supporting implementation of Project Safeguards

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall appoint officers to
act as focal points for the EMP and SGAP and ensure that these officers undertake regular 
coordination with and support for the environment and social specialists to be recruited by the 
PIU as provided in the PAM.

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Khatgal Town power substation (in Khuvsgul Almag) and Dada! Soum power substation (in 
Khentii Aimag) are adequately maintained and managed in order to: (a) provide the required 
power for Project facilities, especially the KLNP headquarters and visitor center in Khatgal 
Town and the CKTC in Dadal Soum; (b) ensure there is no disruption to the existing power 
supply for communities and services, including during winter and times of peak demand. If 
any changes are planned that may adversely affect the capacity or function of these power 
stations the Borrower shall: (a) inform ADB of the proposed changes; (b) if there is any potential 
adverse impact on the Project or any Project facilities, prepare and implement a corrective 
action plan as agreed with ADB.

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, ensure that: (a) public 
services for power, water supply, and wastewater collection at the KLNP and OBNP will be 
maintained for communities during the Project civil works; (b) any interruptions to such services 
which result from Project works will be as limited as possible; and (c) prior to any planned 
interruptions, meaningful consultations are held with all affected communities.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
planting activities under the Project (a) occur only for rehabilitation of construction sites; 
(b) except as provided in (c), below, use only species that are native to Khuvsgui Almag, for 
KLNP, and that are native to Dadal Soum, for OBNP, and utilizing seedlings that are sourced 
from local stocks within Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Almag, respectively; (c) If fast-growing 
non-native species (e.g. grasses) are required for stabilizing bare surfaces of construction 
sites, use for such purpose only sterilized seedlings that cannot propagate; (d) do not use any 
invasive plant species; and (e) do not use pesticides or top-dressing fertilizers.

Tariffs for Wastewater and Solid Waste Management

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments (a) make 
continuous efforts to increase wastewater tariffs and solid waste management tariffs 
progressively to achieve full cost recovery and in accordance with national tariff policies and 
regulations; and (b) undertake at least once a year a periodic review of tariffs and fees including 
an assessment of their impact on the poor.



18
Schedule 4

12. During the process of adjusting wastewater tariffs and solid waste management
tariffs, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the Project 
Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments take into 
consideration (a) the minimum tariff level to cover basic operating costs, debt service and 
capital replacement; (b) users’ affordability and willingness to-pay data from available surveys; 
and (c) recent tariff escalations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
ensure that the Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag 
governments include public consultation in their tariff setting processes.

Governance

13. The Borrower shall not withdraw any ADB loan proceeds until the Project
Executing Agency has engaged a project coordinator and Project financial specialist and a 
procurement specialist in accordance with the PAM.

Design and Quality Control Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing
Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that:

(a) the detailed designs for the Project are completed in accordance with 
the Project implementation schedule as set forth in the PAM, but not 
later than 2 months before the start of the concerned Works;

(b) construction management, quality control, contract management, final 
completion and acceptance of all Works comply with all applicable laws 
and regulations of the Borrower and with all applicable requirements of 
ADB; and

(c) al! structures and facilities constructed or installed under the Project are 
well operated and maintained, and all operation and maintenance staff 
are fully trained in monitoring, operating, and maintaining the structures 
and/or facilities for which they are responsible.

Procurement

15. The Borrower shall, through the Project Executing Agency, ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and



19
Schedule 4

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

Safeguards

Conditions for Award of Works Contracts

16, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works contract which involves environmental impacts is awarded until:

(a) the Project Executing Agency has endorsed the IEE; and

(b) the Project Executing Agency or the relevant Project Implementing 
Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contracts.

Environment

17, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, the Project Executing
Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that the preparation, design, 
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and ali Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the SPS; arid (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the IEE and EMP and any corrective or preventative actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed between ADB and the Project 
Executing Agency.

18. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that: (a) during detailed engineering design of the CKTC, meaningful consultations 
are held with local residents, civil society organizations and other stakeholders to assess 
community concerns about the siting of the CKTC and its access road and to identify 
community-led or other solutions to address any community concerns; (b) the consultations 
include dissemination of all site-related information collected for the detailed designs, including 
the exact proposed location for the CKTC and access road; (c) if, following consultations, some 
stakeholders oppose the location of the CKTC, the PIU delivers a report and recommendations 
for resolution to the project steering committee and ADB and that the project steering 
committee confers with ADB on next steps; and (d) that design work and other preparation for 
the CKTC is suspended until siting issues are resolved in a manner acceptable to ADB.



20
Schedule 4

No Involuntary Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples Impacts

19. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary resettlement impacts or indigenous 
peoples impacts within the meaning of the S PS. In the event that the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, Project 
Implementing Agencies and PIU to, take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under ADB’s Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and the domestic environmental impact assessments, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (if) subsequently agreed between ADB and the 
Project Executing Agency;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB in respect of 
implementation of and compliance with Environmental Safeguards and 
the EMP, semiannually during construction and the implementation of 



21
Schedule 4

the Project and the EMP, and thereafter annually during operation, until 
the issuance of ADB's Project completion report unless a longer period 
is agreed in the EMP; and disclose relevant information from such 
reports to the respective affected people under the Environmental 
Safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards and the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

24 The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency or the 
relevant Project Implementing Agency to include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 24 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as provided in the PAM.

Gender and Development

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
SGAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the SGAP; 
(c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the SGAP; and (d) progress on 



22
Schedule 4

implementation of the SGAP, including progress toward achieving key gender and social 
outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

27. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
“Consultation and Participation Plan" and “Stakeholder Communication Strategy” for the 
Project are fully implemented in accordance with their terms and that activities thereunder are 
regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

Counterpart Support

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall, and shall cause the
Project Executing Agency the Khuvsgul Aimag government, the Khentii Almag government 
and other government agencies to, ensure that (a) counterpart funds are made available to the 
Project in a timely manner, including any additional counterpart funds, as and when required, 
to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during Project implementation; and (b) operation 
and maintenance of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In addition to the foregoing, 
the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency and Project Implementing 
Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or 
Consulting Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

29. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998. as 
amended to date); (b) acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (c) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

30. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, ensure that anticorruption provisions acceptable to 
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts related to the Project, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
Borrower, the Project Implementing Agency, the Project Executing Agencies, the PIU and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that a
safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established at the Project 
Executing Agency and each Project Implementing Agency in accordance with the provisions 
of the IEE and EMP, within the timeframe specified in the I EE and EMP, to consider safeguards 
complaints.

Ownership and Control of Project facilities

32. In the event any change in ownership or control of any Project facilities is
anticipated, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall consult with ADB at 
least 6 months prior to the implementation of such change, and shall ensure that no change 



23
Schedule 4

will be made that will have an adverse impact on the implementation of the Project in 
accordance with the Project Agreement and the PAM.




































































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3817-LAO: Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3317-I.AO(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project!

between

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 OCTOBER 2019

LAO 5023G



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Oidinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 October 2019 between LAO PEOPLES 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC ('Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {"ADB').

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower rias applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be partly carried out hv the provinces of Houaphan, 
Louangphabang. XalgnaboUji and Xiangkhouang ("Project provinces'), and for this purpose 
the Borrower will make available to the Project provinces a portion of the proceeds of the loan 
provided for herein upon terms and conditions acceptable to ADB:

(C) the Borrower has also applied to ADB tor a grant in an amount Oi five 
million Dollars ($5,000,000) from ADB's Disaster R^sk Reduction Fund ("DRRF Grant") for the 
purposes of the Project;

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the European Union for a grant ("Ei1 
Grant". together with DRRF Grant. "Grants") in an amount in Euro equivalent to four million 
four hundred sixty thousand Dollars ($4,460,090) for the purposes el the Project, and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADR's ordinary capital resources upon the tomia and conditions sei forth herein and in rhe 
Project Agreement between ADB and Project provinces;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as foilawe:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01 All provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01(uu) is deleter! and the following is substituted therefor

"Project Agreement" means rhe Project Agreement between ADB of one 
part, and Houaplian Province, Louangphabang Province. Xaignabouii 
Province and Xiangkhouang Province of the other part, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time.



2

(b) The [erm "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Section G.01(3)0), 
8.01 (d), 8.01(f), 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term "Houaphan Province, Louangphabang 
Province, X^Qmaboujj Province and Xiariglchouang Province"

Section 1^1 Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
ternis defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or I he context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set nut in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan.

(b) "EARP" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB,

(c) 'EM?" means an environmental management plan developed for a
Subproject and approved by ADB:

(di "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of Ihe 
SPS,

(e) "Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation commissioning, training. and initial maintenance,

(f) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(g) "IEE" means each initial environmental examination for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB

(h) "List of Eligible Subprojects" means a list which provides all candidate 
subprojects pre-screened in accordance with the criteria set forth in the 
PAM;

(I) 'Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (SOI7, as amended from time to lime):

(I) 'MAF means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture and F nrestry, or any 
successor(hereto

(k i "NonconsLilling Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

l it "PAFO' moans a provincial agriculture and Forestry office in a Project 
province or any successor thereto;

r। r।j "PAM" means the project administration manual for Uie Project dated 26 
July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated from 
time to time in accordance will i the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower arid ADB;

(n) "Procurement Plan1' means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
26 July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB as updated 
from time to time in accordance with Hie Procurement Policy, the 
Procuremient Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(o) ‘‘Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works. Nonconsulting and Consuliing Services (2017 as amended from 
time to time),

(pi 'Procurement Regulations'" means ADBJs Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods. Works Nonconsulling and Consulting 
Services (2017. as amended from time to time).

(q) "Project Executing Agency' for the purposes ol, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MAF or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(r) "Project facilities" means facilities to be provided, constructed or 
operated and maintained under the Project;

(s) "Project province" means each of the Borrower's provinces of 
Houaphan, Louangphabang. Xaignabouli and Xiangkhouang, or any 
successors thereto:

(t) "’REGDF" means the resettlement and ethnic group development 
Framework tor the Project, as agreed between the Borrower and ADB;

(u) "RP" means each resettlement plan For a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the REGDF and cleared by ADB:

(vj "RSP" means a representative subproject selected among the 
Subprojects, more fully described in the PAM;

(w) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(X) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of. and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(y) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services'



■I

(z) 'SubprajeGf means a subproject to be financed under the Project, as 
selected In accordance with paragraphs 18 to 26 of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

taa) 'UXO' means Lmexploded ordinance:

(bb) Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurer nt’rd 
Rian and to be financed out of the proceeds ot the Loan and Grants, 
including any related Nonconsulling Services and project related 
services thai are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract;

(cc) WUA" means a water user association; and

(dd) "WUG" means a Water user group.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB ogress to lend Io the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital lesources an amount of forty million Collars ($40 000,000}.

(b) T he Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (cj hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period' as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Pnncipal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum (hereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time io time.

Section 2.02 The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04 The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05 The currency of repayment of the principal amount Of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes Of Sections 4 03(a) 
and 4 04 pif the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall make available a portion of
the proceeds of the Loan to the Project provinces upon terms and conditions satisfactory to 
ADB

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively tn the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3 02 The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 3,04 (a) Withdrawals from the Laan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to

(I) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Warks and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(H) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), Goods, Works, and Services may 
also be procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB

Section 3.05 The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8 02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement



6

Sec tion 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project
provinces to, (I) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (III) have such financial statements audited annually Dy independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion^) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower , unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03 The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the DRRF Grant arid ELI Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred



7

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6 01 The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of DRRF Grant and EU Grant Agreements shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11 02 of the Loan Regulations

Section 7 02 The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
23rd Singha Road
P.O Box 46
Vientiane Capital
Lao People's Democratic Republic

Facsimile Number:

(856-21)412142

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADS Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines



8

Facsimile Numbers

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2366

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered st the 
principal office of ADB

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC

Deputy Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
ASUSHi NEGISHI
Country Director

Lao Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of Lhe Project

1 The objective of the Project is to improve high value agricultural production,
natural resources management ®nd community nutrition

2 The Project shall comprise th§ following outputs.

Output 1: Market-oriented agricultural production increased.

(a) Completing and confirming market demand assessments for all 
additional subproiect:

(b) Starling market connectivity forums and meetings in the RSPs;

(c) Confirming enterprise grants procedures and implementation 
arrangements and completing grant awards.

(d) Implementing Subproject farm to farm extension, and

(e) Operation a bzing market produce quality assurances systems

Out put 2: Watershed ecological services protected.

(a) Preparing Provincial land use plans (PLUPs) for catchments in four 
Xiangkhouang province and five Houaphan province productive rural 
infra structure subprojects (PRIs);

(b) Preparing PLUP associated land use behavioral change programs with 
supporting community agreements including female participation' and

(c) Implementing PLUPs land use behavior change action plans

Out put 3: Command area irrigation reliability improved.

(a) Contracting and completing RSP works:

(b) Designing and contracting additional PRI subprojects in batches 2 and 
3 with batch 3 being the final processing deadline, and contracting and 
completing Works with handover for batches 2 and 3;

(c) Farming WUGs and WUAs, including 507a participation by females, 
and water user management wilh 25% of female representation: and

(d) Organizing Subproject WUG into WUAs.

Out put 4 Nutrition awareness and facilities improved

(a) Forming and operationalizing district nutrition committees;



in
Schedule 1

(bj Implementing village nutrition schools, and

(c) Implementing Water sanitation and hygiene facilities In targeted 
villages.



SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets Forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table") (Reference lo "Caregory" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the I. nan Account

2. Except as adb may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items Of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis oi the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure sei forth in the Table.

Kite re stC barge

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest Charge' is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during I he implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itseft. on behalf of the BorroWef the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charge

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to he 
insufficient to finance ail agreed expenditures in that Category ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (1i) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made: and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears lo exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category

Dis burse pre nt Procedures

5 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disburse men! Handbook



Schedule 3

'condition,for Withdrawals 'mm Lnan Account

3, Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for Category 3 until the Borrower has issued guidelines 
lor usage of matching grant, in a form and substance satisfactory to ADB, including selection 
criteria and selection procedures for activities in accordance wiih the PAM.



15
Attachment lo Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Num her Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(Dollar) _
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works for RSPs 2.316,170 34.7% of total expenditure claimed

2
Project Costs Other 
Than Category 1 above 
and Category 3 below

33,696,275 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Matching Grant* 180,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,523,445 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 2,284,110

TOTAL 40.000,000

Snt। eel to the cond lion tor withdrawal described >n paragraph 5 of Schedule 3



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Implementation, Environmental, Social and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the Project is 
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the even I of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement, and DRRF Grant and EU Grant 
Agreements shall prevail.

Procurement

2 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that.

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in accordance 
with the ADB Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations,

(to) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth (he Procurement Plan including the procurement and 
selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and ADB's review 
requirements The Borrower may modify the detailed arrangements set forth in 
the Procurement Plan only with the prior agreement of ADB. and such 
modifications must be set out ip updates to the Procurement Plan: and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all computer
hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party: and 
(iij all contracts for the procurement of Goods. Works and Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor supplier consultant or service provider with respect to the 
matters referred to in I his subparagraph

Environment

3 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the EARF: and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the respective 1EE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

4 The Eiorrower shall ensure the following measures are taken: (a) coordinate with the 
regulatory authorities to ensure agrichemicals are used in accordance with national laws and 
regulations and international conventions to which the Borrower is a signatory, (b) ensure that 
pest and/or vector management activities related to the subproject sites are based on 
integrated pest management approaches; (c) implement the training and related measures 



17
Schedule j

included rn the project's good agricultural practice capacity building program, and rd) Include 
a specific section in the semi-annual envi^riment safeguard reports on the application of 
agrichemicals.

5 The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADBs Category A 
environmental criteria as defined under the SPS, is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with Category A environ mental criteria is financed under ihe Project

6 The Borrower shall cause each Project province to establish river how gauging plates 
and lo provide, for each year, fortnightly readings of nvei flow during the dry season between 
1 October and 1 May throughout Project implementation

Inyoji1 nlary Resettlemerit

7 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that ail land and 
all rights-of-way required for each subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the 
Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under ihe related Works contract 
and all iand acquisition and re sett Ie me nt activities are implemented in compliance with (a) ad 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and fnvpluntafy 
rose tile meni^ (b) the REG DE and (c)al) measures and requirements set forth mtha respective 
RP. and any corrective or preventative actions set Forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

8 . The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADB's Category A 
resettlement criteria as defined under the SPS. is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with the Category A resettlement criteria is financed under me Project.

9 Without) jimrtihg the apptication of the REGDF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure or 
cause the Project provinces lo ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
m connection with the Subprojects until

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected people 
in accordance with the RP. and

Jb) a comprehensive income arid livelihood restoration program have been 
established in accordance with the RP.

10 The Borrower shall dlSO ensure that a grievance redress mechanism acceptable to 
ADB is established for affected people in the districts where the resettlement activities under 
the Project are carried out.

'indigenous Peoples arid Vulnerable Groups

11 . The Borrower shall ensure that subprojects do not adversely affect ethnic groups, 
households headed by women disabled, elderly or other similarly vulnerable groups, and that 
rights and needs of ethnic groups are fully addressed in accordance with ADS's Policy on 
Gender and (development (1998) and SPS. in particular the Project shall be carried out in 
accordance with the REGDF.

12 The Borrower shall ensure that no subprojects which have significant impacts on ethnic 
groups, is included in the List of L-ligible Subprojects, and that no Subproject with such impacts 



10
jr,neoule 4

is financed under the Project. For Subprojects In which ethnic groups are present and affected, 
an tn dig eno us peoples plan shall be prepared in accordance with the REGDF

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Prelect provinces to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require con tractors to

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor set forth 
in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP (to the extent they concern Impacts on affected 
people during construction}, and any corrective or preventative actions set out 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

(b) make available a budget for all such environ mental and social measures, and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental, 
resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE, the EMP or the RP

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14 The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project provinces to do the 
following.

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly upon 
submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE. the EMP or the RP. promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks Or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and 
requirements set forth in the EMP or the RP promptly after becoming aware of 
the breach.

Human and Fmoncla! Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

15 . The Borrower shall make available or shall cause the Project provinces Io make 
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP and the RP 
In particular. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure dial the 
environment consultants, whose qualification are acceptable to ADB, are engaged and 
deployed in a timely manner



19
Schedule 4

Prohibited List of Investments

16 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that no proceeds 
of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS

Gender and Development

17 The Borrower, through MAF, shall ensure that me gencfer mainstreaming activities are 
(a) incorporated into the Project design and undertaken during Project implementation, and (b) 
monitored by the Division Advancement of Women within MAF

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16 . The Borrower shall ensure that safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable 
to ADB are established in accordance with Ihe provisions of the EARF, EMP and RP at the 
project management office, within the timeframes specified in the relevant IEE EMP and RP 
to consider safeguards complaints.

Subproject Eligibility and Priority

19 , i he Borrower shall ensure that only candidate subprojects listed in the List of Eligible 
Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project

20 The Borrower shall ensure that candidate subprojects m each Project province are 
taken up in the order of priority indicated in the List of Eligible Subprojects and shall cari^y out 
feasibility studies and detailed design for such candidate subprojects

21 . The Borrower shall require oi cause the Project Provinces to require certification of 
UXO safety to be issued lor each Subproject through the office of Provincial Governor. Where 
UXO clearance is required, the Borrower shall arrange and finance this work, using the 
Borrower's UXO trust fund in accordance with its standard procedures. The UXO clearance 
requires a 12-month notification for inclusion in the Borrower programs.

Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering Design Review

22 . After completion of the combined feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs 
(design report), candidate subprojects shall be reviewed by PAFO who shall report to the 
Provincial Steering Committee, and shall be taken up for physical implementation only if (a) 
the concerned WUGs commit to paying the irrigation service fees at a level that meet the 
requirement ol the operation and maintenance plans as approved by the Loan Implementation 
Consultant: and (b) they meet the selection criteria as provided in the PAM

23 . In case that a candidate subproject does not meet the criteria provided rn the PAM, it 
shall be replaced by the next priority candidate subproject for the respective Project province 
under the List of Eligible Subprojects If candidate subprojects not listed in the l.ist of Eligible 
Subprojects are to be considered for financing under the Project, they shall be examined and 
screened by MAF with the support from an independent consultant acceptable to both ADB 
and the Borrower and submitted to ADB for approval



2D
Schedule 4

Proiect Irrigation Scheme

2*1. fhe Borrower shall ensure that (a) each irrigation scheme to be developed under the 
Project shall ho longer be included in the prowincial or national register of required rice 
production aieas for the dry season, (b) the irrigation schemes io the Project shall have 
completed irrigation management transfer processes with both WUG and WUAs established 
prior to the award of any related Works contract and shall toimaily Identify the required 
irrigation service fee to enable operation and maintenance Of the irrigation command area, and 
(cj the use of the irrigation service tee collected by WUAs in the Project irrigation schemes 
Shall be limited to the operation and maintenance requirement of the scheme until such time 
when the WUAs' bank account has a year-end balance of a! least two years operational and 
maintenance requirements, and the WUAs. based on majority member, will distribute to village 
or district officials any funds in excess of this amounl

l abor Standards, Health, and Safety

25 . The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable 
laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation The Borrower shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the Borrower's 
applicable labor law and regulahons and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms, (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation, (d) do not use forced labor (e)do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment, and (fl disseminate, of engage appropriate service 
providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases incktding 
HIV/AID8, to rhe employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the 
local communities surrounding the Project area particularly women The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Counterpart Support

26 . The Borrower shall ensure that the counterpart funding required tor successful Project 
implementation is timely allocated and provided The Borrower through MAP and Project 
provinces, shall ensure that qualified staff are added to the project management units in a 
timely manner

27 . In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that MAP and the Project 
provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy 'heii liabilities arising from any Works. Goods pnd/or 
Services contract.

Financial Ma nag en lent

26 . The Borrower shall implement the financial management plan as agreed with ADB and 
set forth in the PAM. In particular, the Borrower shall {a) make available the government staff 
in sufficient numbers and with the required academic background and/or experience, as per 
the positions and the timelines in accordance with the PAM; (b) ensure that he standardized 
financial management manual for Project is developed and agreed by the Borrower's 
concerned ministries prior to the commencement of any activities under the Project, and (c) 
undertake monitoring of the implementation of the financial management plan.



21
Schedule 4

Malching Grant

29 rhe Borrower shall implement activities to be financed by the matching grant tn 
accordance with its guidelines, and report to ADB details of the activities on an annual basis.

Governance and Anti corruption

30 . The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anti corruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents 
any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project, and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation

31 The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are 
included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the light of 
ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.





