





















































51081-002: Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3746-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED J/ /

KGZ 51081



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated. ■ '' A -■ xW£etween KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the purposes 
of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB ("Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources (“Grant1') in the amount of sixteen million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($16,800,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(b) “Disaster Risk Management Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(c) “DWR" means the Department of Water Resources and Melioration 
under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;



2

(d) “EARF" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared byADB;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “Hydrometeorology Installation Works” means Works to install any 
hydrological and/or meteorological equipment under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project, including any Works to install 
the hydrological posts referred to in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(i) "IEE" means the initial environmental examination for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(k) “Irrigation Infrastructure Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(l) “KyrgyzHydromet'1 means the Agency for Hydrometeorology under the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MOES" means the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) "Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(p) "O&M" means operation and maintenance;



3

(q) “PAM'1 means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) “PIU” means the Project implementation unit to be established within 
DWR to assist with the execution of the Project;

(s) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time In accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

, (t) "Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods,
- Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from

time to time);

(u) "Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(v) "Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreement) means DWR and MOES, both 
individually and collectively, or any successor to either of them 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(w) "Project facilities” means the irrigation infrastructure to be protected, 
modernized and provided, and the equipmentto be installed, piloted and

( provided, under the project;

(x) "RF" means the resettlement framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(y) "RP” means the resettlement plan for a Subproject, or, as may be 
required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);



4

(co)

(dd)

(ee)

“Subproject” means a subproject under the Irrigation Infrastructure 
Component of the Project that meets the subproject eligibility criteria set 
forth in the PAM;

“Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
Including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract; and

"WUA" means a water user association or union of water user 
associations established and operating under the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on “Unions (Associations) of Water Users and Unions of Water 
User Associations" adopted by the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 8 February 2002 and signed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 15 March 2002, as such law may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-one million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($21,800,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The Interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05, The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01, The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 

i of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time,

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

(

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project In 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 



6

were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only In the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, the Works and the Services, and any relevant records and 
documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following Is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Grant Agreement.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the execution and delivery of the Grant Agreement on behalf of the Borrower 
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary governmental action.

Section 6.02, The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 



7

to be furnished to ADB: that the Grant Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erkindik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2424,



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

Authorized Representative
'bitkitjqul Jcenbaeva

CountryJBirector
Kyrgyz Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved climate change and disaster resilience 
of infrastructure and water security.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) the protection and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to improve 
the productivity of approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigated land, 
including by upgrading and constructing main (primary and secondary) 
canals, lower-level (intra-farm and on-farm) canals, and associated

, Infrastructure such as protective mudflow crossing structures, cross-
t regulators and offtakes;

(b) the enhancement of (i) irrigation system management, including by 
developing and Implementing joint DWR-WUA irrigation system 
management plans with, among others, water delivery scheduling and 
O&M financing and planning; and (ii) agricultural land management, 
including by developing WUA on-farm water management and 
agricultural management plans with, among others, irrigation 
scheduling, cropping patterns, and cultural methods, and providing 
capacity building for farmers and community members; and

(c) the improvement of national disaster risk management capacity, 
including by providing heavy machinery and special equipment for 
preventative and rehabilitation works at the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES; enhancing the asset 
management of such centers; providing capacity building for disaster

[ risk management, including project planning; installing hydrological
posts for KyrgyzHydromet in approximately 20 sites; and piloting an 
Information system for enhanced data collection, processing and flood 
warning.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2025.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(expressed in Dollar)*

15 May 2027 454,167
15 November 2027 454,167
15 May 2028 454,167
15 November 2028 454,167
15 May 2029 454,167
15 November 2029 454,167
15 May 2030 454,167
15 November 2030 454,167
15 May 2031 454,167
15 November 2031 454,167
15 May 2032 454,167
15 November 2032 454,167
15 May 2033 454,167
15 November 2033 454,167
15 May 2034 454,167
15 November 2034 . 454,167
15 May 2035 454,167
15 November 2035 454,167
15 May 2036 454,167
15 November 2036 454,167
15 May 2037 454,167
15 November 2037 454,167
15 May 2038 454,167
15 November 2038 454,167
15 May 2039 454,167
15 November 2039 454,167
15 May 2040 454,167
15 November 2040 454,167
15 May 2041 454,167
15 November 2041 454,167
15 May 2042 454,167
15 November 2042 454,167
15 May 2043 454,167
15 November 2043 454,167
15 May 2044 454,167
15 November 2044 454,167
15 May 2045 454,167
15 November 2045 454,167
15 May 2046 454,167
15 November 2046 454,167
15 May 2047 454,167
15 November 2047 454,167
15 May 2048 454,167



11
Schedule 2

TOTAL 21,800,000
' The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of ti»e Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(expressed in Dollar)*

15 November 2048
15 May 2049
15 November 2049
15 May 2050
15 November 2050

454,167
454,167
454,167
454,167
454,151



12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each Item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the 
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
{ insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB

may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
...... .... ........ (I)_________

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1
DWR - Civil Works (Off-farm 
Canal and Ancillary); Equipment & 
Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,390,973 76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2 MOES - Civil Works; Equipment 
& Machinery; O&M; and Services 10,559,541

76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

3 Interest during Implementation 849,486 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 21,800,000
* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project is 
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM and its 
appendices. Any subsequent change to the PAM or its appendices shall become effective only 
after the approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy 
between the PAM or its appendices on the one hand, and this Loan Agreement or the Grant 
Agreement on the other, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement shall 
prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements; the Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all 
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower, through DWR, shall not award any Works contract for a 
Subproject which involves environmental impacts until DWR has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the State Agency of 
Environmental Protection and Forestry of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

This paragraph 3 shall apply similarly to MOES for all Hydrometeorology Installation Works 
that are covered by an IEE and EMP.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary 
resettlement impacts fora Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. This paragraph 4 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology 
Installation Works that are covered by an RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the preparation, 
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each 
Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and all Project facilities comply with (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; 
(b) the Environmental Safeguards: (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the respective IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all land and all rights- 
of-way required for the Project, each Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and 
all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule 
agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities 
are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

I 7. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP for the Subproject.

This paragraph 7 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology Installation Works that are 
covered by an RP.

Indigenous Peoples

8. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, through DWR and/or MOES (as the case 
may be), shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.



16
Schedule 4

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall make available necessary 
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the RPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant IEE, EIMP and RP (to the extent they concern 
impacts on affected people during construction), and any corrective or

, preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works (as the case may be) that were 
not considered In the relevant IEE, EMP or RP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of

( construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of any Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works that were not considered in the 
relevant IEE, EMP or RP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and



17
Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or RP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that no proceeds of the 
Loan or Grant are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the core labor
. standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project
I implementation. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall include specific provisions in

the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall strictly monitor compliance with 
the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

( 15. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower shall make available all counterpart funds required for the timely 
and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of funds or cost overrun, 
through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable funds in a timely manner 
In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to DWR and MOES and ensure 
that DWR and MOES have sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from any Works, 
Goods and/or Services contract under the Project.

Operational Covenants - DWR

17. The Borrower, through DWR, shall appraise and select all Subprojects in 
accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the PAM. The Borrower, through DWR, 



18
Schedule 4

shall ensure that the selection of sites for the feasibility study of potential Subprojects, and the 
selection of sites for the implementation of selected Subprojects, are undertaken in accordance 
with criteria and procedures agreed upon between DWR and ADB as set out in the PAM and 
its appendices.

18. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each Subproject is implemented 
in accordance with applicable design and technical specifications and construction norms 
satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, quality control and contract management 
are performed in accordance with best international Industry practice. The Borrower, through 
DWR, shall ensure that the detailed design of each Subproject incorporates the findings of the 
climate risk assessment that was undertaken as part of the feasibility study of the Subproject.

19. (a) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that all Project facilities are 
operated and maintained, in an effective and sustainable manner, In accordance with the 
applicable laws, regulations and standards of the Borrower and, in other respects not covered 
by such laws, regulations and standards, in accordance with best international industry 
practice.

(b) The Borrower, through DWR, shall timely develop, approve, adopt and 
implement a joint WUA-DWR sustainable O&M plan for each irrigation infrastructure to be 
protected and modernized under the Project. As set out in the PAM and its appendices, each 
such plan shall Include, but shall not be limited to, (I) a water delivery schedule and (ii) an asset 
management plan including an O&M budget and cost sharing. The Borrower, through DWR, 
shall ensure that budgetary and other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as 
necessary for the O&M of each irrigation infrastructure to be protected and modernized under 
the Project, and, at any given time, the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall 
not be less than the total sum required, at that time, to cover the O&M expenditures indicated 
in the O&M budget referred to in this sub-paragraph (b).

(c) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure the timely development and
( implementation of agriculture and on-farm water management plans under the Project. As set

out in the PAM and its appendices, each such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (i) 
cropping patterns including introduction and diversification of crops and (II) irrigation methods 
and scheduling. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each such plan shall be 
endorsed by the Council (established and operating under the applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower on WUAs) managing the WUA that will be implementing the plan.

Operational Covenants - MOES

20. (a) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all equipment and 
Information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk Management 
Component of the Project are operated and maintained appropriately and In accordance with 
the standards and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, and adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. 
The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that adequate, appropriate and timely 
arrangements and resources are in place for the preventive and standard maintenance of the 
said equipment and information systems after their warranty periods expire. The Borrower, 
through MOES, shall timely develop and implement sustainable asset management and 
maintenance plans for the heavy equipment to be provided to the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES.



19
Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all MOES divisions, 
offices and units, including MOES associated entities and centers, that receive and operate 
the equipment and information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are adequately staffed with personnel who have been 
fully trained, in accordance with the requirements of and as otherwise contemplated by the 
PAM, to operate and maintain them.

(c) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all heavy machinery 
and associated equipment provided under the Disaster Risk Management Component of the 
Project is used only by MOES, or a government agency duly authorized by MOES, and only 
for the purpose of preventative and recovery works related to disaster risk management, 
including the maintenance of structures provided under the Project to protect irrigation 
infrastructure from flood and mudflow. The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that such 
equipment is not leased or otherwise permitted to be used by any third party for any 
construction or other commercial activity.

(d) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all hydrological and/or 
meteorological equipment and information systems provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are, in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower, transferred and/or made available for use by KyrgyzHydromet 
promptly after their provision.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions 
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and Implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

23. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall provide updated information on 
the Project on their websites, Including information on performance, business opportunities, 
bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.























































49026-002: Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3633-VlE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in .the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 42. April ZOAg

VIE 49026



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated Apii£ between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, 
Ha Giang, and Lang Son (“Project Provinces”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make 
available to the Project Provinces the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ARVC” means agriculture and rural value chain;

(b) “Candidate Subproject” means a candidate subproject for financing 
under the Project, a list of which has been agreed upon between the 
Project Provinces and ADB and provided in the PAM;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);



2

(d) ’ “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan to help in carrying out activities as described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the 
Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(f) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and'requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable.) of 
the SPS;

( (h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any
x update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces and

cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(k) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces pursuant to 
the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

( (I) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Onlending Agreement” means, the agreement or agreements entered 
into between the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and each of the 
Project Provinces for the purposes of relending a portion of the 
proceeds of this Loan as specified in Section 3.01 of this Loan 
Agreement;



3

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) . “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project facilities” means facilities developed, constructed, updated 
and/or maintained under the Project;

(t) “Project Province” means each of the Borrower’s provinces of Bac 
Kan, Cao Bang, Ha Giang, and Lang Son where the Project is carried 
out;

(u) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Framework” or 
“REMDF” means the resettlement and ethnic minority development 
framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(v) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Plan” or “REMDP” 
means each resettlement and ethnic minority development plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Project Provinces pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
REMDF and cleared by ADB;

(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces to ADB that describes progress 
with implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the 
REMDPs (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;

(y) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement 
and the relevant provisions of the PAM; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule.set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall (i) make a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Project Provinces through budget allocation, and (ii) 
relend the balance of the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Provinces under the respective 
Onlending Agreements, all upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



5

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 
Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2023 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower, through the Project Provinces, shall 
enable ADB's representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant 
records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project Provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Onlending Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under any Onlending Agreements shall be 
assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates the Project Provinces 
as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or 
permitted under Section 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02 and 
5.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 
Project Provinces pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan 
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as 
if taken by the Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on the Project Provinces under 
Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 
of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

State Bank of Vietnam
47 - 49 Ly Thai To
Hanoi, Viet Nam



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(84-4) 38250-612
(84-4) 38258-385

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632)636-2331.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

LEMINH HUNG
Governor

State Bank of Viet Nam

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase production, and movement of goods 
and passengers within the Project Provinces and to major domestic and international 
markets.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs.

Output 1: Road network connectivity among the Project Provinces 
improved. Carrying out Subprojects to upgrade provincial and district roads, 
including road safety measures and training.

Output 2: Rural water supply improved. Carrying out Subprojects to 
develop water supply schemes.

Output 3: ARVC infrastructure in Lang Son province improved. Carrying 
out Subprojects to support the development of shared horticultural trade and 
marketing services for horticultural commodities, through provision of viability 
gap grants to the selected enterprises and producers groups.

Output 4: Decentralized public asset management processes 
established. Supporting the implementation of the Borrower’s decentralized 
public asset management program.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2023.



10

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Payment Due
15 January 2023
15 July 2023
15 January 2024
15 July 2024
15 January 2025
15 July 2025
15 January 2026
15 July 2026
15 January 2027
15 July 2027
15 January 2028
15 July 2028
15 January 2029
15 July 2029
15 January 2030
15 July 2030
15 January 2031
15 July 2031
15 January 2032
15 July 2032
15 January 2033
15 July 2033
15 January 2034
15 July 2034
15 January 2035
15 July 2035
15 January 2036
15 July 2036
15 January 2037
15 July 2037
15 January 2038
15 July 2038
15 January 2039
15 July 2039
15 January 2040
15 July 2040
15 January 2041
15 July 2041
15 January 2042
15 July 2042
TOTAL

Payment of Principal 
(expressed in US$) 

3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 
3,750,000 

150,000,000



11

SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed put of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the 
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Category 1A, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Bac Kan Province, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and executed and 
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government 
entity) and the Bac Kan Province, and is legally binding upon the 
parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

Category 1B, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Cao Bang Province,. in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Cao Bang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

Categories 1C and 2, until the Onlending Agreement between the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and the Ha Giang Province, in form 
and substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Ha Giang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms; and

Category 1D, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Lang Son Province, in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Lang Son Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated for 

ADB Financing Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account**(Dollar)

Category Subcategory
1 Project Costs 144,686,400

1A. forBac Kan Province* 32,884,373 100% of total expenditure claimed***

1B for Cao Bang Province* ' 33,039,415
100% of total expenditure 
claimed***

1C for Ha Giang Province* 31,418,624 100% of total expenditure claimed

1D for Lang Son Province* 47,343,988
100% of total expenditure 
claimed****

2 Consulting Services for Ha Giang Province* 1,587,004
66 percent of total expenditure 
claimed***

3 Interest Charge 3,726,596 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 150,000,000
Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.

** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
*** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services.
**** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services and detailed engineering design consulting services.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to 
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured 
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan 
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods 
set forth below:

(a) National Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any 
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for the respective 
Subprojects which involves environmental impacts until it has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s competent 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

7. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject 
involving involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous peoples impacts until the relevant 
Project Province has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP for the Subproject 
based on the Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of the REMDP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality- 
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified 
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Fixed Budget Selection for Project audit

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured 
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants 
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, 
unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement 
Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social, 
Financial and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the 
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. 
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Project Provinces and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM 
and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) 
the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no 
Subproject which meets the ADB’s Category A environmental criteria as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all 
land and all rights-of-way required for each Subproject and all Project facilities are made 
available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related 
Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in 
compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective REMDP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no 
Subproject which meets the Involuntary Resettlement Category A as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, 
the REMDF or the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to 
ensure , that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the 
Subprojects until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and



17
Schedule 5

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

7. ' The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction, 
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) the REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the respective REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no 
Subproject which meets the Indigenous Peoples Category A as defined under the Safeguard 
Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower shall make available and cause the Project Provinces to make 
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all 
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and the REMDP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the relevant Project Provinces with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation 
of the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the 
REMDP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project Provinces to do 
the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;



18
Schedule 5

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts' 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the REMDP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

< 12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

(
Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a) 
the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources are allocated 
for implementation of the GAP; and (c) progress on implementation of the GAP, including 
progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the 
core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and

( incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced 
labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from using a legally permissible means of expressing 
their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of 
employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, 
information. on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular, reports.

Selection and Implementation of Subprojects

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a) 
only Candidate Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project; (b) Candidate 
Subprojects in each Project Province are taken up in the order of priority as indicated in the 
PAM; (c) feasibility studies and detailed design for such Candidate Subprojects are carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions under the PAM; and (d) only Candidate 



19
Schedule 5

Subproject which meets feasibility criteria as provided in the PAM is financed as a Subproject 
under the Project.

Community Awareness and Beneficiary Participation

16. The Borrower shall ensure that Project Provinces promote active community 
awareness and stakeholder participation in the design, implementation and performance 
monitoring of Subprojects, through (a) disseminating the nature of the proposed Works in 
open public forums, and (b) establishing a mechanism for public consultation during Project 
physical implementation activities.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the counterpart 
funding required for successful Project implementation is timely allocated and provided. The 
Borrower shall further cause the Project Provinces to adequately staff and equip their 
respective Project management offices.

18. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project 
Provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Consulting Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

19. The Borrower shall ensure that each of the Project Provinces shall (a) prepare 
a maintenance management plan that includes estimates of the physical works and 
associated costs required for routine and periodic maintenance, as well as provisions for 
emergency repairs for the whole life of the Project facilities; (b) include the maintenance 
management plans in its annual budgets and provide adequate funds in a timely manner 
from provincial budgets to implement the maintenance management plan; and (c) establish 
mechanisms for the safe and proper use for each of the Project facilities in accordance with 
national regulations and practice, including, but not limited to, posting signs on roads and 
bridges of maximum weight limits, and as necessary alerting users of hazards or establishing 
physical barriers that prohibit vehicles above a certain size to pass.

Financial Management

20. The Borrower shall ensure that the financial management action plan as 
agreed between the Project Provinces and ADB and included in the PAM is implemented in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe as indicated in the PAM, but in any case within one 
year of the Effective Date.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower (a) acknowledges ADB's right to investigate, directly or through 
its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practices relating to the 
Project; and (b) agrees to cooperate, and shall cause the Project Provinces, and all other 
offices of the Borrower, organizations and entities involved in implementing the Project to 
cooperate, fully with any such investigation and to extend all necessary assistance, including 
providing access to all relevant books and records, as may be necessary for the satisfactory 



20
Schedule 5

completion of any such investigation. In particular, the Borrower shall ensure that (a) periodic 
audits of the Project contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are 
carried out; (b) relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) are included in all bidding documents for the Project; and (c) contracts financed under 
the Project include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of Project Provinces, contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.























































47381-005: Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2


LOAN NUMBER 3625-SRI

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2)

between

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 18 MAY 2018

SRI 47381



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 18 May 2018 between DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the 
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the 
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program;

(B) by a periodic financing request dated 2 October 2017, the Borrower 
has applied to ADB for (i) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on concessional 
terms (“Concessional Loan”); and (ii) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on regular 
terms (“Ordinary Operations Loan”); each for the purposes of the Project described in 
Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement (as defined 
hereafter);

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Ordinary Operations 
[Concessional] Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from its ordinary 
operations resources an amount of thirty-one million Dollars ($31,000,000) for the purpose of 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the 
context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II



The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventy-nine million Dollars 
($179,000,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR; and

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a 
credit of 0,10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 



outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in 
Section 2.01(6) of the Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan Regulations 
and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary 
Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where 
any such item has hot been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with 
those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the 
contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 



terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) 
shall have been fulfilled.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, 
the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with its terms, subject 
only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations.



ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Each of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and 
Mass Media, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and Director General of the Department of 
External Resources of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Secretary
Ministry of Finance and Mass Media
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka

cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources

Facsimile Numbers:

+94 11 243-3349
+9411 244-7633

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA

R.H.S. SAMARATUNGA 
Secretary

Ministry of Finance & Mass Media

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
SRI WIDOWATI
Country Director

Sri Lanka Resident Mission



SCHEDULE 1

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

TOTAL

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)

1 May 2023 3.333333
1 November 2023 3.333333
1 May 2024 3.333333
1 November 2024 3.333333
1 May 2025 3.333333
1 November 2025 3.333333
1 May 2026 3.333333
1 November 2026 3.333333
1 May 2027 3.333333
1 November 2027 3.333333
1 May 2028 3.333333
1 November 2028 3.333333
1 May 2029 3.333333
1 November 2029 3.333333
1 May 2030 3.333333
1 November 2030 3.333333
1 May 2031 3.333333
1 November 2031 3.333333
1 May 2032 3.333333
1 November 2032 3.333333
1 May 2033 3.333333
1 November 2033 3.333333
1 May 2034 3.333333
1 November 2034 3.333333
1 May 2035 3.333333
1 November 2035 3.333333
1 May 2036 3.333333
1 November 2036 3.333333
1 May 2037 3.333333
1 November 2037 3.333343

100.000000



2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount 
of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be 
the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as 
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to 
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category 6 is for interest and commitment charges 
on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works, Consulting 
Services, and PMU and PIU operational costs, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 
20% of the Loan amount.



TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing 

__________ ($)
Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account
Category Subcategory

1 Civil Works 140,470,000

1A UEC-ICB-2A

O
ltti 114,890,000

85% of total expenditure 
claimed

1B NWPC-ICB-1 25,580,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

2 Environment Mitigation 820,000
W®- •<

100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3

Consulting Services 
(Project Management, 
Design and 
Supervision 
Consultant)

5,970,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

4 PMU and PIU Operation Costs 7,000,000
s 100% of total expenditure 

claimed

5 Equipment Operation Maintenance 5,660,000
81% of total expenditure 
claimed

6 Interest andCommitment Charges 17,240,000 100% of amounts due

7 Unallocated 1,840,000

TOTAL 179,000,000



