















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 6027-PAK (COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Punjab Water Resources Management Projects) 

between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED15 T.olo

PAK 51036



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated riLloXo between ISLAMIC REPUBLIC 

OF PAKISTAN (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan under an ADB project 
readiness financing (“PRF") to finance preparatory activities for prospective projects ("PRF 
Activities”) described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and

(B) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term "Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations as a 
defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF Activities".

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations as a defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF 
Executing Agency”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Amortization Schedule" means the amortization schedule for 
repayment of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan (in the event 
that the PRF Loan is not refinanced by ADB), as set forth in Schedule 2 
to this Loan Agreement;

(b) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “Ensuing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement to be entered 
into between the Borrower and ADB for an Ensuing Project which also 
provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(d) "Ensuing Project(s)" means the prospective project(s) to be financed by 
ADB, that satisfy the selection criteria set forth in Schedule 1;

(e) "Existing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement entered into 
between the Borrower and ADB for an ongoing project financed by ADB, 
an amendment of which provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(f) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(h) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “PRF Executing Agency" within the meaning of the Loan Regulations 
means the Punjab Irrigation Department of the Government of Punjab 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the PRF Activities;

(j) “PRF Implementing Agencies" means the Punjab Irrigation Department 
and the Punjab Agriculture Department of the Government of Punjab, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(k) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(I) "Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(m) "Procurement Regulations’ means ADB's Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) "Refinancing Date" means the date no later than the first Principal 
Payment Date that is either (i) the effective date of the Ensuing Loan 
Agreement; (ii) the effective date of the amended Existing Loan 
Agreement; or (iii) such other date as may from time to time be agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(o) “Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services; and

(p) “SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009).

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of eight million three hundred and twenty thousand 
Dollars ($8,320,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the Amortization 
Schedule.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest on the Loan shall be payable semiannually on 
1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. In the event that the Loan is refinanced by ADB pursuant 
to an Ensuing Loan Agreement or an Existing Loan Agreement, on the Refinancing Date:

(a) the Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn 
from the Loan Account along with any interest accrued hereunder in 
accordance with the terms of the Ensuing Loan Agreement or the 
Existing Loan Agreement; and

(b) the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account 
shall terminate and any unwithdrawn amount of the Loan shall be 
cancelled.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures relating to the PRF Activities in accordance 
with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the PRF Activities, the Borrower 
shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall or shall cause the PRF
Executing Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the PRF Activities; (ii) 
prepare annual financial statements for the PRF Activities in accordance with financial 
reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually 
by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of 
each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on 
the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which 
sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the PRF Activities that were identified in the 
course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each 
related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management 
letter, all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and 
the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the PRF 
Activities and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the PRF Activities and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate 



5

to the PRE Activities with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise 
agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the PRF Activities and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51)910-4016.



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 8636-2444 
(63-2) 8636-2484.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

By____
DR.

AKI STAN

Economic airs Division 
Ministry of Economic Affairs

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC

VAIZ ABBAS 
S^cfetary

ASIAN DEVE PMENT BANK

By
XIAOHONG YANG 

Country Director 
Pakistan Resident Mission



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the PRF Activities

1. The PRF Activities shall comprise:

(a) project preparatory activities in the form of feasibility studies and due 
diligence assessments, including preliminary engineering design; cost 
estimates: technical, financial, integrity, economic, and socioeconomic 
analysis; environmental analysis; and social impact assessment;

(b) detailed engineering design, and preparation of environmental and 
social safeguards planning documents;

(c) advance procurement actions, including preparation of bidding 
documents and supporting the bidding process until contract award; and

(d) capacity development for the PRF Executing Agency and PRF 
Implementing Agencies in PRF project preparation and implementation 
including procurement, contract management, financial management, 
safeguards planning and monitoring, and gender aspects.

2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB, the PRF Activities
are expected to support preparation of the Ensuing Projects that satisfy the following selection 
criteria:

(a) Relevance: the project is in line with the overall objective of the PRF that 
is to (i) meet the policies and strategies of the national and provincial 
governments, and ADB. including sector operational plans, country 
partnership strategy and is included in the country operations business 
plan; and (ii) ensure high implementation readiness for the ensuing 
projects;

(b) Technical: the technical design will meet relevant guidelines and 
regulations of the Borrower. The technical feasibility will be assessed 
through detailed examination of the project s compatibility with local 
conditions, including current and projected climate variables, availability 
of water sources, proximity to the residents, and available land for 
project facilities. Alternative design options will be identified and 
assessed;

(c) Governance: both the executing agency and the implementing agency 
of the proposed project have an established capacity to administer and 
implement externally-funded projects including those financed by ADB. 
Both the agencies have adequate financial management and 
procurement capacity to manage activities related to the preparation of 
the proposed projects supported under the PRF;



8

(d) Safeguards: project preparation and design activities for the project 
supported through the PRF are expected to have no environmental or 
social impacts, as the project will only finance consulting services. The 
proposed project will fully meet the requirements of the SPS.

3. The PRF Activities are expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



9

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date.



* The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations. 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.



11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charges" is for financing interest
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the PRF Activities. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion 
of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, In consultation with 
the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Project Management 430,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,950,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
3 Interest Charges 470,000 100% of amounts due
4 Unallocated 1,470, 000

TOTAL 8,320,000



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities are implemented in accordance with 
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

2. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities do not have any environmental, 
indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS.

Prohibited List of Investments

3. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity 
included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Procurement

4. The Borrower and the PRF Executing Agency shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Consulting Services is carried out in accordance with 
the Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations;

(b) Consulting Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Consulting Services obtained (including all computer hardware,
software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party; 
and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of Consulting Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities 
from the contractor, supplier, consultant or service provider with respect 
to the matters referred to in this subparagraph.



14
Schedule 4

Governance and Anticorruption

5. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as 
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
PRF Activities; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

6. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB 
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the PRF Executing Agency, PRF 
Implementing Agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers 
as they relate to the PRF Activities.




































































50264-002: Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project


LOAN NUMBER 8389-CAM

LOAN AGREEMENT 

(Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

dated 0 7 DEC 2020

CAM 50264



LOAN AGREEMENT

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 0 7 DEC 2020 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB")

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
("A Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources in an amount of seventy million Dollars ($70,000,000) ("A Loan') for 
the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the A Loan Agreement (“Project”).

(B) the Borrower has also applied to Agence Franpaise de D6veloppement 
(“AFD”) for a loan ("AFD Loan") in Euros which is equivalent to twenty-five million Dollars 
($25,000,000) to assist in cofinancing a part of the Project, upon the terms and conditions 
set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and AFD (“AFD Loan Agreement");

(C) by an externally financed grant agreement of even date herewith between 
the Borrower and ADB ("JFPR Grant Agreement’), the Borrower has also applied to the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction for a grant (“Grant") in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) 
to be administered by ADB for the purpose of the Project.

(D) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a loan ("B Loan") for the purposes 
of the Project to be funded by ADB entirely from a participation by ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
Limited (“AIF");

(E) by a participation agreement of even date herewith between ADB and AIF 
("Participation Agreement"), ADB has agreed to grant to AIF a participation in the B Loan 
(“Participation") on the terms and conditions set forth therein; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a B Loan to the Borrower upon the terms and 
conditions set forth herein and in the Project Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and 
the respective PFIs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

General Conditions; Definitions

Section 1 01 All the provisions of the General Conditions Applicable to 
Loans made by ADB Funded Through Participations of ASEAN Infrastructure Fund Limited, dated 
9 May 2017 ("General Conditions ), are hereby made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the 
same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, however, to the following 
modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (dd) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor



2

“Project Agreement’ means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB and a PFI, as such agreement may be 
amended from time to time; and such project agreement includes all 
schedules to the Project Agreement.

(b) The term "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01 (a)(i), 
8.01(d). 8.01(f). 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the General Conditions shall 
be substituted by the term “PFI".

(c) Section 3.02 (Interest) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Interest Charge. An interest charge at the rate specified in the 
Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. 
The interest charge shall accrue from the respective dates on which 
amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet interest charge 
payments, when and if due.

(d) Section 3.03 (Commitment Charge; Maturity Premium) is deleted and the 
following is substituted therefor.

Computation of Interest Charge. The interest charge shall be 
computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

(e) Section 3.04 (Computation of Interest and Other Charges) is deleted and 
the following is substituted therefor:

Repayment and Prepayment. (a) The Borrower shall pay 
the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the amortization schedule to the Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days' written notice to ADB, the 
Borrower shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a 
date acceptable to ADB (provided, that the Borrower shall have paid 
all amounts due under the Loan Agreement as of such date): (i) all of 
the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or 
(ii) all of the principal amount of any one or more maturities of the 
Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount 
which is (i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this Section; or (ii) less than the full 
amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this 
Section, ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so 
received in any manner and for such purposes under the Loan 
Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.



3

(f) Sections 3.05 (Repayment and Prepayment), 3.06 (Rebate). 3.07 
(Surcharge) are hereby deleted.

(g) Sections. 3.08 (Place of Payment). 3.09 (Sale of Loan) and 3.10 (Change 
of Law) shall be renumbered as Sections 3.05. 3.06 and 3.07, respectively.

Sec tion 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms 
defined in the General Conditions and in the A Loan Agreement have the respective meanings 
therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional term used in 
this Loan Agreement have the following meaning: “interest charge ’ means a charge made on the 
B Loan pursuant to Section 2.02

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB agrees to make to the Borrower the B Loan in
an amount of five million Dollars ($5,000,000), with funds to be obtained entirely through the 
Participation in the B Loan by AIF

(b) The B Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means the 
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the rate 
of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum thereafter on the on the amount 
of the B Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest and other charges on the B Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2 04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the B Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3 01. The Borrower shall relend a portion of the proceeds of the 
B Loan to each of the PFIs under a separate Subsidiary Loan Agreement for purposes of the 
Component 1 Each Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall provide inter alia for the relending of the 



4

proceeds of the B Loan to each of the PFIs, the carrying out of the Project, and the rights of the 
Borrower and ADB with respect thereto. Such Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be in form and 
on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, and shall be without prejudice to. and without 
limitation on. the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02 (a) Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds
of the B Loan made available to the PFIs shall be used only for making AIF Subloans to Eligible 
Sub-borrowers for AIF Eligible Activity and shall be applied exclusively to the cost of Goods, 
Works and Services and other items of expenditure required to carry out such AIF Eligible Activity.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the B Loan made applicable to 
the PFIs to be applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project, specifically for 
purposes of the AIF Eligible Activity by the Eligible Sub-borrowers, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.03 The proceeds of the B Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.04 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of 
the B Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement.

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 of 
the General Conditions shall be 30 August 2027 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01 In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project 
facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in 
Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. In addition to the information and reports set forth in 
Sections 6 01 and 6 04 of the General Conditions, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be 
furnished, to ADB all such reports and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning 
(a) the Eligible Sub-borrowers, the AIF Eligible Activity and the AIF Subloans; and (b) the 
administration, operations and financial condition of each PFI.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to inspect 
the Project, any Eligible Sub-borrower, any Eligible Activity, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in accordance 
with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited 



5

annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each 
such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the B Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets 
out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the 
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof 
as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project 
and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date of ADB's 
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB. upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize 
and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested 
by ADB This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree

Section 4.05 The Borrower shall not take or permit any action which 
would interfere with the performance of PFI's obligations under this Loan Agreement or under the 
Project Agreement.

Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the B Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be 
assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB

Section 4.07. ADB's obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB's receipt of a corresponding amount from AIF in accordance with 
the terms of the Participation Agreement. In the event AIF does not pay any amount of the 
Participation in the B Loan to ADB. ADB. by notice to the Borrower, shall cancel the corresponding 
amount of the B Loan.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01 The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the General Conditions:



6

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
A Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
AFD Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Section 5. 02 The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the General Conditions: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the General 
Conditions: the A Loan agreement will have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the General Conditions, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the A Loan Agreement has been duly authorized or approved by. and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
General Conditions.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the General 
Conditions.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes of 
Section 11.01 of the General Conditions:



7

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance 
St. 92. Sangkat Wat Phnom 
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855) 23 427-798
(855) 23 428-424

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their representatives 
thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in their respective 
names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the principal office of ADB.

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



9

nts for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4 03 of 
the General Conditions.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the B Loan and the allocation of the B Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the B Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of B Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table.

(a) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the B Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB. are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB may. by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the B Loan proceeds shall be disbursed
in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5 . Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for [Financial services Category] until Subsidiary Loan 
Agreements with both PFIs. in form and substance satisfactory to ADB. shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of respective PFI, and shall have become fully effective and 
binding on the parties thereto in accordance with their terms.



12
Attachment to Schedule 2

TABLE

• Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 2

ALLOCATION A ND WITHDRAWAL OF B LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for AIF Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Cooperative support 2,772.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
2 Financial services 2.000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed
3 Unallocated 228,000

TOTAL 5,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3977-NEP(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Priority River Basins Flood Risk Management Project)

between

NEPAL

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 22 DECEMBER 2020

NEP 52195



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 22 December 2020 between NEPAL ("Borrower”) 
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's 
Special Funds resources in an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000) ("Grant”) for the 
purpose of financing expenditures under the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(b) “DHM” means the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(c) “DWRI” means the Department of Water Resources and Irrigation of the
Borrower, or any successor thereto;



2

(d) “Environmental Management Plan" or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for the Project, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the I EE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “FOs” means the field offices for the Project established under the 
Project Executing Agency;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(i) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means DHM and DWRI, or any successor to 
the foregoing acceptable to ADB;

(k) “IPP” means the indigenous peoples plan for the Project, and including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB, as described in paragraph 7 of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MEWRI" means the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation 
of the Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(n) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(o) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
August 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(p) “PIU” means the project implementation unit established in DHM;

(q) “PMU” means the project management unit established under the 
Project Executing Agency;



3

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
August 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) "Procurement Policy” means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(t) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(u) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MEWRI, or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(v) "Project facilities” means the facilities to be constructed, rehabilitated or 
improved under the Project;

(w) "Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(y) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million Dollars ($40,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE HI 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for
the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the 
date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss
the financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Grant shall have become liable for 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of 
the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Secretary or Joint Secretary (International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Division) of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance 
Singhadurbar, Kathmandu
Nepal



7

Facsimile Number:

(977)1-4200537

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444 
(632)8636-2391.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SHREEKRISHNA NEPAL 
Joint Secretary

International Economic Cooperation 
and Coordination Division 

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Officer-in-Charge
Nepal Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved resilience of communities to flood risks
of selected river basins in the Terai region of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) improved flood protection infrastructure, through (i) construction of flood 
control infrastructure; (ii) bio-engineering of river embankments for 
enhanced flood risk management; and (iii) development of maintenance 
manuals and asset management systems for flood protection 
infrastructure;

(b) enhanced systems for flood forecasting and response, through 
(i) installation of rain gauges and hydrometeorological stations; 
(ii) development of flood forecasting systems; and (iii) improved 
maintenance of flood forecasting early warning systems; and

(c) improved capacity for flood prevention and preparedness, through 
(i) implementation of a capacity-building program on flood risk 
management and infrastructure planning for DWRI and local 
governments; (ii) capacity-building of local communities on disaster 
preparedness; (iii) construction of flood shelters with gender-responsive 
features; and (iv) development of plans for community-based disaster 
risk management.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2027.

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

ro 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works 29,570,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

2 Equipment 550,000 49% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consulting Services 2,470,000 79% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,640,000 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 5,770,000

TOTAL 40,000,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) all positions identified as key personnel
within the PMU, PIU and FOs are filled for the full duration of the Project by individuals with 
adequate skills and expertise relevant to each position; and (b) vacancies in such positions, 
should they occur, are filled within 3 months.

Procurement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) the Borrower's Ministry of Forests and Environment has granted the final 
approval of the IEE; and



15
Schedule 4

(b) the Government has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP 
into the Works contract.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
each IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary
resettlement impacts, within the meaning of the Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that 
the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the 
Safeguard Policy Statement.

Indigenous Peoples

7. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not have any negative
indigenous peoples impacts, within the meaning of the Safeguard Policy Statement. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 
to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
and with the SPS, including preparation by the Borrower of an IPP, for submission to and 
clearance by ADB, and compliance with the measures and requirements set forth in such IPP,

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 



16
Schedule 4

arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or, if applicable, the IPP promptly 
after becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan or Grant are used to
finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with regular reports.



17
Schedule 4

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available, through budgetary allocations or other
means, all counterpart funds required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, 
including funds required to (a) meet additional costs arising from design changes, price 
escalation in construction costs or other unforeseen circumstances; (b) ensure effective 
operation and maintenance of the Works, both during and after completion of the Project; and 
(c) ensure the Project Executing Agency and Implementing Agencies have sufficient funds to 
satisfy liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 3 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower shall prepare a grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB, and establish a special committee to receive and 
resolve complaints/grievances or act upon reports from stakeholders on misuse of funds and 
other irregularities, including grievances due to resettlement. The special committee shall 
(a) make public the existence of the grievance redress mechanism; (b) review and address 
grievances of stakeholders of the Project, in relation to the Project, any of the service providers, 
or any person responsible for carrying out any aspect of the Project; and (c) proactively and 
constructively respond to such grievances.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Implementing Agencies
shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge 
that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any 
such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such 
investigation.

18. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding 
documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine 
the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, 
suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.



























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3932-BAN: Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing


LOAN NUMBER 3932-BAN(COL)
[Additional Financing to Loan 3731-BAN and Loan 3732-BAN(COL)]

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 JUNE 2020

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 June 2020 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
BANGLADESH ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a loan from its ordinary capital 
resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Initial Loan”) to the 
Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the project described in Schedule 1 of 
the Initial Loan Agreement (“Initial Project”);

(B) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Concessional Loan Agreement”). ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) 
("Initial Concessional Loan”) to the Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the 
Initial Project:

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
scaling up of the Initial Project, as described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED”) under the Local Government Division of the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to LGED the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and 
conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Participation Framework” or “CPF” means the community 
participation framework for the Project, including any update thereto, as 
agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Initial Project and 
revised for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Initial Project 
as revised for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 29 
April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
29 April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



3

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) "Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 16 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources (concessional) an amount of one hundred million Dollars 
($100,000,000).



4

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for suspension 
of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the purposes of 
Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Initial Loan or the Initial Concessional Loan shall 
have become liable for suspension or cancellation in accordance with the terms of the Initial 
Loan Agreement or Initial Concessional Loan Agreement respectively.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for acceleration 
of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event specified in 
Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary, Secretary, any Additional 
Secretary. Chief, Joint Secretary, Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary, Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary, Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh



7

Facsimile Number:

(880) 2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2340.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

FATIMA YASMIN 
Secretary 

Economics Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
MANMOHAN PARKASH 

Country Director 
Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1 
t

Description of the Project

1 The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

The Project will scale up the Initial Project and shall comprise improving the 
condition of approximately 930 km of rural roads to all-weather standards which incorporate 
climate resilience and safety features.

3 The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023.

11

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1 The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5 Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB

Financing 
($)

1

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

Category

1 Works 90,100,000 65% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Unallocated 4,900,000

TOTAL 100,000,000
Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the 
PAM Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this 
Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency does not award 
any Works or Nonconsulting Services contracts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.



14

Schedule 4

Community Participation Framework (CPF)

4 The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project Executing Agency to, implement
the CPF as agreed with ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower.

5 The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure,
no section or part thereof under any Works contract awarded for the Project shall be handed 
over to the contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been implemented in 
full.

Operation and Maintenance

The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and 
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to the Project Executing Agency on a timely basis for the same 
purpose.

Environment

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) 
all measures and requirements set forth in the I EE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the Project does not have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, 
Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agency to 
make available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



15

Schedule 4

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the I EE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation.or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing 
Agency includes specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB 



16

Schedule 4

under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

15 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets in the GAP are achieved.

Counterpart Support

16 The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

17 . The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18 The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.






































































51423-002: Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project


LOAN NUMBER 3896-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 MAY 2020

MON 51423



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 May 2020 between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a concessional loan (“COL 
Loan”) in an amount of twenty-five million three hundred thousand Dollars ($25,300,000) to 
assist in financing the Project from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, upon the terms and 
conditions set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“COL Loan 
Agreement”, together with this Loan Agreement, “Loan Agreements”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied to the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
for a grant (“JFPR Grant”) in an amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) to assist in financing 
a part of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon the terms and conditions set forth 
in a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CGG” means a community grower group to be supported under the 
Project;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “DEIA" means a Detailed Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(d) “EBA” means an environment baseline assessment for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMDP” means ethnic minority development plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) “EMP” means the consolidated environmental management plan for the 
Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “GEIA” means a General Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(j) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(k) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(I) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MET” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Environment and Tourism, or 
any successor thereto;

(o) “MOF” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance, or any successor 
thereto;

(p) “MOFALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light 
Industry, or any successor thereto;



3

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 18 
December 2019and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “PIU” means a Project implementation unit established within MOFALI;

(u) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated - 
18 December 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(v) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(w) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(x) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MOFALI, or any successor acceptable 
to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(y) “Project facilities” means facilities to be constructed, procured, 
rehabilitated and/or maintained under the Project;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation and compliance with the EMP, including any corrective 
and preventative actions;

(aa) “SDAP" means the social development action plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(bb) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(cc) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(dd) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fourteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($14,700,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 19 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 August and 15 February in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and



5

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3. 03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall perform, or cause 
to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 



6

management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, 
shall enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the COL Loan and JFPR Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of the COL Loan Agreement and the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been 
duly executed and delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.



7

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MOF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S.Danzan Street 5/1
Ulaanbaatar-15160
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

(976-11)320247

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2407.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Country Director 
Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase efficiency of climate resilient
agricultural production and marketing.

2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs.

Output 1: Efficient and climate-resilient irrigation infrastructure and 
management systems installed. Upgrading, modernizing and climate­
proofing selected irrigation systems along with directly associated infrastructure 
providing irrigation services for 7,000 ha.

Output 2: Environmentally sustainable production systems improved. 
Improving food safety, environment sustainability and climate resilience of 
agriculture production systems, through (a) supporting the National Institute for 
Plant Protection with testing equipment and reagents for additional testing 
capacity; and (b) supporting, through the coordination of the national extension 
center, four regional crop research institutes with: (i) provision of equipment and 
facilities such as climate-controlled growth chambers, storage cool rooms, 
sheds, fencing, mechanization packages, seed cleaning and packaging 
equipment, conservation farming equipment, and teaching facilities; (II) small- 
scale irrigation rehabilitation and modernization; and (Hi) greenhouses including 
low-carbon options for extending cropping seasons, high value vegetable 
cultivation and quality seedling production.

Output 3: Technical, institutional and management capacity and 
coordination strengthened. Setting up CGGs in the selected irrigation 
systems and providing training on improved vegetable production for CGG 
participating farmers in collaboration with crop research institutes, and providing 
mechanization technology packages, all-weather greenhouses with solar- 
powered heating and long-life films, and small cool rooms for product storage.

3. Parts of Output 1 and Output 3 shall be financed by the JFPR Grant.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal in 
said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.



12

Schedule 2

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Goods and Works3 11,391,228 100% of total expenditure claimed*

2 Services3 805,084 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Interest andCommitment Charges 837,396 100% of amounts due

4 Unallocated 1,666,292

TOTAL 14,700,000
Exclusive of VAT and duties.

a Proceeds of the COL Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to
disbursement of this loan for this category.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Environment, Social, Financial and Other Matters

General Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that an
implementation agreement shall be entered into with each aimag government which shall 
among things (a) define aimag government responsibilities for operating and maintaining the 
irrigation systems, (b) ensure sufficient amount of funding for maintenance is in place in the 
aimag annual budget, (c) ensure small-farmers are the beneficiaries of the irrigated systems 
for at least 15 years (land lease agreement period), (d) have appropriate systems in place for 
selecting land leasers to be included in the irrigated systems area, (e) ensure there are 
transparent irrigation fee systems in place which shall cover, at least partially, O&M costs.

Procurement

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall not award any
Works contract, and shall ensure no Works contract is awarded, which involves environmental 
impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:



16

Schedule 4

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s relevant 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

Counterpart Funds

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a)
counterpart funds are made available to the Project in a timely manner, including additional 
counterpart funds, as and when required, to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during 
Project implementation; and (b) O&M of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In 
addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from Works, Goods, and/or Consulting Services 
contracts.

Environment

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, commissioning, implementation and operation of the project 
and all Project facilities comply with: (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all 
measures and requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower. In case of any discrepancy or inconsistency among the 
Borrower’s laws, regulations and procedures relating to environment, health and safety and the 
SPS, the SPS shall prevail.

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works shall be conducted for a subproject until domestic requirements for environmental 
assessment have been completed and approved by the relevant domestic agencies. This shall 
include, but not be limited to: (a) the preparation of an EBA for each subproject by a certified 
domestic agency, and the submission of this assessment to MET for review; (b) the issuance 
of a GEIA Letter by the MET, which endorses the subproject EBA and clarifies whether a DEIA 
is required; (c) the preparation of a DEIA for each subproject, as required; and (d) subsequent 
review and approval of the DEIAs by MET. The Borrower, through the Project Executing 
Agency, shall further ensure that any environmental safeguard conditions specified by MET for 
any subproject, through the GEIA Letter, DEIA, or other means, which are not covered under 
the project EMP, shall be (i) integrated in the EMP, and (ii) included in all bidding documents.

8. After completion of the EBA, GEIA, and/or DEIA for each subproject, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall submit the following documents to ADB 
for review: (a) the summary findings of the EBA, GEIA Letter, and DEIA; and (b) English- 
language translations of the GEIA Letter and MET letter of conclusion following completion of 
the DEIA. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that any findings 
or conclusions that represent new safeguard risks and/or mitigation tasks or costs which are 
not already included in the EMP, shall be discussed between MET, MOFALI, PIU and ADB 
and any additional requirements shall be included in the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that, in
compliance with SPS, an ecological survey for rare, threatened and restricted-range species 
and their uses of the subproject area will be implemented, by a certified biodiversity 
specialist(s) and using an internationally accepted survey methodology for Okhindiin Tai 
subproject. The resulted assessment shall (a) cover the ecological values of the specific 
subproject area, (b) strengthen the preliminary ecological impact assessment undertaken in 
the IEE, (c) develop detailed mitigation measures, and (d) conclude on the final net (residual) 
ecological impacts and whether these are acceptable under the SPS and/or national 
regulations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that 
such assessment will be undertaken before the detailed engineering designs are completed 
and approved, and can be done as part of, or in parallel with, the DEIA. No works shall 
commence for the subproject before ADB and the Borrower have reviewed and approved the 
ecological survey, impact assessment, and detailed engineering designs.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
pesticides or other chemicals classified as “hazardous" or restricted-use by the World Health 
Organization or the government will be funded by the project. Prohibited chemicals shall 
include omethoate and methamidophos (pesticides) and bromadolion (a rodenticide).

11. In compliance with national requirements for the provision of environmental
flows, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the water 
allocation extraction volumes calculated for each subproject for environmental flows and 
irrigation (and which are included in lEE’s Appendix 5 and the feasibility study reports for each 
subproject) are included in detailed engineering designs and complied with. The Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that, for this purpose: (a) water 
extraction for each subproject will be monitored on a monthly basis by each soum government 
Project coordinator; (b) the monitoring results will be reported on a monthly basis to the 
subproject soum government and PIU, and compared against the monthly environmental flow 
rates calculated for each project river; (c) the monitoring results will be submitted at least 
annually to the relevant River Basin Administration responsible for the subproject rivers, for 
review and confirmation that extraction volumes comply with the permitted allocations; and (d) 
based on these comparisons, corrective actions will be identified in the event that irrigation 
water extraction is clearly exceeding the modeled acceptable extraction volumes.

12. For the associated facilities to the Project, as provided in the PAM, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that they are maintained in 
accordance with domestic requirements for environmental management, including, but not 
limited to, environmental safety measures, water allocation approvals, and worker and 
community health and safety. In case any changes are made to such existing facilities which 
would significantly impact their capacity or function and as a result the viability of the Project, 
the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall immediately advise ADB of such 
changes, and the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall assess the Project 
impact and prepare a corrective action plan, if necessary, to be agreed with ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples

13. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project does not have any indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within 
the meaning of SPS. In the event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency and other agencies as necessary, shall take all steps 



18

Schedule 4

required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, the resettlement framework and with SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards and Social Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary human and budgetary resources to fully implement, as applicable, the EMP, SDAP 
and GAP.

Safeguards-Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

15. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and PIU to,
ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain specific provisions that 
require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under the Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) 
a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) subsequently agreed between 
ADB and the Borrower;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous people risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the project that 
were not considered in the IEE and the EMP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

16. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB semiannually during 
construction and the implementation of the Project and the EMP, and 
thereafter annually during operation, until the issuance of ADB’s Project 
completion report unless a longer period is agreed in the EMP, and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to the respective affected 
people under the Environmental Safeguards, promptly upon submission; 
and

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event 
and proposed corrective action plan.



19

Schedule 4

Gender and Social Development

17. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
GAP and SDAP are implemented in accordance with their terms; (b) the bidding documents 
and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth 
in the GAP and SDAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP 
and SDAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP and SDAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender and social outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Works Contract

18. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things (a) comply with the applicable labor 
law and regulations of the Borrower and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment; (f) do not delay any lawful payment to the workers; and 
(g) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further 
ensure that this paragraph shall be applicable to any workers regardless of their nationality, 
and strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide 
ADB with semiannual reports.

Grievance and Redress Mechanism

19. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that
safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in accordance 
with the provisions of the IEE and the EMP at the project management office, within the 
timeframes specified in the relevant IEE and EMP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Household connections

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that water
supply to all households within the water supply network under the Project is in operation with 
adequate connections by the Project completion.

Land Leasing

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, , shall ensure that the
existing land lease contracts for irrigation systems to be covered by the Project for which land 
has been leased out by the soum governments to farmers and companies for agriculture 
purpose, the existing terms and conditions of the lease are maintained. The Borrower shall 
ensure by causing MOFALI to issue a letter to soum governments involved in the project that 



20

Schedule 4

they shall not revoke land possession rights issued to farming households. Forthose irrigation 
systems with which the land lease contracts are not yet in place, the Borrower, through the 
Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all farmers have a certificate, a map of the leased 
land and a contract, with the land lease contracts with the terms and conditions which are (a) 
in line with the principle of fairness and equity; (b) reflect the willingness of households who 
are leasing land; and (c) are in line with the Borrower’s Land Law and Crop Planting Law, and 
relevant requirements by ADB.

Governance and Anticorruption

22. The Borrower shall and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and other
government agencies involved in the Project to comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, 
as amended to date) and the Borrower acknowledges that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project. The Borrower agrees to cooperate, and to cause the Project Executing 
Agency and all other government offices, organizations and entities involved in implementing 
the Project to cooperate, fully with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance, 
including providing access to all relevant books and records as may be necessary for the 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, the PIU, other government 
agencies involved in the Project, and all contractors, suppliers, consultants and other services 
providers as they relate to the Project.





