















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  
CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 

(PR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND), 
Project Team Leader; Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR), Project Team Co-leader; Héctor 
Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González 
(VPC/FMP); Jose Antonio Mejía Guerra (IFD/ICS); Alejandro Quijada (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo 
Tello (VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Carolina Vera 
(CSC/CPR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 8 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................. 9 

A. Financing instruments .................................................................................. 9 
B. Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 10 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 10 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 11 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 12 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Project economic analysis 

2. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) 

3. Program Operating Regulations 

4. Census and surveys technical report 

5. Public consultation with data users and producers 

6. Public consultation with National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI) 

7. Bibliography 

8. Sociocultural analysis 

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-35
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-33
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AWP Annual work plan 
CAA Consejo Asesor Agrario [Agricultural Advisory Council] 
CAN Censo Agrario Nacional [National Agricultural Census] 
DCEA Dirección de Censos y Estadísticas Agropecuarias [Office of 

Agricultural Censuses and Statistics] 
DGEEC Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas, y Censos [Bureau of 

Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Bureau of Planning] 
DINCAP Dirección Nacional de Coordinación y Administración de Proyectos 

[National Office of Project Coordination and Administration] 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
MAG Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
OC Ordinary Capital 
ONPI  Organización Nacional de los Pueblos Indígenas [National Organization 

of Indigenous Peoples] 
PDA Personal digital assistant 
PEU Program execution unit 
SCSP Sistema de Contrataciones del Sector Público [Public Sector 

Procurement System] 
SICP  Sistema de Información de Contrataciones Públicas  

[Public Procurement Information System] 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
WAL  Weighted average life 
WCA World Programme for the Census of Agriculture 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

PARAGUAY 
PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  

CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 
(PR-L1147) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: Republic of Paraguay, acting through the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital (OC): 15 million 100% 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15 million 100% 

Weighted average life (WAL) 15.25 years(d) 

Currency of approval: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital  

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public and 
private stakeholders. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds:  

(i) The program execution unit has been established on the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, 
to the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (see paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual execution conditions: 

The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions on environmental, social, health, and safety matters identified 
in the legal requirements section of the environmental and social management report (ESMR), including Annex B. 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original WAL of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original WAL may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 
(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Agriculture is a key sector of the Paraguayan economy. In the period 2004-2016, it 
generated an annual average of 25% of GDP, and 30% of jobs. The sector has also 
grown at an average annual rate of 5.7% over that same period. Alongside this 
growth, agricultural exports have risen significantly over the last decade, 
representing 60% of the total value of exports in 2016.1  

1.2 This solid sector performance has occurred in the context of a dual productive 
structure. On the one hand, rapid growth can be observed in some areas, especially 

soybeans, which contributed 57% of agricultural GDP growth between 2004 and 
2016. Based on Paraguay’s last National Agricultural Census in 2008 (CAN 2008), 
the production of soybeans and livestock is concentrated on lands larger than 500 
hectares. By contrast, survey data show that the average annual farm income of 
family farms (under 50 hectares, accounting for 96% of at farms, according to 
CAN 2008) devoted to sesame, cassava, sugarcane, corn, and other crops, fell from 
US$3,121 in 1991 to just US$981 in 2013. (Willi, P., 1991; A-Fines and GIZ, 2014).2 
Recent studies indicate that, to maintain this solid aggregate sector performance 
and improve farming income for rural families living Paraguay, productivity needs to 
improve through actions to promote the use of better technologies among small-
scale farmers, greater diversification of production, and the introduction of 
production systems that help to better manage climate and other risks (Nin-Pratt, A. 
et al., 2016). 

1.3 These recommendations are the result of an analysis of existing official statistics. 
However, decision-makers need robust, up-to-date information that allows them to 
work more precisely when designing and/or implementing instruments for public 
policy and/or private investment. Furthermore, the impact of different interventions 
can only be measured and assessed effectively if appropriate statistics are available. 
For that reason, statistics are needed on land use, agricultural production factors, 
the predominant economic and social conditions faced by farmers, and other areas. 
Additionally, much of the income inequality seen in Latin America and the Caribbean 
can be attributed to factors such as race, place of birth, education level of parents, 
gender, and sexual orientation. Some case studies suggest that the benefits of 
having information are much greater than the costs of generating it. For example, 
Bruce Gardner reviewed the literature that quantifies the value of information on the 
agricultural market for private decision-makers, as well as for decision-makers in the 
public sector working on policy reforms relating to trade and investment in research 
and development in the U.S. (Gardner, 2004). The study confirms that the availability 
of this information has net benefits for decision-makers. 

1.4 Data requirements for the agricultural sector are extensive and include information 
on the structure and management of agricultural holdings, agricultural production 
and inputs, food consumption, household income and expenditure, gender equality, 
the work force, and agricultural prices. There is also a growing demand for basic 
agroenvironmental data on greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, to improve 
national greenhouse gas inventories. All these data could come from agricultural 

                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. 
2  See optional electronic link 7 for a full bibliography. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
censuses and sample surveys, population censuses and surveys, administrative 
records, and other sources.  

1.5 An agricultural census is a statistical operation focused on collecting, processing, 
and disseminating data on the structure of the agricultural sector of an entire country, 
or a significant part of one. The basic objectives of agricultural censuses according 
to the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) (FAO 2015) are: 
(i) to provide data on the structure of agriculture, especially for small administrative 
units, and to enable detailed cross-tabulations; (ii) to provide data to use as 
benchmarks for, and reconciliation of, current agricultural statistics; and (iii) to 
provide frames for agricultural sample surveys. 

1.6 In an integrated agricultural statistics system, an agricultural census provides: (i) an 
integrated set of data on food and agriculture, necessary for decision-making related 
to food, agriculture, and rural development; and (ii) sampling frames for the surveys, 
which are conducted more frequently to collect more detailed and timely data. It 
should also be based on the necessary quality standards and include the 
dissemination of the information, so as to meet the information demand of the public 
and private sectors. 

1.7 The “Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics” (World Bank, 
UNSD, FAO 2010) published after a consultation process that included national 
statistical institutes, agriculture ministries, recommendations from the United 
Nations Security Council, experts and academics, and online forums. In its 
recommendations, the strategy identifies and highlights limitations in the production 
of statistical data for the agricultural sector and suggests that the conceptual 
framework for agricultural and rural statistics needs be expanded, and that the scope 
and coverage of such statistics should be broadened to include, for example, 
aspects of rural populations and households, fisheries, forestry, and other 
dimensions. 

1.8 Some countries of the region, including Paraguay, therefore implemented technical 
cooperation operation ATN/OC-14750-RG, to develop a consensus-based shared 
conceptual and methodological framework for the IDB’s Regional Public Goods 
Initiative based on technical and practical criteria, to promote the production of 
agricultural and rural statistics sustainably over time. This regional public good, 
named “Development of Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural 
Statistics Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean,” began with a diagnostic 
assessment3 of the capacity to produce and disseminate agricultural and rural 
statistics, looking at the legal framework, coordination within the national statistical 
system, financial and human resources, available infrastructure and equipment, and 
the type and quality of data. It also identified national needs, along with procedures 
for generating and/or compiling data and dissemination methods.  

                                                
3  This assessment was based on responses to a self-administered standard questionnaire sent to the 

countries. The questionnaire had 233 items grouped into 23 categories under four dimensions, which 
were used to prepare a baseline country profile. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.9 The findings of the regional public good assessment put Paraguay4 in Group 2 out 

of four groups, with Group 1 being the “weakest countries,” and Group 4 being the 
“strongest countries.” Group 2, “intermediate to weak countries,” also includes 
El Salvador, Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Lucia. According to this 
diagnostic assessment, the main limiting factors for agricultural statistics in 
Paraguay are institutional weakness due to a scarcity of resources, both human 
(core training) and material (physical infrastructure), and weak methods and 
practices. Added to these are poor coordination within the national statistical system 
and unawareness of data quality5 (see details in Table 1). 

 
Table 1. Limiting Factors for Agricultural Statistics in Paraguay 

Dominant 
limitations 

• Transportation equipment for field activities 

• Sound methodology implemented for agricultural surveys 

• Development and updating of sampling frames 

Significant 
limitations 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the main offices 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the field 

• Technical skills of available statistical personnel 

• Up-to-date information technology hardware 

• Up-to-date information technology software 

• Lack of available funds for planned statistical field activities 

• Interagency coordination 

Relevant 
limitations 

• Number of support staff in the field for statistical activities 

• Office equipment (phone, Internet, office furniture) 

• Turnover of professional staff 

• Information sources exhausted 

 

1.10 Paraguay’s current regulatory framework puts responsibility for producing 
agricultural statistics on the Ministry of Agriculture,6 as is the case in other countries 
inside and outside the region such as France, Uruguay, India, and the U.S. The legal 
foundation for statistical activities is based on two main laws: Executive Order 11126 
of 1942, which reorganizes the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) and gives it the authority for “technical direction of all statistical work;” and 
Law 81 of 1992, which designates the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics 
(DCEA) as the executing agency responsible for preparing agricultural statistics and 
keeping them up to date by regularly conducting the CAN. Paraguay has also 
developed the National Strategy for Statistical Development, based on the principles 

                                                
4  On a scale of 0 to 100, Paraguay received 28 points, ahead of only Argentina (21) and Venezuela (14) in 

a group of 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries that averaged 45. The best score was obtained 
by Mexico (82), followed by Brazil (71). Among the items with the lowest score were: (i) coordination 
within the statistical system, strategic vision and planning, and trained human resources, with a score of 
0; (ii) data collection technologies, with 9; and (iii) awareness of quality, with 23. 

5  “Diagnóstico sobre las capacidades instaladas en los países de ALC para la producción y difusión de 
estadísticas agropecuarias rurales” [Diagnostic assessment of installed capacities in the LAC countries 
for the production and dissemination of rural agricultural statistics], Miguel Galmés, technical cooperation 
operation ATN/OC-14750-RG IDB. 

6  Law 81/92 of 22 December 1992 establishing the organizational and functional structure of the Ministry 
of Agricultural and Livestock (MAG). 



 - 4 - 
 
 

 
of the PARIS 21 initiative.7 Nevertheless, the statistical sector is not coordinated as 
a whole, nor is there one institution with the legal mandate to lead and coordinate 
the process of preparing statistics across sectors and institutions. 

1.11 Paraguay’s most recent agricultural census was performed in 2008 and was the fifth 
in the country’s history since 1944. A decade has passed since that census 
(CAN 2008), and the information from it no longer reflects the current conditions in 
the country. It lacks the data to assess quality (omission and nonresponse rates), 
nor is there data on information requests classified by type of user or how that 
information is used. Some users have questioned the reliability of the data, because 
of the way the field work was done, and the data processed. The data are also not 
broken down by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples. Paraguay does not 
have a system of regular, reliable surveys to monitor and follow up on trends 
occurring after the previous intercensal period (1981-2008). Data need to be 
quantified on the expansion of the land area devoted to annual crops, deforestation, 
new operators and the development of technology-based business production 
models, news ways of organizing production, and other developments. 

1.12 The Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) is the unit of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) responsible for “preparing and updating 
agricultural statistics, for which it regularly conducts the National Agricultural 
Census.”8 A preliminary assessment of the current organizational and financial 
structure of the DCEA reveals weaknesses in: (i) technical human resources, in 
terms of both number and knowledge that is sufficiently up to date to work using 
advanced technologies and statistical methods (out of 39 DCEA employees, only 
15 have university degrees, and 50% of those have low levels of training or outdated 
knowledge of census procedures); (ii) equipment and materials (100% of computer 
hardware is obsolete, and the vehicle fleet has been reduced by 80% over the last 
five years); and (iii) strategic planning for data collection based on statistical 
methods. Annual DCEA estimates of agricultural output are derived from data 
provided by authorized data reporters, which is an imprecise and unreliable type of 
information. Consequently, strengthening the DCEA both technically and 
administratively would benefit the decision-making and policy formulation process of 
the MAG, and particularly its Bureau of Planning (DGP)9 responsible for planning, 
monitoring, coordination, and assessment, as well as other public and private 
entities.  

1.13 The assessments mentioned above clearly underscore the need to strengthen 
country systems for agricultural statistics. This means not only having more 
information available, but improving the timeliness and quality of that information in 
a cost-effective manner. Adopting modern information technologies is a key factor 
in meeting these objectives, as their benefits in quality and economic efficiency have 
been proven in other countries. An example is the use of personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to conduct surveys and censuses, known as computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI), instead of pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI). Reliability, 
accuracy, timeliness, accessibility, and consistency are all quality indicators for 

                                                
7  The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS 21), established in 1999, 

promotes the better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. 
8  Law 81/92, Article 8. 
9  A MAG unit: http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias. 

http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias.


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
censuses that show improvements with the use of these new technologies (Baker 
et al, 1995; Caeyers et al., 2011; Seligson and Moreno Morales, 2015; Benstead et 
al., 2017). 

1.14 The Bank’s experience. Since 2007, the Bank has approved a series of investment 
loans to help support censuses and strengthen statistical systems. These include: 
the Program to Support the Economic Census (loan 1918/BL-PR); Program to 
Develop the National Statistical System through the 2012 Population and Housing 
Census (loan 2542/BL-PR); Project to Improve the Agricultural Statistical 
Information System and the Agricultural Information Service for Rural Development 
in Peru (loan 3272/OC-PE); and the Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 
(loan 3798/BL-GY). Public good ATN/OC-14750-RG, Development of a 
Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural Statistics Systems in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is also now in execution.  

1.15 Based on these operations, as well as the recommendations of the FAO’s World 
Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) and IDB technical note 
“Experiencias en el diseño estadístico y realización de censos nacionales del sector 
agropecuario y rural” [Experiences in the statistical design and implementation of 
national censuses of the agricultural and rural sector] (document IDB-TN-366), 
Table 2 presents the main lessons learned and the how these have been 
incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 2. Lesson Learned 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

1. The National Agricultural Census (CAN) 
must be considered part of an integrated 

national statistical system. 

The program includes the generation of integrated 
information (census and surveys) of the national 
agricultural statistics system, as input for the 
national statistical system. 

2. Pilot testing is necessary to prepare a 
high quality census questionnaire. 

The program calls for a pilot to review and adjust 
critical parameters, such as the duration of surveys 
and the data collection and analysis method. 

3. As a project activity, it is important to 
make respondents, producers, and users 
aware of the value of accurate statistical 
information and utilizing that information to 
improve the quality of public policy and 
decision-making. 

The program will finance a communication and 
dissemination plan to raise awareness in the target 
population prior to collecting information, along with 
widespread dissemination of findings through 

various sources. 

4. The extensive involvement of public 
and private sector users in designing the 
census questionnaire ensures that useful 

information is collected. 

To design the census questionnaire, the program 
calls for workshops with the participation of public 
and private sector users. 

5. Political commitment to the census at 
the highest level is important. 

The program includes joint activities with 
Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) to ensure that 
it is a political priority. 

6. Include the gender perspective in the 
design of the questionnaires. 

The program supports the incorporation of 
questions that will generate information on gender 
and diversity in census and survey forms, following 
the guidelines of the FAO’s WCA 2020.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

7. Work with advanced technologies for 
data collection. 

The program incorporates the use of PDAs for 
personal interviews and a Web-based data 
transmission system to enhance data quality and 
reduce the time required for collection and 
analysis. It also includes the use of satellite 
imagery to make land-use and production 
estimates. The use of PDAs will also facilitate the 
implementation and quality control of the census. 

8. Institution-strengthening must be 
prioritized to ensure census continuity and 
the ongoing quality and dissemination of 
statistical information. 

The program includes investments to help 
strengthen the DCEA, so that data collection, 
analysis, and dissemination actions are 
sustainable. A cooperation agreement with the 
DGEEC is also planned. 

9. Synchronized administrative 
management is necessary when 
executing a mass data collection 
operation. 

The program calls for a company or international 
agency with experience in human resource 
management to be engaged for the selection and 
hiring of census takers. 

 

1.16 The country’s sector strategy. The project is linked primarily to the principal points 
and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, as well as the MAG’s 
Agricultural Strategic Framework 2014-2018 and Institutional Strategic Plan 
2014-2018. In terms of the National Development Plan 2030 and its major areas of 
strategic focus—poverty reduction and social development, inclusive economic 
growth, and positioning Paraguay as a global player—the project will provide 
essential input to identify evidence-based actions to support farming families and 
rural populations. The program will also contribute to the MAG’s Agricultural 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018 by supporting public policy design and the adoption 
of sector development measures, as one of the objectives is to make information 
available for such purposes. The program also fits into the MAG’s Institutional 
Strategic Plan 2014-2018 by supporting the establishment of an agricultural 
information system that integrates information on climate, economics, and 
technology, as well as statistical synthesis and studies of current economic 
conditions and sector performance, to provide the different users with data for 
decision-making. 

1.17 The Bank’s country strategy. This operation is aligned with the Bank’s country 
strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the 
strategic objective to “Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008), specifically the crosscutting themes of: 
(i) institutional capacity and rule of law, as it seeks to strengthening the institutions 
that generate agricultural statistics; (ii) gender equality and diversity, as it generates 
differentiated information by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples; and 
(iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it provides reliable 
information for building a national emissions inventory. The program is also aligned 
the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) under the 
indicator, “Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery,” through the outcome 
indicator “Improvement in institutional capacity to collect and process agricultural 
statistics” in the program’s Results Matrix. It is consistent with the Dimension of 



 - 7 - 
 
 

 
Success 1 of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which advocates that agriculture in 
the region achieve high levels of productivity and proposes the modernization of 
statistics systems as an activity under its second line of action. Lastly, it is consistent 
with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document 
GN-2587-2) through support for public sector management through integrated 
information systems. 

1.19 Approximately 6% of the resources of this operation will be invested in climate 
change adaptation activities, based on the joint methodology of the multilateral 
development banks for estimating climate finance. These resources contribute to 
the IDB Group’s goal to increase the financing of climate change-related projects to 
30% of total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 The general objective of this project is to contribute to improving the availability and 
quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public 
and private stakeholders. The program has the following components: 

1.21 Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 
(US$10.32 million). This component will finance the implementation of the 
agricultural census with emphasis on guaranteeing quality, proper thematic 
coverage, and the timely and wide dissemination of the information generated. As 
an innovation, this census will adopt the use of an electronic questionnaire and data 
capture using mobile devices in the field. The census will have a crosscutting gender 
approach, to get women more involved and increase their visibility in their role as 
both producers and workers. All relevant information will also be disaggregated by 
indigenous community and will address issues of environmental conservation. The 
agricultural census process to be financed will have the following stages: 
(i) pre-census: cartographic updates and georeferencing of farms, pre-census 
survey, and development of the data capture system; (ii) census: data collection pilot 
test and field operation; and (iii) post-census: data quality analysis, post-census 
survey, and dissemination of results. To promote the quality of data collection, this 
component also envisages: (i) validations and controls in the electronic form that 
assist census takers in their work; (ii) a pilot test in the field to validate the electronic 
forms; and (iii) dissemination actions to inform and motivate the respondent 
population. An information processing and analysis system will be developed that 
encompasses everything from database consolidation and quality control to the 
generation of the primary tabulations and making the information (including 
microdata) available to users online, in as much detail as permitted by laws and 
regulations on the confidentiality of the information. As an additional layer of quality 
control for the information generated, a post-census survey is planned to validate 
the accuracy of the census itself.  

1.22 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural 
statistics system (US$3.67 million). This component will strengthen the capacity 
of the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) to generate reliable and 
up-to-date agricultural statistics. The strengthening process includes: (i) developing 
IT tools to support the adoption of best practices for agricultural censuses; 
(ii) updating knowledge of census processes in the region by sending DCEA 
technical staff abroad and hiring experts to bring DCEA technical staff up to date on 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
practices used; (iii) renovating buildings; (iv) purchasing computer hardware; 
(v) purchasing vehicles to ensure that the DCEA can operate throughout rural areas; 
(vi) developing a model for the use of satellite imagery to produce agricultural 
statistics that can be validated with census information; (vii) conducting thematic 
studies with the census information; and (viii) conducting two surveys built on the 
census sampling frame to update relevant information on the sector. The topics of 
these surveys will depend on the studies and policy priorities, but may include 
agriculture, livestock, production costs, and family farming. Agricultural statistics are 
also expected to be incorporated into the national statistical system under an 
agreement with the DGEEC. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.23 The program Results Matrix has been agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) and 
contains impact, outcome, and output indicators for the program, as well as its 
baselines and targets. In keeping with the program objective, the impact indicators 
also seek to capture the two dimensions of availability and quality of agricultural 
information. As a substitute for availability, the number of census information 
requests is used as an indicator. The indicator to evaluate the expected changes in 
the quality of information will be user ratings. At the outcome level, indicators are 
included for three different dimensions: (i) the quality of the census will be assessed 
by comparing the census results to the results of the post-census survey, omission 
rate, and nonresponse rate; (ii) the improvement in the timeliness and availability of 
agricultural information will be verified through a shorter time lag between the 
conclusion of field work and publication of the final results, as well as through a 
shorter time devoted to data collection in the field; and (iii) the improvement in 
agricultural statistical capacity will be assessed through the rating of installed 
capacities for the production and dissemination of agricultural and rural statistics.  

1.24 As an added benefit, strengthening the agricultural census makes the source of 
information used to build Paraguay’s national emissions inventory more reliable, 
enabling Paraguay to comply with current requirements under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and transparency guidelines 
under the Paris Agreement.10 It also generates information on land use (pastures, 
forests, crops), livestock, etc., that can be used to assess resilience, design public 
policies on adaptation, and makes it possible to pose specific questions on mitigation 
and/or adaptation. The program will also benefit Paraguayan farmers and ranchers 
(currently estimated at 300,000), public and private institutions, and other links in the 
agrifood chain. 

1.25 The use of mobile devices for data capture and satellite imagery are technological 
innovations that will benefit the country’s statistical capacity in the context of the 
agreement signed with the DGEEC. The program will also receive advisory support 
from the National Secretariat for Information and Communication Technologies 
(SENATICs) on the technical specifications of computer hardware and connectivity. 
These interagency agreements, along with efforts to strengthen the MAG/DCEA, 
aim to make the generation of agricultural statistics sustainable. 

                                                
10  The Paris Agreement (2015) is part of the UNFCCC, which establishes measures to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions through mitigation, adaptation, and resilience of ecosystems to the effects of global 
warming. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40491683
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_mitigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_adaptation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_resilience


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
1.26 Economic viability. The economic analysis of the program was based on the 

economic viability of the 2018 National Agricultural Census (CAN 2018), the costs 
of which represent nearly 80% of total program resources. The analysis of the 
economic viability of the census employed the least-cost methodology (a specific 
instance of cost-effectiveness analysis). This methodology is commonly used in 
interventions of this nature, when it is recognized that the benefits (statistical 
information, in this case) have a very high value, but one that is difficult to quantify. 

1.27 The anticipated costs of the agricultural census indicate that it will be cost-effective 
(See optional electronic link 1). The estimated total cost of CAN 2018 is 
US$11,627,262,11 including all aspects of the preparation, survey, processing, and 
dissemination phases. The estimated number of productive units to be enumerated 
will be around 300,000, yielding a cost per productive unit of US$39.12 This figure is 
higher than was budgeted for the agricultural censuses in Nicaragua (2011, US$23) 
and Honduras (2008, US$27), but lower than was budgeted in Brazil (2018, US$47) 
or the actual figure in Uruguay (2011, US$73). Factoring in the land area (which 
affects the cost of field work), the cost per square kilometer of CAN 2018 in 
Paraguay will be US$29, which is higher than in Uruguay (2011, US$18.5) and 
similar to Brazil (2018, US$29), but lower than in Nicaragua (2011, US$49) and 
Honduras (2008, US$71). The cost of the agricultural census will therefore be within 
the range of costs of other recent agricultural censuses performed in countries of the 
region. 

1.28 Another relevant comparison is the costs budgeted for the census using 
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) (US$11,627,262) versus the costs 
that would be expected using pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI) (US$12,330,855). 
The use of PDAs instead of paper questionnaires will save approximately 
US$700,000. This figure does not reflect the fact that CAPI offers better quality 
control than PAPI, so the financial gains of adopting CAPI are even greater. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 This project is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1) and the specific investment modality. Its total cost is 
US$15 million, to be financed totally by the Bank from the Ordinary Capital 
resources. 

                                                
11  This figure includes the amount of Component 1, plus an amount corresponding to equipment and 

management and evaluation costs for the project. 
12  All figures presented in the economic viability analysis are expressed in 2016 U.S. dollars. The sources 

of this data are the FAO, Uruguay’s Office of Agricultural Statistics (DIEA), and the DCEA (Paraguay). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Program Cost and Financing (in US$000) 

WBS Components IDB % 

1 Component 1: Design and implementation of the 
agricultural census 

10,320 69% 

2 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities 
in the agricultural statistics system 

3,670 24% 

3 Administration, audit, and evaluation 710 5% 

4 Contingencies 300 2% 

 Total: 15,000 100% 

 * These amounts include local taxes. 

2.2 The program disbursement period will be five years, running from the effective date 
of the loan contract. Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds 
(see paragraph 3.7). 

 
Table 4. Disbursement Schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,559,201 11,117,339 895,705 803,553 624,202 15,000,000 

% 10% 74% 6% 6% 4% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social safeguard risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), the Bank has analyzed the potential environmental and 
social risks of this operation and classified it as category “B,” with a moderate level 
of risk. No significant environmental or social risks have been identified in the 
sociocultural analysis prepared for this project. The identified environmental and 
social risks relate primarily to interactions between census takers and the indigenous 
population, risks faced by census takers when travelling to socially complex areas, 
and the risk that the census questionnaire may not be sensitive enough to the 
sociocultural complexity of indigenous peoples and gender issues in agriculture. The 
sociocultural analysis includes recommendations on these issues to promote the 
inclusion of vulnerable population groups like indigenous peoples and small family 
farmers, with a gender approach. 

2.4 In accordance with Operational Policy OP-703, Directive B.6, this project requires at 
least one public consultation. This requirement was met with two consultations 
conducted with key stakeholders: (i) one with public and private sector data users, 
and (ii) another with the National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI). 
Additional consultations with other social actors are also planned as part of the 
census preparation process, especially, once a draft census form is ready. More 
information on this matter is included in the annex, Environmental and social 
management report (ESMR). 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation actions are planned. 

D. Other project risks 

2.6 The following was identified as high risk: a government changeover would affect 
priority or execution time. The planned mitigation measure is to rely on political 
consensus and the sectoral private sector, as well as the mandate contained in 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
Article 8 of Law 81 of 1992, and international commitments (the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development). The following were identified as medium risks: (i) public 
administration fails to keep pace with census operation needs; (ii) no decree issued 
to conduct the census; (iii) refusal to provide information to census takers; 
(iv) political decisions not to disseminate census results; and (v) loan contract fails 
to enter into effect in 2018. The following mitigation activities were identified and 
agreed upon, supported particularly by the Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) for 
the census, made up of prominent individuals from the public and private sector, to 
back up policy-level actions at the key entities identified: (i) the CAA will take steps 
to comply with administrative time frames; (ii) work will be done directly with the 
Office of the President; (iii) an efficient communication campaign will be launched 
(local authorities and civil society); (iv) the CAA will take steps to raise awareness 
among public sector stakeholders, with IDB support; and (v) the MAG, CAA, and 
project team will work with Congress for it to take up this law for consideration. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be the 
borrower, acting through the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), which will 
be fully responsible for administration and supervision of the program. 

3.2 The program will be implemented under the direct supervision of the MAG, acting 
through the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and the National 
Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The DCEA, supported 
by a program execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving 
as principal liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will 
perform administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and 
contracting, in coordination with the PEU. 

3.3 The key positions identified for the PEU for program execution are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) Component 1 coordinator; (iii) Component 2 coordinator; 
(iv) financial and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; and 
(vi) planning and monitoring specialist. 

3.4 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan 
proceeds: (i) the program execution unit has been established on the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, to 
the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered 
into force. These conditions must be satisfied for implementation to begin. The 
program Operating Regulations establish the basic rules for the execution of the loan 
(e.g., field work, supervision, and regional coordination, information processing and 
analysis, and fiduciary considerations), as well as the responsibilities of PEU 
members.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Procurements 
financed in whole or part with IDB funds will be conducted pursuant to the Policies 
for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(document GN-2350-9). The procurement plan contains detailed information on the 
procurements to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures 
followed by the Bank for their review. Numerous low- and medium-skilled operational 
staff will be hired (approximately 5,300 people) to collect CAN information in the 
field. To do so, an international competitive bidding process will be held to engage 
a firm with experience in human resources management, or an international agency 
with such experience will be contracted. No selection processes involving single-
source selection are planned, with the exception of fuel purchases, since this product 
can be obtained from only one source13 under the fuel provision agreement between 
Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR) and the executing agency,14 and other cases 
where it is justified under policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
applicable to program execution for financial management and planning, as well as 
procurement supervision and execution. An intervention of this nature entails 
significant travel expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees 
of the MAG or other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of 
the census, as well as process and disseminate the information generated. The 
estimated expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down 
as follows: per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional 
compensation (45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line 
with expense items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of 
employees that take on additional work.15 

3.7 Disbursements. The disbursement modality will be as established in the Financial 
Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6). 
Advances will be made preferably on a six-monthly basis, once justification has been 
provided for at least 80% of the advanced amount. Accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet must be submitted as documentation.  

3.8 Audits. The PEU will deliver the audited financial statements for the program on an 
annual basis during execution on the terms required by the Bank. The project will 
require the selection of a Plus-level independent auditing firm. The audited financial 
statements will be delivered within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, and 
the closing final statement will be delivered within 120 days following the scheduled 
date for the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan agreed upon with the 
MAG. The DCEA, acting through the PEU, will be responsible for generating and 
sharing the necessary information with the Bank to track the Results Matrix 
indicators. 

3.10 Monitoring. Throughout project execution, the PEU will prepare and deliver status 
reports to the Bank within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. These 

                                                
13  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6(c). 

14  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 

15  The program does not call for counterpart support to be factored into the calculation. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40468605
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
reports will provide a detailed account of physical and financial execution of the 
project, as well as progress on all Results Matrix indicators. The reports will also 
provide a detailed account of issues encountered during project execution, and 
corrective measures taken, as well as explain any deviation from the project 
management instruments (multiyear execution plan, annual work plan (AWP), and 
procurement plan). No later than the last quarter of each year of project execution, 
the PEU will deliver the AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction, as 
well as the maintenance plan for equipment purchased with the loan proceeds and 
the plan for meeting the environmental and social requirements established in the 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). Bank staff will conduct regular 
inspection missions and meet with PEU personnel to discuss the progress of 
activities identified in the AWP, compliance with the Results Matrix indicators, the 
AWP for the following year, and the procurement plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 In addition to overall monitoring of execution, the project will incorporate several 
different measures to oversee data gathering and ensure the quality of information 
in CAN 2018 and the agricultural surveys in the two subsequent years. Firstly, a 
cartographic update will be done, to minimize the likelihood of omissions or 
duplications during data collection. Secondly, the PDAs used to collect information 
will have a built-in, automatic verification program. This way, any inconsistency in 
responses, whether contradictions or mistakes on the part of the respondent or 
errors on the part of the census taker when entering the information into the PDA, 
will be detected and corrected immediately. Thirdly, CAN 2018 will have a Web-
based data transmission system for the immediate and simultaneous application of 
controls on progress and coverage in the field, and the data registered by census 
takers. 

3.12 As established in the monitoring and evaluation plan, the project will have a midterm 
and a final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the 
date on which 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, or 50% of the 
execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first. The objective of the midterm 
evaluation will be to review the progress of all activities, examine the causes of any 
potential deviation from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. 
The final evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the date on which 95% of the 
loan proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial 
execution by subcomponent and the source of financing; (ii) progress on outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts included in the Results Matrix; (iii) compliance with the 
ESMP; (iv) summary of financial statements, procurements, disbursements, and 
internal control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. Both the 
midterm and final evaluation will be conducted by external consultants independent 
of the PEU. 

3.13 Impact assessment. The project will have a “before and after” evaluation of the 
impact indicators included in the Results Matrix, conducted as part of the final 
evaluation described above and the project completion report (PCR). 

3.14 Additionally, CAN 2018 will include a post-census survey to measure omission and 
nonresponse rates, as well as the accuracy of certain key variables included in the 
census. This will make it possible to get an exact final value for the outcome 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Significantly, there is no known experience 
with post-census surveys in the case of agricultural censuses, so this will be the only 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
census in the region to conduct such a survey. For that reason, CAN 2018 will not 
only yield benefits for Paraguay, but serve as an international benchmark. 



Annex I - PR-L1147

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy 

or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

Yes

Increase the provision of agricultural public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting.

Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison.

The objective of the project is to contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country to support the decision-making of public and private agents. To 

achieve this objective, the project will implement two components: 1) Design and implementation of the Agricultural Census; and 2) Institutional strengthening of the entities in charge of 

the agricultural statistics system.

The documentation is well structured, with a good diagnosis of the problems and main weaknesses faced by the national agricultural statistics system, including institutional weaknesses, 

inadequate methods and statistical practices used, and lack of coordination in the national statistical system. Likewise, aspects of the previous agricultural census are identified that can 

be improved upon in terms of data quality, and the dissemination and use of these data.

The proposed solution is in line with the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic. Higher-level indicators reflect 

benchmarks established in other censuses to measure data quality. The lower level indicators reflect the design of each component. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of 

impacts, results and outputs with their respective baseline values, targets, and means to collect information. Empirical evidence is provided on the utility and effectiveness of implementing 

surveys using the Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) method; however, the external validity of this evidence is not alluded to.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-effectiveness analysis. The cost per survey, and per square kilometer, is compared between this and other censuses in the region. The census 

cost is identified using the CAPI method and it is compared to the cost of the counterfactual if the PAPI (Pen-And-Paper Interviewing) method was used. The results indicate that the 

CAPI method will provide a census of better quality and at a lower cost. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on the main costs. The results indicate that the CAPI method will allow 

the country to save a significant amount of resources, which is in contrast if the census was done using the PAPI method.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes an evaluation using two methods: 1) reflexive evaluation; and 2) ex post cost-effectiveness assessment. The reflexive evaluation will use the 

results of the census and a post-census survey to measure the quality of the data in terms of omission and non-response rates. These results will provide important information, since 

there is no evidence from another agricultural census carried out in the region that undertakes a post-census survey to verify the quality of the data

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable. Risks include mitigation actions and compliance indicators.

Evaluable
9.3

3.0

3.6

2.7

1.2

6.9

2.3

4.7

10.0

4.0

2.4

1.2

1.2



Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-
making by public and private stakeholders. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base year Final target Means of verification Comments 

Impact: Improve the utilization and value of agricultural statistical information. 

Requests and 
downloads of 
information 
generated from 
the agricultural 
census 

Information 
requests and 
downloads 

110 2009 200 DCEA reports No systematic record of consultations is 
available for the 2008 agricultural 
census. There are records of 
information requests that serve as a 
basis to estimate the quantity. 

Quality rating of 
census data 
based on user 
perceptions 

Score (1-5) To be 
determined 

2017 BL * 1.25 Survey of public sector 
users of agricultural 
information 

Create a list of users of agricultural 
information. Determine consultation 
methodology and content of the rating 
form. 
Construct baseline with opinions on the 
2008 census. 
For the new census, consider one year 
after the census is published to allow for 
dissemination. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 1: Improvement in the quality of the country’s agricultural statistics 

Difference 
between the 
results of the 
post-census 
survey and the 
census 

% N/A N/A <5% Publication of the census and results 
of the post census survey 

For the main variables: land area, 
land use, and others to be 
determined when the census form 
is designed. 

Overall 
omission rate 

% N/A N/A <5% Agricultural census fact sheet Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

Nonresponse 
rate 

% N/A N/A 1% Agricultural census fact sheet and 
database 

Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

FAO Gender 
Index 

Index 0 2009 1 The FAO Gender Index is calculated 
using items 1001-1005 of the FAO 
publication “World Programme of the 
Census of Agriculture 2020,” dividing 
the number of responses that can be 
obtained based on census 
information by the total number of 
items (5) 

Gender monitoring. 

Indigenous 
population 
index 

Index 0 2009 1 The indigenous population index has 
a value of 1 if the main census 
variables can be stratified based on 
the producer’s ethnic origin, and 0 if 
the census data cannot be broken 
down by this criterion 

Ethnic monitoring. 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 2: Improvement in the timeliness and availability of agricultural information 

Time lag 
between the 
end of field 
work and 
publication of 
results 

Months 12 2009 6 Presentation of final results Construct baseline using the 2008 
census. 

Time taken for 
field work 

Months 9 2008 4 Agricultural census fact sheet DCEA report on 2008 census as 
baseline. 

Outcome 3: Improvement in institutional capacity for the collection and processing of agricultural statistics 

Rating of 
agricultural 
statistical 
capacity 

Score To be 
determined 

2017 To be 
determined 

Report with baseline and final scores Score applied using the FAO 
methodology (“Assessing Country 
Capacity to Produce Agricultural 
and Rural Statistics,” June 2014), 
surveyed by an external 
consultant, rather than self-rating. 
Use the score directly and not 
“Class.” 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Base 
year 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
target 

Means of verification Comments 

Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 

Cartographic 
update 

Cartographic 
maps of 
departments 

0 2017  17    17 Department maps, DCEA 
technical report, and GIS 
content. With technical support 
from the DGEEC. 

 

Census 
conducted 

Census 0 2017  1    1 Preliminary results published.  

Post-census 
evaluation 
survey 
conducted 

Survey 0 2017   1   1 Report on post-census survey 
results.  
Within six months following 
census field work. 

 

Results 
disseminated 

Publication N/A N/A   1   1 Dissemination includes 
publication of results with a 
methodological note and the 
primary tabulations, as well as 
Web-based microdata 
consultation system. 

 

Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural statistics system 

Agricultural 
surveys  

Surveys 0 2017    1 1 2 Publication of survey results 
within three years following the 
census. 

 

Technical staff 
trained in 
generating 
statistical 
information 

Number of 
technical 
staff 

0 2017  15    15 DCEA report identifying 
technical staff and areas in 
which they received training. 

 

Model 
developed for 
the use of 
satellite 
imagery  

Model 0 2017    1  1 DCEA report on the results 
achieved in using satellite 
imagery to generate agricultural 
statistics.  

 



Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
 

Thematic 
studies 
performed with 
census 
information 

Number of 
studies 

0 2017    1 2 3 Documents with the results of 
the studies performed within 24 
months following publication of 
the census results. 

 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENT 

Country: Republic of Paraguay 

Project name: Project to Implement the Census and Agricultural Surveys 
System 

Project number: PR-L1147 

Executing agency Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Prepared by: Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(Fiduciary Specialists) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional evaluation for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
assessment and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) on the 
National Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The fiduciary 
agreements applicable in project execution have been prepared as a result of this 
evaluation. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE COUNTRY 

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development; nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for the 
execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared through 
auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the Integrated Financial 
Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting Subsystem (SICO), and 
other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage payment transfers to 
vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central Bank of Paraguay. The 
integration of these tools will allow audited financial statements for a program or 
project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future; in the meantime, parallel systems 
are used. External control is currently performed through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s Public Sector Procurement System (SCSP), the Bank 
makes full use of the Public Procurement Information System (SICP), as well as the 
country subsystems electronic for reverse auction and competitive bidding, for the 
amounts and categories established in the agreement for the use of these 
subsystems signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

III. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

3.1 The executing agency will be the Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), with the support of the Office of Agricultural 
Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and DINCAP. The DCEA, supported by a program 
execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will provide general 
coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, ensuring that the 
conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving as principal 
liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will perform 
administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and contracting, in 
coordination with the PEU.  

3.2 Considering the MAG’s satisfactory fiduciary performance in the execution of prior 
operations (loans 1255/OC-PR and 1800/OC-PR), acting through DINCAP, no 
fiduciary risks are anticipated that could affect meeting the program objectives. 
Nonetheless, the institutional capacity assessment of the MAG was updated during 
the preparation phase of the operation in the following areas: planning and 
organization, capacity to execute the activities programmed and organized 
(administration of personnel, goods, and services, and financial management), and 
control. The consolidated result for the MEG capabilities evaluated using the ICAS 
exhibits a medium level of development, which is associated with medium risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of the MAG and our experience to date, the opportunities 
for improvement are concentrated in the strengthening of accounting and internal 
control. 

4.2 Procurement management. The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation 
actions are envisaged.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for the 
monitoring of project-related activities. For that reason, the DCEA will prepare a 
procedures manual for the PEU that will be approved by MAG authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be included in the special 
provisions:  

a. A special bank account to be opened for the exclusive use of the program.  

b. The executing agency will deliver the audited annual and final financial 
statements for the project, with specific terms of reference acceptable to the 
Bank, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year of the executing 
agency during the original disbursement period or its extensions. The final 
audit report will be delivered within 120 days after the close of the original 
disbursement period or its extensions. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 6 

 
 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR  
PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved the use of the 
electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) of the SCSP (Law 2051/03). The use of other country systems 
accepted subsequent to approval of the project will be implemented automatically, 
and so stated in the procurement plan. 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding will be conducted 
using national bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector 
specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical specifications of 
procurements during the preparation of selection processes. No selection processes 
involving single-source selection are planned initially, with the exception of fuel 
purchases under the fuel provision agreement between Petróleos Paraguayos 
(PETROPAR) and the executing agency,2 and other cases where it is justified under 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.3 Numerous low- and medium skilled operational staff will be hired (approximately 
5,300 people) to collect information in the field. To do so, an international competitive 
bidding process will be held to engage a firm with experience in human resources 
management, or an international agency with such experience will be contracted. 
The estimated budget to engage this firm is US$335,895, and the estimated 
personnel expenditure is US$7,028,731. 

6.4 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts generated 
under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals issued 
or agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector specialist will be responsible for 
reviewing the terms of reference for the contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to the procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. A procurement workshop will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538 of October 2013, the 
use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the use 
of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000)..  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the competitive bidding (shopping) 

                                                
1  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

2  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

method for complex works (for reference, US$250,000), and for 
contracts for goods and nonconsulting services up to the amount 
established by the Bank for use of the shopping method for complex 
goods and services (for reference, US$50,000) 

(iii) Contracts for amounts equal to or greater than the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.5 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any system 
or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. The 
operation’s procurement plan and its updates will indicate what contracts are to be 
executed through the approved country systems.3 

6.6 Recurring expenditures. An intervention of this nature entails significant travel 
expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees of the MAG or 
other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of the census, as 
well as process and disseminate the information generated. The estimated 
expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down as follows: 
per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional compensation 
(45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line with expense 
items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of employees that take 
on additional work. 

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None for this operation. 

6.8 Domestic preference. None for this operation. 

 
Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and International Shortlist (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 
nonconsulting 

services 

International shortlist 
in consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

                                                
3  If the Bank approves another system or subsystem, it will be applicable to the operation, in accordance 

with the loan contract. 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 6 

 
 

Table 2. Main Procurements 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 
Estimated  

amount (US$) 

Goods    

Computer hardware and tablets ICB Year 1 1,382,014 

Procurement of vehicles ICB Year 1 617,500 

Procurement of fuel SSS Year 1 283,353 

Nonconsulting services    

Firm to contract and manage personnel for field work ICB Year 1 335,895 

Consulting firms    

Evaluation of data quality by sampling QCBS Year 2 315,857 

Field operation (7,500 surveys in two waves) QCBS Year 4 758,981 

* Link to procurement plan. 

 
Table 3. Amounts by Category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 35,588 

Goods 2,578,683 

Nonconsulting services 1,339,537 

Consulting firms 1,280,965 

Individual consultants 1,349,647 

Total, procurement plan 6,584,420 

Note: Does not include the US$7,028,731 corresponding to the operational staff expense for collection of information in 
the field, described in paragraph 6.3, as it is not a procurement. 

 

6.9 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by policy 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank, 
considering the position of the Ministry of Finance on the matter. Supervision of all 
procurement processes governed by the SCSP electronic reverse auction and 
competitive bidding subsystems (document GN- 2538-11) will be conducted through 
the country’s system.4 

6.10 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated, beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.11 Records and files. The agreed formats and procedures to be described in the 
project’s Fiduciary Manual of Functions and Procedures should be used for the 
preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

7.1 Programming and budget. (a) The PEU, reporting to the DCEA and in coordination 
with DINCAP, will centralize the coordination of execution, supported by other 
departments and units of the MAG, as necessary; and (b) the MAG will be 
responsible for budget programming, administration, and execution, under the zero-
based budget system. 

                                                
4  Depending on the scope of use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If so, it 

should be mentioned in this Annex. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43


Annex III 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses the modified cash basis 
of accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through 
DINCAP. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the Bank. 
These reports are prepared using different systems, which creates additional 
work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will be made through 
advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the monthly 
submission of a detailed financial plan for up to six months, and another for a 
longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual demand 
inferred from the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and procurement 
plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject to the 
justification of 80% of the previous advance.  

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for 
accountability will be decided by the borrower and executing agency during the 
loan negotiation process. 

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes an improvement 
plan for internal control. Additionally, the MAG internal audit unit does not 
include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency must deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, on terms of reference previously approved by the Bank. The project's 
financial statements include a cash flow statement, statement of accrued 
investment income, the notes to these financial statements, and the statement 
from the project management team. The audit report will include evaluation of 
the internal control system. The project will require the selection of a Plus-level 
independent audit firm. External audits will be covered with loan proceeds, 
estimated at US$260,000 over the planned five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based on 
project execution and internal audit reports. 

 
Table 4. Financial Supervision Plan 

Nature/Scope Frequency 

Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

Review of disbursement requests and attached reports 2/3 per year 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 

 

7.3 Execution mechanism. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to the Republic of Paraguay 
Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey 

and Census System 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary 
with the Republic of Paraguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in 
the execution of the Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey and Census System. Such 
financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the 
Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-1994 
Pipeline: PR-L1147 
 





















































   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 1 of 24 

 
 

Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 

Nickerie, Suriname 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTERMEDIATE REPORT 
 
 
  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Prepared by:  Ravindra Patandin 

Date:  May 28th, 2018 
Version: 2 

 

  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 2 of 24 

 
 

Table of Contents 
1 Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 3 

1.1 General .................................................................................................................................... 3 

1.2 This study ................................................................................................................................ 3 

1.3 Objective and approach of this Study ....................................................................................... 3 

2 Background .................................................................................................................................. 4 

3 Review studies and available information ...................................................................................... 5 

3.1 General .................................................................................................................................... 5 

3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions .............................................................................................. 6 

4 Assessment of Existing structures ................................................................................................. 8 

4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH ..................................................................... 8 

4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam ...................................................................................... 8 

4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway ................................................................................................. 9 

5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal ..............................................................10 

6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway .......................................................................13 

7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates .........................................................................................15 

 

Appendices: 
 
I Overview map (Source: EU Masterplan OWMCP, 2010) 
II Proposed Infrastructure (Source: EU Masterplan OWMCP, 2010) 
III Assessment of existing structures: Nanni weir, Van Wouw Inlet, HA Intake and IKUGH inlet and 

survey results 
IV Survey results Maratakka Spillway area 
V Overview Option 1 and 2 for Corantijn Canal supply 
VI Schematic Designs Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 3 of 24 

1 Introduction 
 

1.1 General 
The Government of Suriname has requested the Bank’s technical support in the preparation of an 
investment loan to finance a Sustainable Agricultural Productivity Program (SU-L1052). The goal of SU-
L1052 is to increase agricultural productivity in Surinam through investments in infrastructure and 
management of irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems; and by improving the quality of available 
agriculture statistics. The expected results of the I&D component of the Program are: (i) increased 
agricultural productivity in I&D areas; (ii) improved water management within I&D areas; (iii) operating 
WB effectively contributing to the operation and management (O&M) of I&D infrastructure.  
 
The objective of the Irrigation and Drainage component is to improve the functioning and management of 
I&D systems in Suriname, particularly in Nickerie District, by addressing current failings in infrastructure 
and transferring key management and maintenance responsibilities to Water Boards (WB). The program 
will finance: (i) rehabilitation/modernization of primary and secondary I&D infrastructure selected to 
benefit small- and medium-size farmers; (ii) support for developing and strengthening WB capacity to 
take over the O&M of I&D systems; (iii) capacity building of government bodies in charge of water 
resource administration for irrigation; and (iv) design and implementation of one-time incentives 
mechanisms limited in time and scope and aimed at improving efficiency in farmers’ water use and 
increasing their willingness to cover O&M costs. This component will include measures to improve the 
water resource sustainable management for its different uses, particularly by taking into account climate 
change impacts (i.e., in regard to water supply and demand) and considering adaptation measures. 
 
During the first stage of the project preparation activities, the Irrigation and Drainage consultancy and the 
Government indicated during the IDB mission that took place in November 2017 that, to improve the 
efficiency of the Nickerie I&D system and to reduce the likelihood of flooding in irrigated areas two 
structures needed to be built: Nanni Weir and the Maratakka Spillway. These structures need to be 
analyzed as part of project preparation. 
 
 
 

1.2 This study 
 
The concerned study is to review existing information and prepare preliminary designs and cost estimates 
of the two structures as well as the additional works required in the restructuring of the inlets to the main 
irrigation canals (Van Wouw, Stondansi, HA and Lateral canal). 
 
This study is part of a series of consultancies that will take place simultaneously as part of the SU-L1052 
Program preparation plan agreed between the government and the IDB, which includes: economic 
analysis, institutional capacity analysis, environmental and social analysis and a study on the hydrology 
of the Nickerie water resource base. 
 
This document presents the Intermediate Report, for the consultancy assignment to address the activities 
and planning for the feasibility assessment of the Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway. 
 

1.3 Objective and approach of this Study 
 
The specific objective of this consultancy is to carry out a:(i) feasibility study of the Nanni Weir and 
related structures, including preliminary or basic design and estimates of the investment costs required; 
and (ii) feasibility study of the Maratakka spillway and link canal to the Maratakka River, including 
preliminary or basic design and estimates of the investment costs required. 
 
The following approach is used to achieve this objective: 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 4 of 24 

- Conduct site visits and review existing data/reports on the structures 
- Consult with relevant stakeholders, including the OWMCP, LVV, OWT&C and others 
- Conduct field surveys and inspections  
- Review and propose solutions and alternative options 
- Discuss and agree on selected infrastructure works 
- Prepare preliminary designs and cost estimates 
- Assess technical and financial feasibility 
- Propose implementation schemes and procurement procedures 

 
It is noted that the Inter-Ministerial Irrigation and Drainage Coordination Working Group (IMIDCWG) 
consists of members of amongst others LVV, OWT&C and OWMCP. They are regularly consulted 
during the course of this assignment. 
 
Furthermore, discussions are held with the IDB team and other consultants participating in this project. 
This ensures that relevant available information and data is shared and cross-checked. 

2 Background 
 
Appendix I presents an overview map of existing infrastructure and (inlet and outlet) structures. Appendix 
II presents proposed improvement and new infrastructure in the EU OWMCP Masterplan (2010). 
 
The Nanni Weir 

The Multipurpose Corantijn Project initiated in 1981 was never completed due to shortage of funds.  
The construction of the Nanni Weir and related structures was the major and essential hydraulic structure 
never completed, resulting in considerable losses of expensive pumped water. 
 
The absence of a weir at the outflow of the Corantijn canal causes the water from the Corantijn canal to 
spill directly into the Nanni swamp. As a result the water level in the whole Nanni swamp needs to be 
raised before irrigation water can flow into the irrigation canals. Substantial losses in evaporation occur in 
the large Nanni swamp estimated at 30% and the whole irrigation supply becomes very inefficient and 
difficult to manage, in particular when irrigation supply is interrupted.  
 
The construction of the Nanni weir at the outlet of the Corantijn canal requires a regulating structure in 
the weir that will allow the inflow of irrigation water from the Nanni swamp into the irrigation system as 
well the outflow of excess water of the Nanni swamp into the Nanni creek through the existing Nanni 
spillway. 
 
Additional structures need to be considered and include the reconstruction of the Nanni Inlet structure 
into the Van Wouw and the Stondansi canals, the extension of the Stondansi canal, reconstruction of two 
intakes from the Stondansi canal into the HA and Lateral canals and strengthening of the swamp retention 
embankment and deepening of the Suriname canal. 
 
The master plan of the EU-financed study on the Irrigation supply of the Nickerie system identified the 
Nanni weir and related structures (estimated at 10 million USD in 2009) as the first priority for an 
improved and efficient irrigation supply with a direct impact on the areas to be irrigated and a reduction 
of pumping costs. 
 
 
The Maratakka Spillway 

The Maratakka Spillway and related link canal to the Maratakka River was one of two major and essential 
water control structures that were never completed. Implementation of the Spillway will connect the 
Suriname canal and allow the evacuation of floodwaters from the Nanni swamp and alleviate importantly 
the present flood hazards and increase fresh water supply to the Nickerie River. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 5 of 24 

The main outflow of floodwaters from the Nanni swamp is presently through the Nanni spillway into the 
Nanni Creek on the west side of the swamp close to the outflow of the Corantijn canal. The outflow on 
the eastern side of the swamp retention dike was to be realized through the Maratakka spillway that was 
however never constructed. Excessive rainfall in the Nanni catchment area causes frequently serious 
flooding, as the capacity of the Nanni spillway is insufficient for the evacuation of floodwaters.  
 
Construction of the Maratakka spillway and related connection canal from the Suriname canal into the 
Maratakka River would importantly reduce flooding problems and loss of production due to inundations 
in several polders, while the inflow of fresh water from the Maratakka into the Nickerie River would 
make additional water available for irrigation and push back saltwater intrusion. Cost estimates of the 
Maratakka spillway from the EU Masterplan did amount in 2009 to USD 750,000. 

3 Review studies and available information 

3.1 General 
 
Key reports relevant to this study are: 

• Irrigation Master Plan OWMCP (EU funded, 2010). 
• Designs of the “DOL” structures (original and “reduced” version) (Sunecon/ILACO, 1989) 

 
Abovementioned and other available literature were reviewed to understand the overall set up of the 
proposed MCP works and the hydraulic/water management aspects of the concerned Nanni Weir and 
Maratakka Spillway. 
 
The following sources / stakeholders have been contacted to obtain available data: 

• Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries (LVV) (head office and District 
Nickerie office) 

• Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communication (OWT&C) (Drainage 
department as well as District Nickerie office) 

• (Overlaying) Water board MCP (OWMCP) 
• District agencies (District Commissioner, and others) 
• Anton de Kom University (Adek) 
• Contractors, consultants and others who have worked in the MCP area. 

 
The discussions have provided valuable data to understand the recent changes and current status of the 
structures in the Project area. 
 
The table below presents an overview of key meetings and activities until date. 

Date Meeting with/ activity Subject/ Topic 

March 4th 2018 Mr. G. Van Der Kooye (Min. LVV 
Nickerie) 

Overall project, key issues and objectives 

March 9th 2018 Mr. August Lila (Director OWMCP) Overall project, key issues and objectives, available 
data, status of infrastructure 

March 9th 2018 Mr. Sanjay Triloki (OWT&C 
department Nickerie) 

Site visit Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH area, 
status of infrastructure 

March 14th 2018 Mr. Martin Smith (consultant) Discussion about the overall objectives and set up, 
involvement on different parts of project 

March 30th 2018 Field Survey Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH 
area, status of structures, measurements 

April 9th – 13th  IDB Analysis Mission IDB Mission team, Ministry LVV, IMIDCWG , Dr 
Sieuw Naipal,   

April 19-20th  Field Survey Maratakka Spillway area, measurements 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 6 of 24 

3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions 
 
A meeting was held with Mr. Van der Kooye (LVV Nickerie) on 4th March 2018. He explained the 
reasons behind the several proposed Nanni Weir and Maratakka 
Spillway including related structures and works. The key points 
are listed as: 

- Nanni Weir is needed to allow more intake of water 
from the Nanni Swamp and divert this water towards the 
north/east via the Suriname Canal. This is to feed the 
northern agricultural areas, including the remote 
Autonoom area, with sufficient fresh water. 

- There is a need for other structures to be taken into 
account for rehabilitation and construction. This 
includes Van Wouw Intake, which is in poor condition (see picture) and experience substantial 
water losses. Furthermore, some other structures need rehabilitation such as Nanni Spillway, 
IKUGH Intake (see picture) and Swamp Retention dam 
along the Suriname Canal. 

- An alternative may be considered by abandoning the Van 
Wouw Intake and making a new intake in the Suriname 
Canal close to the new Nanni Weir. 

- The Nanni Weir is needed to reduce losses from Corantijn 
Canal through flowing back into the Nanni swamp. 

- Maratakka Spillway is to have a controlled discharge of 
water during high water levels in the swamp, as the existing 
Nanni spillway does not have sufficient capacity. As such, flooding occurs regularly after heavy 
rainfall periods. 

- The Maratakka Spillway is also to discharge about 5 m3/s of fresh water during dry seasons into 
the Maratakka River. This is to push back and control the salt intrusion in the Nickerie River. 

  
An initial site visit was conducted on 9th March 2018 to the Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH area. The 
site visit provided valuable information about the status of the several existing infrastructure and 
structures. It further provided a good overview of the possible interventions proposed in the 1977 and 
2010 studies. The visit to the proposed Maratakka Spillway location could not be undertaken during this 
visit due to unavailability of airboats. The Suriname Canal, between IKUGH and Maratakka, is not 
accessible by normal boat due to floating grass/weed. 

 
Van Wouw intake and Nanni spillway   IKUGH and HA intake 
 
 
A meeting was held with Mr. August Lila, Director of OWMCP on 9th March at his office. He confirmed 
more or less the same as Mr. Van der Kooye. In addition, it was discussed that the need for alternatives to 
supply more water is direly needed for the northern/Autonoom Area. The operation of the Wakay pumps 
is affected due to insufficient available fuel. The use of larger storage volumes of fresh water from the 
Nanni Swamp should be considered as much as possible. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 7 of 24 

Mr. Lila also indicated that there were alternatives designed for the Nanni Weir in the so called “DOL 
Werken (klein)” from 1989. These were the simplified works for Distribution, intake and retention as 
compared to the original DOL works.  
Furthermore, discussions in the past were also to increase the pump capacity at Wakay from 30 to 50 
m3/s. 
 
It was discussed with Mr Lila to provide the following data (if possible within 2 weeks): Historical (long 
range) water levels (swamp, rivers, canals), rain fall data, flow discharge measurements, levels of dams 
and canals (measured in the recent past) and copies / scans of relevant reports.  
OWMCP is in charge and maintains the Corantijn Canal, Wakay pumps and inlet/outlet structures along 
the Corantijn Canal.  They furthermore conduct water level measurements and other management tasks as 
provided in the state decree for OWMCP. All levels (divers) are regularly checked to see if the NSP 
levels are correct. 
 
Mr. Sanjay Triloki, from OWT&C drainage department in Nickerie, joined the site visit and provided 
valuable information about the operation of the several structures. OWT&C is in charge of operating and 
maintaining all main inlets and outlets, such as Van Wouw, Nanni and IKUGH. The swamp retention 
dam was rehabilitated in 2016/2017 and is now in most sections at sufficient height. Only smaller parts, 
e.g. along Corantijn Canal, may not be at sufficient height (info from Mr. Lila).  
Mr. Tiloki emphasized to look at structures that would be able to work under different water level 
conditions. The current inlet and outlet main structures are more than 40 years old and need some proper 
rehabilitation.  
His view is that it may be cheaper to construct an inlet 
near halfway Suriname Canal (after the Lateral Canal) 
than to reinforce the Swamp Retention Dam over a 
length of over 30 km. He noted that the Suriname Canal 
is linked with Nanni Swamp through several 
channels/drains. This was confirmed during the site 
visit (see picture). 
Also the Nanni Swamp has always water, but due to 
low water levels during dry seasons, intake for 
irrigation can not be done under gravity. Farmers in the 
north of the swamp often use their own pumps to take water from the Suriname Canal for irrigation. 
 
Mr. Triloki mentioned that it takes lots of efforts to keep the lengthy canals clean. The Suriname Canal 
between IKUGH and Maratakka is only partially clean.  
He also indicated that regular maintenance in the far past was conducted by a pontoon with an excavator 
or draglines on it. This pontoon was operated continuously for all canals, including Nanni Creek up to the 
Nanni lake/reservoir further south. This way sufficient water was released through the Nanni Creek, even 
in dry periods. At the moment, the Nanni Creek is not maintained due to lack of accessibility and high 
costs for special swamp excavator equipment. The creek has a reduced discharge capacity. 
 
A meeting was held on 14th March 2018 with Mr. Martin Smith, another consultant in this project. The 
site visit data and initial findings until date were exchanged with him. Furthermore, the overall objectives 
and base set up of this project were discussed. It was understood that Mr. Smith would focus on the Water 
Board rehabilitation works and other related activities to improve the efficiency of water use and 
management. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 8 of 24 

4 Assessment of Existing structures 
 
The following existing structures or areas have been visited for inspection and assessment of current 
condition.  

1) Nanni Spillway 
2) Van Wouw Intake structure 
3) HA Intake Structure 
4) IKUGH Inlet structure 
5) Swamp Retention dam (Stondansi canal, Lateral canal) 
6) Surinam Canal 
7) Corantijn Canal/dam (only section near Nanni Weir location) 
8) Maratakka Spillway area (end of Surinam  Canal/link to Maratakka River) 

 
Field topographic surveys and measurements have been conducted as and where possible. 
 

4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH 
 
The existing structures: Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw Intake, HA Inlet and IKUGH inlet have been 
inspected and their conditions have been checked. This general assessment was to understand if the 
existing structures would fit within the main infrastructure system for water supply and if rehabilitation 
would suffice to be included in the main system or new structures would be needed. The results are 
presented in a separate report in Appendix III.  
 
Note: the further detailed investigation and related rehabilitation works and costs are conducted through a 
separate consultancy activity of the IDB and are not part of the scope of this Report. 
 
Also, the report includes some cross sections of the Swamp Retention dam (between Stondansi and 
Surinam Canal) and Surinam Canal with levels. It appears that the Swamp Retention dam has an average 
crest level of about NSP +4.0 m. This implies that the further increase to the required NSP +4.45 m would 
only need a clay backfill of average 55-60 cm (considering some settlements) and hence would probably 
not involve a major risk of instability (sliding of slopes) of the dam. Also the dam has already been 
constructed for over 30 years, so the sub-soil is most probably stabilized over time. 
 
The Swamp Retention dam along Lateral Canal could not be measured due to inaccessibility (canal was 
overgrown).  However, from field check near IKUGH it was observed that the crest level of this dam is 
more or less at similar elevation as the dam along Stondansi Canal. 
 
The embankment dam between the Surinam Canal and Nanni Swamp is at approx. NSP +2.20 m in the 
section along the Stondansi Canal. It is assumed that the level of the swamp embankment in the section 
along the Lateral Canal is more or less the same. This embankment would be prone to instability if the 
dam needs to be raised with 1 to 2 meters. 
 

4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam 
The Corantijn Canal, including side embankments, has been rehabilitated about 10 years ago. The crest 
level of the swamp retention dam is reportedly at sufficient elevation. Some spots show settlements and 
may require some maintenance. OWMCP carries out regular inspections and repairs when possible. 
 
The Corantijn Canal flows uncontrolled into the swamp area and Surinam Canal near the Nanni Spillway. 
This open section is about 350 m long. The swamp retention dam needs to be continued along this section 
with a crest level at NSP +4.45 m, in order to have a controlled conveyance of water from the Corantijn 
Canal to the agricultural areas. The existing open water area near Nanni Spillway and the future Nanni 
Weir can be further excavated to create a pond area from where water can be distributed to different 
directions.  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 9 of 24 

The dam can be constructed on the existing embankment with the Nanni Swamp using clay from the 
canal and pond. 
 

4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway 
 
The proposed Maratakka Spillway location was difficult to access. It is located at the end of Surinam 
Canal and the beginning of the linkage to the Maratakka River and the access from the Surinam Canal 
was practically impossible due to the heavy overgrown canal. The linkage canal was partially (1.5 km) 
accessible by boat. Further travel had to be by walking on the old northern dam along this canal. 
There are no known benchmark levels nearby, so the water level at IKUGH (30 km distance) was used to 
estimate the approximate levels in NSP (National chart datum) in the Surinam Canal at Maratakka. The 
elevation levels at this location may therefore have a +/- 15 to 20% deviation.  
 
The cross section measurements are shown in Appendix IV. 

Surinam Canal end part near Maratakka  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Link canal to Maratakka River (overgrown)  View from end dam Surinam Canal 
 
The crest level of the Swamp Retention dam (north) along Surinam Canal and at the end is about NSP 
+4.0 m. This means that the spillway structure will require some excavation of the end dam to lower the 
level. 
It is expected that a sand ridge (also referred to as Cupido ridge) goes further to the south and parallel to 
the Surinam Canal. The top of this sand ridge is unknown, but from previous estimates (Environmental 
studies 2007 and hydrological studies 1977) it is assumed that the top varies between NSP +3 and +4 m. 
It is likely that the end dam at Surinam Canal is connected to the sand ridge, and thus blocking or 
reducing free flows from the swamp to the link canal (towards Maratakka River). 
  

Maratakka Spillway location. End dam 
Surinam Canal, connecting to sand ridge 

Link canal (4 km) to 
Maratakka River 

Possible sand ridge in swamp 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 10 of 24 

5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal 
 
This section contains an assessment of two alternatives to distribute the water from Corantijn Canal to the 
agricultural areas. During dry seasons water levels in the Nanni Swamp gets below the required level of 
NSP + 2.50 m to distribute water under gravity into the agricultural areas. At this level, the pumps at 
Wakay start operating and fill up the Corantijn Canal (source: OWMCP). 
 
There are two options to distribute the Corantijn Canal water to the agricultural areas in Eastern and 
Western polders (up to Lateral Canal 1). See Appendix V. 

1) Option 1: the water is distributed through the Stondansi Canal (about 3.75 km) and via a new 
connection (850 m) to the Lateral Canal 1 (about 7 km). 

2) Option 2: the water is distributed through the Surinam Canal (total 11.5 km) 
 

 
In both options it is assumed that the distribution of water will primarily focus on supply to the Eastern 
and Western Polders. The Autonomous Area will only receive water from Corantijn Canal if there is 
sufficient available. That means that a hydraulic structure (end control gate) is required in both options. 
 
Both options also require that the new Swamp Retention dam (approx. 350 m) between the existing dam 
of Corantijn Canal and the existing Swamp Retention dam at Stondansi / Surinam Canal.  
 
The Swamp Retention dam between Stondansi and Surinam Canal is about 4.5 km long and the Swamp 
Retention dam between Lateral and Surinam Canal has a length of about 7 km. 
 

Cross section 1-1 (Stondansi and Surinam Canal) for Option 1 and Option 2. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 11 of 24 

Cross section 2-2 (Lateral and Surinam Canal) for Option 1 and Option 2. 
 
The table below contains an overview of the assessment of both options. 
 
Overview of details and assessment of Option 1 and 2 

Works/items Option 1 Option 2 
Closing dam between Corantijn 
Canal dam and Stondansi 
Swamp Retention dam 

Closing dam with crest level at NSP 
+4.45 m, approx. 350 m long. 

Required, same as Option 1. 

Increase of Swamp Retention 
dam crest level. Total length 
about 11.6 km (Stondansi 4.6 
km and Lateral 7 km). 

Increase from NSP +4.0 m to NSP 4.45 
m. About 60 cm (incl settlement) 
increase over about 8 m wide crest. 

Required, same as Option 1 

Widen/re-profiling Stondansi 
Canal to allow more flow, less 
hydraulic losses 

Widen and re-profiling of Stondansi 
canal (about 2-3 m wider, with stable 
slopes both sides) 

Not applicable for Option 2. 

Increase swamp/Surinam canal 
embankment crest level and re-
profiling Surinam Canal.  
 
Total length about 11.5 km. 

Not applicable for Option 1. Raise crest level from NSP +2.20 m to 
about NSP +3.50 m to avoid Corantijn 
Canal water going into swamp. Close all 
open connections between swamp and 
Surinam Canal in this section. About 1.5 
m (incl settlement) higher over 5-6 m 
wide crest with shallow slopes (for 
stable dam). 
Re-profiling of Surinam Canal to convey 
water with less hydraulic losses. 
 
Note: raising the embankment further 
could impose higher risks of instable 
side slopes and slides. This would 
increase costs and time to allow for 
gradual settlement and water pressure 
dissipation in the underground. 
 

New Nanni Weir Needed at junction of Nanni Creek/ new 
swamp retention dam 

Required, same as Option1.  
(Note: swamp water will be conveyed to 
HA/IKUGH via new Nanni Weir and 
Surinam Canal) 

End control structure at end of 
Eastern Polders (start of 
Autonomous area) 

New outlet/end control structure at end 
of Lateral Canal 1. Discharge into 
Surinam Canal 

Same as Option 1. 
New outlet/end control structure at end 
of Surinam Canal. Discharge into 
Surinam Canal 

New Canal New Canal connection (850 m) between 
Stondansi and Lateral Canal 1. Including 
end check hydraulic structure at end of 
Stondansi Canal to control water levels. 

Not applicable for Option 2 

Rehabilitate existing hydraulic 
structures 

Rehabilitate Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw 
and IKUGH. 
Construct new HA Intake together with 
end check structure Stondansi 

Rehabilitate Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw 
and IKUGH, same as Option 1. 
Rehabilitate HA Intake structure. 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 12 of 24 

 
The cost comparison for both options is shown in the table below. Some works are the same for both 
options and have not been included for the comparison. Only the differences are shown. 
 
Cost comparison Option 1 and 2 (excluding structures applicable for both) 

Works/Item Cost Option 1 Cost Option 2 
Increase swamp embankment 
(along Surinam Canal) crest level.  

Not Needed. Approx. 15 m3/m, total 11.5 km is 
approx. 172,500 m3 excavation and 
backfilling and profiling of Surinam 
Canal. 
USD 1.3 M. 

Widening/re-profiling Stondansi 
Canal 

Approx. 18 m3/m excavation and 
backfilling, 3.75 km long. Combine with 
increase of dam (see next) 
USD 500,000 

Not needed. 

Increase of Swamp Retention dam 
crest level (along Stondansi 
Canal) (raise dam along Lateral 
canal is same for both options) 

Approx. 7 m3/m, total 3.75 km 
excavation, back filling and profiling.  
USD 200,000 

Approx. 7 m3/m, total 4.5 km 
excavation, back filling and profiling. 
USD 240,000 

Excavate new canal to connect 
Stondansi with Lateral Canal and 
construct Swamp Retention dam 
alongside 

Approx. 60 m3/m, total 850 m long is 
51,000 m3 excavation, backfilling and 
profiling. This is also part of Swamp 
Retention dam crest level increase.  
USD 380,000 

Not needed.  

HA Intake structure New HA Intake, combined with new end 
check control structure Stondansi Canal. 
USD 800,000 

Rehabilitate HA Intake structure. 
USD 50,000 

End control structure End control structure at end of Lateral 1 
Canal to discharge to Surinam Canal 
USD 300,000 

End control structure at end of 
Surinam Canal (parallel at Lateral 1 
Canal) to discharge to Surinam Canal. 
Capacity is bit larger then for Option 1 
to allow discharges both from 
Corantijn Canal as well as from 
Swamp. 
USD 500,000 

Total extra costs per option USD 2.13 M USD 2.09 M 
 
The costs for extra works in Option 1 are slightly higher than in Option 2. Given the level of costs 
assessment, this difference is considered negligible. 
 
However, Option 2 carries more risks than Option 1. In particular, the risks lie with the instable soil that 
is expected in the swamp area. The embankment between Surinam Canal and the Nanni Swamp will 
require a balanced work method to increase the crest level in small steps. Also, special swamp equipment 
will need to be used, as access over land is very limited. With the longer expected execution of works and 
input of special equipment, extra costs are likely to be faced.  
 
Another advantage of Option 1 is that all water flows (pumped and gravity) will be conveyed and 
controlled through one main supply canal. This may have benefits when measuring and control devices 
will be linked together for improved and efficient operation. 
 
 
It is recommended to continue with Option 1 for further implementation. This option is also the same as 
recommended in previous studies. 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 13 of 24 

6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
 
 
Improved main infrastructure for Irrigation: the Nanni Weir 

The Multipurpose Corantijn Project (MCP) initiated in 1981 was never completed due to shortage of 
funds. The construction of the Nanni Weir and related structures was the major and essential hydraulic 
structure never completed. 
 
The proposed Nanni Weir structure consists of several works combined: 

1) Construction of the Nanni Sluice/weir structure: this is a sluice concrete structure with 2 gates, 
adjacent steel sheet piles as retaining structures, inlet weed control mechanism and mechanical 
hinges to lift the doors. 

2) Embankment Swamp retention dam between Corantijn Canal and Stondansi Canal. This is to 
close the gap between Corantijn Canal and Nanni Swamp, and at the same time create a basin to 
distribute the water from Nanni swamp properly. 

3) Connect Stondansi Canal to Lateral Canal (Eastern area) and construction of an end/control 
structure. 

 
The Nanni Weir including closing dam and structure is primarily meant to ensure sufficient water supply 
to the polders during dry seasons, when the water level in the Nanni Swamp gets lower than NSP +2.5 m 
and gravity supply is not possible anymore. 
 
In addition to these works, other related works are required: increase crest level (to NSP +4.45 m) of the 
Swamp Retention dam along Stondansi and Lateral Canal, rehabilitation of the Nanni Spill Way, 
rehabilitation of Nanni Creek, rehabilitation of the Van Wouw Intake, construction of a new Intake at HA 
and rehabilitation of IKUGH inlet. 
 
It is noted that more structures have been proposed in the original MCP, but these aimed at full water 
supply for a larger projected irrigation area. These other structures will be needed when those areas are to 
be developed for rice cultivation in the future. 
 
The key advantages for the Nanni Weir structure are: 

1) The pumped water from Wakay through Corantijn Canal will be conveyed directly to the Western 
and Eastern Polders. Having such a closed circuit of transport of pumped irrigation water is much 
better to control and to avoid waste of water resources. The flows and water levels can be 
controlled for all agricultural areas linked to the main system, i.e. MCP, Western Polder, Easter 
Polder and Autonomous Area. 

2) Currently, the pumped water is dispersed into the Nanni Swamp through the open connection at 
the proposed Nanni Weir. This means that the pumped water first fills up the swamp area along 
the Surinam Canal, and only is usable when the level reaches to a sufficient level (NSP +2.50 m) 
for gravity supply into the irrigation canals of the Western and Easter Polder areas and 
Autonomous area. The small scale farmers do not have own pumping systems, and need to wait 
some time before they are supplied with water. During this delayed availability of water, they are 
faced with the risks of loss of crops and income: too long time waiting or weed on field, getting 
less water due to forced abstraction by large farmers (e.g. Autonomous area) and less yield/ha. 

3) The pumped water from Corantijn River (Wakay) is expensive as compared to the water in the 
Nanni Swamp. It requires fuel and expensive annual maintenance of pumps. Furthermore, at the 
current stage pumping has to be continued until sufficient water level is reached in Nanni to 
ensure gravity flow. That means often more pumping then strictly is needed for the irrigation 
capacity. Surplus of pumped water not used for irrigation is then discharged through the Nanni 
Spillway to the Corantijn River. This means relative expensive water (per m3 or per ha) is 
wasted.  

4) It is expected that less pumped water will be needed to supply the area with the required amount 
under the current demand. The areas with less than 2 crops per years may be able to increase their 
crops and yields as well. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 14 of 24 

5) A controlled distribution of water will also enable the OWMCP to release water as needed in 
each section/area. They intend to introduce a “water calendar” to distribute water as scheduled. 
This will minimize the pumping requirements due to much lesser losses. 

6) The controlled discharge or release of water per section will also make it easier to introduce 
properly measured water fees for each area separately. At this moment, it is understood that 
payment of fees for O&M of the main structure is not introduced due to lack of trust by the 
farmers that they get what they pay for. 

 
The Maratakka Spillway 
 
The Maratakka Spillway and related link canal to the Maratakka River was one of two major and essential 
water control structures that were never completed. Currently, the emergency spills are only located in the 
western part of the Nanni Swamp, with Nanni Spillway (about 25 m3/s) as the main release structure. The 
capacity of the Nanni Spillway is often reduced to about 11 m3/s due to small discharge capacity of the 
Nanni Creek, encroachment on the creek banks with low dam level and high tide in Corantijn River. 
Two small (inlet) structures are located in the southern parts of the Corantijn Canal and can function also 
as spill. 
 
The Maratakka Spillway is located in the north-eastern part of the Swamp at the end of the Suriname 
canal and will allow the accelerated evacuation of floodwaters (during rainy seasons) from the northern 
part of the Nanni swamp. 
The proposed structure is a concrete broad crested weir at fixed top level (NSP +3.65 m), with an 
estimated capacity of at least 15 m3/s. At this stage, it is recommended to only construct the emergency 
spillway. In the future, the spillway structure may be extended with a sluice to release a minimum of 5 
m3/s during dry weather conditions. 
 
The key advantages for the Maratakka Spillway structure are: 

1) The Maratakka Spillway alleviates greatly the present potential flood hazards during rainy 
seasons. Any flooding of the agricultural areas will directly result in loss of crops and income. 

2) The risks are reduced not due to extra spill capacity but also by locating the spillway at the 
opposite site of the Nanni spillway. Both structures can work independently, just in case of non-
functioning of either structure. 

3) The costs for the Maratakka Spillway are much less then to improve the Nanni Creek to its full 
capacity (if deemed feasible under the current conditions). The measures for Nanni Creek 
upgrading may be costly or not be feasible to the full extend, e.g. due to land ownership issues 
and regular siltation of the creek bottom and outflow area at the river. 

4) The Maratakka Spillway will increase fresh water supply to the Nickerie River through the 
Maratakka River, and contribute to pushing back the salt water intrusion. This will enable more 
production due to increased irrigation at the right bank of the Nickerie River. It is noted that the 
pumping station at Wageningen is currently under rehabilitation. This will allow pumping more 
fresh water during high tide (when salt water intrusion is expected to reach furthest in the river). 
However, further studies for the salt water intrusion assessment, including hydrologic modeling, 
is required to justify large investments in just adding extra fresh water flows into the Nickerie 
River. 

5) The extra spill way, together with the new Nanni Weir and dam, will enable OWMCP to keep the 
water levels in the northern part of the swamp more controlled and evenly distributed over the 
east-west section. This is expected to be better for the flora and fauna. 

 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 15 of 24 

 

7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates 
 
This section contains the schematic designs and cost estimates for the Nanni Weir and related structures, 
as well as the Maratakka Spillway. It is noted that the designs are at schematic/ preliminary level, which 
entails certain margins for unknown conditions such as geotechnical properties of the soil and 
topographic levels. Further assessments are being conducted to fine tune the designs and costs where 
possible. 
It is noted that detailed designs and engineers cost estimate are to be carried out during the 
implementation of the Program. 
 
The following key data for designs have been abstracted from the previous studies and reports. No major 
changes are foreseen at this stage, as most of the starting points used in the earlier designs are still 
applicable. Some of the capacities are higher than actually required at this stage of development in the 
polders. However, the structures are for a design life of at least 30-35 years and may need the capacity in 
the near future. 
It is noted that certain water use efficiency is envisaged at the individual farmers. This can be by grading 
the terrains, using different crop techniques using less water and re-using water where possible.  
 
Water supply: 
Wakay pump:   30 m3/s. 
Capacity Nanni Weir: 17 m3/s, between NSP +2.5 and NSP +3.30 m. Concrete wall and crest level at 

sides at NSP +4.45 m. 
Stondansi Canal: 31 m3/s (increase capacity, reduce hydraulic losses) 
Van Wouw Intake: maintain capacity; Crest of concrete walls and side dams to be increased to NSP 

+4.45 m. 
Optional: demolish existing intake and build new inlet (12.5 m3/s) further 
upstream in Van Wouw Canal. This option is  

IKUGH Intake: maintain capacity. Crest of concrete walls and side dams to be increased to NSP 
+4.45 m.  

HA Inlet:  new inlet with 2.5 m3/s capacity. 
 
 
Spillways and flood control: 
Swamp Retention dam: raise to NSP +4.45 m (along Stondansi and Lateral 1 Canal) 
Nanni Spillway:  maintain at 20-25 m3/s. Increase crest level at sides to NSP +4.45 m. 
Maratakka Spillway: 15 m3/s. Crest level at NSP +3.65 m.  Crest level at side dams to NSP +4.45 m. 
 
 
Schematic designs for the key structures have been presented in the EU OWMCP Masterplan. See 
Appendix VI for overview of the schematic designs. 
 
In principle these designs can be maintained. For these structures some recommend improvements have 
been included in this report. Reference is made to the Appendix III.  
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 16 of 24 

 
Cost estimates: 
 
Cost estimates for the works have been prepared using Bills of Quantities and unit rates of existing 
similar infrastructure works or prices from other sources (like contractors, suppliers, etc). An attempt has 
been made to determine costs within a margin of 10-15%.  
It is noted that the cost estimates depends on assumptions of soil/geotechnical conditions, availability of 
source of material and accessibility for equipment. Furthermore, it is assumed that works will be 
combined as much as practically possible in one contract, so that contractor’s overhead and other costs 
can be minimized. 
 
The total estimated costs for the new main infrastructure works are about USD 5.1 Million, excluding 
turn over taxes. 

 
 
In addition to the costs of the Works, 10-15% has to be added for Project/Contract Management, detailed 
topographic surveys, soil investigations, detailed designs and Construction supervision. 
 
It is noted that rehabilitation of important existing main structures, Nanni Spillway, Nanni Creek, Van 
Wouw Intake and IKUGH Intake, are direly needed for an improved overall main water supply 
infrastructure. The costs for rehabilitation of these structures are not part of this document, and are 
assumed to be covered by other means. 
 
  

New Main Infrastructure Works OWMCP Option 1: Use Stondansi Canal to convey to IKUGH
Cost USD

No Component Description 25-May-18

1 Nanni Weir New intake structure from Nanni Swamp, including closing dam (ca. 350 m) 2,000,000.00            
2 Stondansi Canal/Swamp Retention dam Widening Stondansi Canal and raising retention dam level to +4.45 m,  3,75 km 703,125.00               
3 HA Intake New intake (1 x 5 m wide), combine with regulator, demolish existing, close dam 250,000.00               
4 Regulator/end check Structure Stondansi Regulator structure (2x 5 m) at end Stondansi to connect with canal to Lateral 1 550,000.00               
5 Diversion canal Stondansi to Lateral Canal 1 New canal (850 m) with Swamp Embankment dam 382,500.00               
6 Lateral Canal 1/ Swamp Retention dam Profiling canal and raising dam level (to +4.45 m) 7 km long 630,000.00               
7 End check/regulator outlet Regulator structure at end Lateral Canal 1 (2x 2.5 m) to discharge in Sur Canal 350,000.00               
8 Maratakka Spillway- only Part 1: Weir Spillway weir end Surinam Canal/Nanni swamp north to Maratakka 225,000.00               

Note: Only new main infrastructure. Total Works Main Infra for Option 1 5,090,625.00            
Cost of rehabilitation of exisiting main structures (Excluding 10-15% surveys, design, tender, supervision)
are not included



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 17 of 24 

 
 
 
Appendices: 
 
 
 
 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 18 of 24 

Appendix I: Overview map (Source: EU Masterplan 2010) 
 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 19 of 24 

Appendix II: Proposed Infrastructure (Source: EU Masterplan 2010) 
 

 
 
 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 20 of 24 

 
Appendix III: Assessment of existing structures: Nanni weir, Van Wouw Inlet, HA Intake and 
IKUGH inlet and survey results 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   1 

MEMO 
 
Project : Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
Subject : Assessment Existing Hydraulic Works Nickerie OWMCP  
Date : April 2018 
 
 

Contents 
1.  General/ Project area ................................................................................................................. 2 

2. Van Wouw Intake Structure ...................................................................................................... 3 

2.1 Structure assessment ................................................................................................................ 3 

Steel sheet piles ......................................................................................................................... 3 

Concrete ................................................................................................................................... 3 

Wooden sheet piles ................................................................................................................... 3 

Trash racks................................................................................................................................ 4 

Steel gates ................................................................................................................................. 4 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 4 

3. Nanni Spillway ......................................................................................................................... 5 

3.1 Structure assessment ................................................................................................................ 5 

Inflow/outflow side ................................................................................................................... 5 

Sliding gates ............................................................................................................................. 5 

Erosion ..................................................................................................................................... 5 

Concrete structure ..................................................................................................................... 5 

4.  IKUGH .................................................................................................................................... 7 

4.1. Structure assessment ............................................................................................................... 7 

Steel gates ................................................................................................................................. 7 

Trashracks ................................................................................................................................ 7 

Inflow/Outflow side .................................................................................................................. 8 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 8 

5. HA Inlet Structure ..................................................................................................................... 9 

5.1. Assessment structure .............................................................................................................. 9 

Gate inflow ............................................................................................................................... 9 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 9 

Concrete culvert ...................................................................................................................... 10 

7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal ...................................................................................... 11 

8.  Schematic drawings ................................................................................................................ 13 

 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   2 

1.  General/ Project area 

The project area consists of four hydraulic structures, namely the Van Wouw Intake, Nani Spillway, 
IKUGH (Integraal Kunstwerk Groot Henar) and HA Inlet Structure.  Field survey occurred in March 
and April 2018.  The structures have been assessed if they could be rehabilitated and used again as 
main structure. In addition some surveys and cross-sections have been carried out to assess the main 
dam and canal levels. 
 

 
 
  

 
 
  

Nani Spillway 
   Van Wouw Intake 

Corantijn Canal 

Van Wouw Canal 

Stondansie Canal 

Surinam Canal 

Surinam Canal 

HA Inlet Structure. 

IKUGH 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   3 

 

2. Van Wouw Intake Structure 

2.1 Structure assessment 
 
The Van Wouw Intake Structure consists of two gates of steel with a lifting tower and two hinged 
trash racks. The inflow side is at the Corantijn Canal whereas the outflow side of this structure is at 
the Van Wouw Canal.  

Steel sheet piles 
 
Several steel sheet piles at both the inflow and outflow side 
of the Van Wouw Intake Structure are heavily corroded.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace only steel sheet piles that are corroded, and give 
the piles the necessary coating 
- Replace all steel sheet piles, and give the piles the 
necessary coating 
 

Concrete 
 
At several locations both on the inflow and outflow side of the structure, steel reinforcement is shown 
due to concrete decay. 
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace pile cap at the inflow side 

 

Wooden sheet piles 
 
At the outflow side of the structure wooden sheet piles are anchored to land. Several of these piles are 
rotten and broken. There is also heavy erosion seen. Geo-textile is placed between wooden piles and 
land to prevent further erosion.   
Proposed works: 
- Replace wooden piles with new one 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   4 

 

Trash racks 
 
There are two trash racks. At some sections the racks are also 
corroded. The racks are hinged, but there is no control system.   
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current trash racks with new ones of aluminum  
- New control system for trash racks 
- Equipment to clean racks 
 

Steel gates 
 
There are two sliding gates that show corrosion at several locations. Both of the gates are being 
operated manually with a hoisting system. Each gate has two pulley systems, yet only one gate has a 
hoisting system that is connected.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel gates with new ones made of lighter material (e.g. aluminum)   
- Give the gates the necessary coating  
- Replacing current rebates (grooves) with new ones including Teflon 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
There are currently 4 systems with a maximum of 5 ton. Only 1 mechanism is connected to a gate, 
two of the mechanisms are not connected and 1 hoisting system has no mechanism. 
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace the complete hoisting system with new system  
- Give the gates the necessary coating 
 
The structure should be adapted to the reservoir level of NSP 4.45 
 
The structure should be passable for floating maintenance equipment and boats.  
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   5 

3. Nanni Spillway 
 
The main function of this structure is the need to regulate the water level in the Nani-reservoir.  

3.1 Structure assessment 
 
Inflow/outflow side 
 
At both outflow and inflow side of the spillway steel sheet piles show heavily corrosion.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel piles with new ones (Incl. necessary coating) 
- Instead of replacing the steel sheet piles, fill the area with rip rap  
 

 
 

Sliding gates 
 
The Nani Spillway consists of three wooden gates. These gates are manually opened without any 
hoisting mechanism. Steel profiles are used to keep the gates open. The gates are in rabbets made of 
steel.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current sliding gates with aluminum doors 
- Control mechanism with complete new pulley system  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Erosion 
 
At some locations there is also erosion seen.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Fill erosion areas with ripe clay 

 Concrete structure 
This structure has minimal concrete decay.  
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Proposed works: 
- Applying concrete spray techniques to rectify concrete elements 
 
The spillway has to be adapted to embankment levels of NSP 4.45 and width of 4 m to allow 
equipment to drive up to the structure by the Corantijn Canal embankments. 
 
Currently there are no trash racks, these should be implemented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   7 

 

4.  IKUGH 
 
IKUGH structure has three inflow and outflow sections, each with a gate of steel.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4.1. Structure assessment 

Steel gates 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of three gates of steel. At several locations the gates show corrosion. 
The gates are in chamfers, also made of steel. Some gates are not in chamfers anymore. The gates are 
manually operated with wooden planks.  

 
Proposed works:  
- New aluminum gates 
- New rabbets with Teflon  
 
 
Trashracks 
 
The structure used to have three trash racks at the inflow side. Currently these racks are unconfined.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   8 

 

Inflow/Outflow side 
 
The steel sheet piles and its anchoring show corrosion. At several locations at both inflow and outflow 
side concrete decay is shown. There is also erosion seen at the inflow side near the steel sheet piles.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
As mentioned above the gates are manually operated. There are no lifting mechanisms presents.  
 
 

 
 
 
The structure has to be adapted to embankment levels of NSP 4.45 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   9 

 

5. HA Inlet Structure 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of one gate of steel and one outflow section with a valve culvert. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5.1. Assessment structure 

Gate inflow 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of one gate of steel at the inflow side. At several locations it is 
corroded. The gate is placed into rabbets, that also show corrosion. The gate has a whirl control 
system.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel gate with a new one made of a lighter material (e.g. aluminum)  
- Rabbets need to be renewed, with new profiles and rubber 
- Trash racks need to be placed  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
This structure has a whirl mechanism and is manually operated.  
 
Proposed works: 
- The whirl system needs to be inspected and renewed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   10 

 

Concrete culvert 
 
The concrete culvert shows some concrete decay 
 
Proposed works: 
- By using concrete spray techniques, the concrete decay can be repaired 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   11 

 

7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

GPS Location 
DP-01 Cross Section 1 Surinam Canal  
DP-02 Cross Section 2 Surinam Canal  
DP-03 Cross Section 3 Surinam Canal 
DP-04 Cross Section 4 Surinam Canal 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   12 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   13 

 

8.  Schematic drawings 
 
Van Wouw Inlet Structure 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   14 

 
 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 21 of 24 

 
Appendix IV: Survey results Maratakka Spillway area 
 
  



W
L : +1.225 m

date 20-04-2018   D
rainage

-2 41

0.74
E

levation (N
S

P
)

1.06
1.40

2.06
2.48

2.76
2.58

2.66
2.04

1.51
1.46

-1.06
-1.06

0.04
0.08

1.46
0

D
istance

2.00
4.00

6.00
8.00

10.00
13.00

16.00
19.00

22.00
25.00

28.00
31.00

34.0035.00
38.00

(M
)(M

)

N
O

R
T

H
x: 529507.7025
y: 629412.8371

S
O

U
T

H
x: 529535.4330
y: 629386.8560

D
am

 height: 2.76 m Cross section_01
date: 20-04-2018

-1 62.5

1.11
1.43

1.29
1.33

-0.27
-0.27

-0.29
-0.27

-0.39
-0.39

-0.07
-0.10

0.49
1.40

1.61
1.85

2.23
3.09

4.01
3.90

3.43
2.76

2.21
1.91

1.29
0

3.00
6.00

8.00
12.00

16.00
20.00

22.00
24.00

26.00
28.00

30.00
32.00

34.00
36.00

38.00
40.00

42.00
44.00

46.00
48.00

50.00
53.00

55.00
57.00

W
E

S
T

x: 529463.1501
y: 629375.0191

E
A

S
T

x: 529505.6624
y: 629412.9889

1.6

W
L : +1.613 m

date 20-04-2018   S
urinam

 canal

C
ross section_02

date: 20-04-2018

E
levation (N

S
P

)
D

istance (M
)(M

)

D
am

 height: 4.01 m

N
ote:

- W
aterlevel in S

urinam
 canal

estim
ated from

 w
aterlevel

m
easured at IK

U
G

H
.

- W
L = W

aterlevel

* S
ituation cross section M

aratakka and S
urinam

 canal.



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 22 of 24 

 
 
 
Appendix V: Overview Option 1 and 2 for Corantijn Canal supply 
 
  



 
 
 



 



Opti
on 1

Cros
s Se

ction
 1-1

Ston
dans

ie Ca
nal

Suri
nam

 Can
al

Exca
vate

Fill

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+4.45 NSP

Earth

Nan
i Sw

amp

Leg
end

Existing Retention Dam



Opti
on 2

Cros
s Se

ction
 1-1

Ston
dans

ie Ca
nal

Suri
nam

 Can
al

Nan
i Sw

amp

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

(use excavation from Swamp)

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+3.50 NSP

Raise Level Retention Dam

+4.45 NSP

Approx. +2.2 NSP

Excavate

Exca
vate

Fill

Ear
th

Lege
nd



Option 1

Cross Section 2-2

Lateral Canal

Surinam Canal

Exist

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+4.45 NSP

Nani Swamp

+2.20 NSP

Exca
vate

Fill

Ear
th

Lege
nd



Option 2

Cross Section 2-2

Surinam Canal

Nani Swamp

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

(use excavation from Swamp)

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+3.50 NSP

Raise Level Retention Dam

+4.45 NSP

Approx. +2.2 NSP

Excavate

Lateral Canal

Exca
vate

Fill

Earth

Leg
end



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 23 of 24 

 
Appendix VI: Schematic Designs Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
(Original source: OWMCP Masterplan, 2010) 
 
 
 
Note: 
The designs presented in this Appendix are taken from the OWMCP Masterplan. The designs are yet to 
be checked on some details such as location, position and dimensions. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 24 of 24 

Maratakka Spillway (at end dam of Surinam Canal near link to Maratakka River) 
 

 
 

 
 
 




	1 Introduction
	1.1 General
	1.2 This study
	1.3 Objective and approach of this Study

	2 Background
	3 Review studies and available information
	3.1 General
	3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions

	4 Assessment of Existing structures
	4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH
	4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam
	4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway

	5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal
	6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway
	7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates
	20180528 MEMO Hydraulic Structure NICKERIE_FINAL.pdf
	1.  General/ Project area
	2. Van Wouw Intake Structure
	2.1 Structure assessment
	Steel sheet piles
	Concrete
	Wooden sheet piles
	/Trash racks
	Steel gates
	Hoisting mechanism


	3. Nanni Spillway
	3.1 Structure assessment
	Sliding gates
	/Erosion
	Concrete structure


	4.  IKUGH
	4.1. Structure assessment
	Steel gates
	Inflow/Outflow side
	Hoisting mechanism


	5. HA Inlet Structure
	5.1. Assessment structure
	Gate inflow
	Hoisting mechanism
	Concrete culvert


	7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal
	8.  Schematic drawings





















































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Caroline Bidault (RND/CHA), Team Leader; 

Bruno Jacquet, Marie Bonnard (RND/CHA); Lina Salazar, Carmine Paolo De Salvo, Michele Lemay 

(INE/RND); Romina Emanuela Kirkagacli, Marise Etienne Salnave (FMP/CHA); Louis-François Chrétien 

(LEG/SGO); Régine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); and Lisa Restrepo (INE/RND). 

 

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 

distributed to the Bank´s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 

approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 

made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version. 



CONTENT 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY………………………………………………………………………..1 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................... 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification ........................................... 2 

B. Objective, Components and Cost ...................................................................... 9 

C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................... 11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .................................................................. 11 

A. Financing Instruments ..................................................................................... 11 

B. Economic Analysis .......................................................................................... 11 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks .................................................... 12 

D. Fiduciary Risk ................................................................................................. 12 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks ............................................................................. 13 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 13 

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements........................................................ 13 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................ 16 

 



- ii - 

Annexes 
Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

Electronic Links 

Required 

1. The Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908  

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894 

4. Procurement Plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989 

Optional  

1. Economic Analysis of the Program 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897 

2. Detailed Budget per Output 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908 

3. Diagnostic of the fishery sector in Haiti Southern regions 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157  

4. A snapshot view of the fishery associated with Fishing Aggregating Devices (FADs) in 
selected communes of the Southeast, South and Grande Anse Departments, Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185  

5. Micro-study of the Fishery Sector in the South and Grand Anse Departments of Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888


ACRONYMS 

 

AECID 
Spanish Agency of International Cooperation for Development (Agence 

Espagnole de Coopération Internationale pour le Développement ) 

AOP Annual Operation Plan 

BAC Agricultural Communal Office (Bureau Agricole Communal) 

CITES 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 

Flora 

DDA 
Departmental Agricultural Directorate (Direction Départementale de 

l’Agriculture) 

EA Executing Agency 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

FD Fishery Directorate 

FY Fiscal Year  

GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in Resources of the IDB 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GoH Government of Haiti 

Ha Hectare 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

MDE Ministry of Environment (Ministère de l’Environnement)  

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation  

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

MT Metric Ton 

OM Operation Manual 

PDPM 
Marine Fisheries Development Program (Programme de Développement de la 

Pêche Maritime) 

PR Progress Report 

SC Steering Committee 

UE European Union 

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 

UPMP Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 

 

 
 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542996/R


                                                                                    Annex I - HA-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.6 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.2 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector 

entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps 

in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

The general objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable development of artisanal fisheries. The 

project aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improve sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the 

quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme.  A diagnosis of the opportunities and challenges of developing sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti is provided, although some key empirical evidence related to resource sustainability is missing. Cognizant 

of this, the project emphasizes the gathering of socio-economic and resource information and in general the interventions and their sequencing respond to the needs identified.

The vertical logic of the project recognizes and embeds both the need to establish sustainable management practices and to enhance income generating opportunities for fishers and merchants. Indicators at all levels 

are SMART and baseline values, yearly targets, and the means for collecting the information is provided. 

The ex-ante economic analysis is in general adequate, although some assumptions are not fully justified. The monitoring and evaluation plan is complete and follows the DEM guidelines. Given the lack of rigorous 

evidence on the effectiveness of the type of interventions promoted by the project, the non-experimental approach proposed for the evaluation is particularly relevant, especially if similar project interventions are 

to be expanded to other parts of the country.

The program will finance public infrastructure, training and matching grants 

targeted towards female merchants (see components II and III). Also, the impact 

evaluation design will allow to measure the specific impact on women 

merchants. 

The project will improve environmental sustaibability of artisanal fishing. See 

paragraph 1.23 of the POD.

The impact evaluation will be conducted by implementing a quasi-experimental 

approach of Difference in Differences combined with Propensity Score 

Matching. This analysis will allow measuring the project effectiveness on 

improving income and environmental sustainability by increasing access to 

productive capital (boats, new fishing techniques, etc.), human capital 

(trainings)  and public infrastructure.  In addition, this evaluation will allow 

comparing the effectiveness of providing matching grants that partially finance 

the cost of productive capital versus providing grants that fully finance access to 

productive capital. Also, the impact evaluation design will allow measuring  the 

specific impact on women merchants. 

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Regional and sub-regional integration agreements and cooperation initiatives supported

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Increase agriculture income in targeted areas

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

-Trade openness (trade as percent of GDP)

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support regional cooperation and integration

I. Strategic Alignment



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 1 of 5 

 

RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Objective: The general objective is to increase revenues of artisanal fishermen in the three southern regions of Haiti through the development of sustainable artisanal 

fishing. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability and improved sanitary and food 

safety conditionsfor marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal 

fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. 

IMPACTS Baseline 2015 End of Project 

Target 

Comments 

IMPACT 1: Increase net revenues of artisanal 

fishers 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys, Associations 

monitoring system, Fisheries information system  
Indicator 1.1: Increase average total net revenues 

from fishing and fishing-related activities by 

household 

US$1,640  US$2,458  

IMPACT 2: Improve the environmental 

sustainability of artisanal fishing 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys. Shore=continental 

plateau. 
Indicator 2.1: % of fishers fishing exclusively on the 

shore out of total number of fishers 

75% 50%  

Indicator 2.2: Establishment of at least one no-take 

zone in the coastal area associated with the scope of 

the project 

0 1 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 1: Strengthen 

the institutional management 

of the fisheries sector for 

resource management 

       Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015.International 

conventions  have to be ratified by the parliament. For the FAO 

agreement the verification will be done with documentation 

provided by the Ministry.  

Means of verification: At least 3 from the list below : 

  · The Internation Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic 

Tunas (ICCAT) is responsible for the conservation of tunas and 

other related species in the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas 

(1969) 

  · The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 

of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES; 1973) 

  · UN Agreement relating to the Conservation and Management of    

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995) 

  · Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS; 1974) 

  · The Ramsar Convention (1971) 

  · Convention on Biological Diversity (1993) 

Indicator 1.1: Membership to 

international conventions on 

sustainable fishing (unit: 

number of conventions) 

 

0   1  2 3 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 2 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

· Convention on marine pollution (MARPOL; 1983) 

  · International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate 

Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (INN)  

OUTCOME 2: Improve 

health conditions of fishing 

products 

        
Source and year of baseline: OIE fisheries report, 2008-2009  

Means of verification: OIE reports 

Indicator 2.1: Number of 

health certificates for exports 

given to firms (OIE) 

666   800   1000 

OUTPUTS 

Output 1: Revision and 

formulation of judicial 

instruments for the drafting of 

a framework law on fisheries 

0   1   1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR , DPAQ 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 2: FD offices built and 

equipped (unit: infrastructure) 

0   3   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. 

One office for Fisheries Directorate in Damiens and 2 buildings in 

Pestel and in Les Cayes 

Output 3: Study on 

operational implementation of 

a control and monitoring 

system of marine fisheries 

(unit : study) 

0  1    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Rapport semestriel du projet 

Control and monitoring system of marine fisheries, pilot towards a 

rights-based fisheries control system 

Output 4: Implementation 

plans for a system of 

monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases as well 

as for a health control system 

for fishing products drafted 

(OSAPISA) (unit: plan) 

0  2    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports;  

(ii) Implementation plan for a system of monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases; and (iii) Implementation plan for a health 

control system for fishing products  

Output 5: Additional FD staff 

at decentralized DDA (South, 

South East and Grande Anse) 

in place (unit: staff) 

0 26     26 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Proof of recruitment (contractual term 

prior to first disbursement) 

Additional DDA managers (8) and technicians (18) in departments 

of intervention (Sud, Grande Anse and Sud Est) 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 3 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

Output 6: Managers and 

technicians trained (unit: 

people trained) 

0 2 45   2 49 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Staff trained in : masters ; short term training for DDA managers, 

DPAQ managers and technicians; training of aquatic pathology 

service. 

Output 7: Study on new 

potential markets prepared 

(unit: study) 

0 1   0  1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, Study 

Output 8: Outreach campaigns 

conducted (unit: campaign)  

0  2 1   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports; (ii) National 

outreach campaign on the use of ice and health norms;               

(iii) National outreach campaign promoting the consumption of 

fishing products; and (iv) National outreach campaign on 

endangered species. 

Output 9: Fisheries 

information system in place 

(unit: system in place) 

0  1    1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

This system includes: software development ; data collection 

system 

Output 10: Census of 

fishermen conducted (unit: 

census) 

0 1     1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, census report, 

dataset 

The census of fishermen will take place nationally and will include 

data on equipment and boats. 

Output 11: Studies  on fishery 

resources and new fishing 

techniques completed (unit: 

study) 

0 3 1 1 1  6 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

3 fisheries resources evaluation campaigns (experimental fishing) 

Research on new fishing techniques including artifical reefs, FAD 

(including study of impacts) 
 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOME 3: Increase 

quality of fish sold  

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator3.1: Value of weekly 

sales of fish per woman 

merchant 

US$54       US$74 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 4 of 5 

 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTPUTS 

Output 12: Fish 

reception/unloading areas with 

water supply and wastewater 

disposal systems built (unit: 
infrastructure and equipment) 

0  1 1   2 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Marigot and Anse d’Hainault 

Includes: 300m2 warehouse, 1 floating pontoon, 1 3000L tank, 2 

manual water pump systems, 1 insulated container. 

Output 13: Fish cleaning areas 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

built (unit: infrastructures and 

equipment) 

0  10 7   17 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. One by commune of intervention except Jacmel 

Includes: 30m2 warehouse, 1 2000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system, 1 20m3 insulated chamber. 

Output 14: Communal public 

markets built and equipped 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

(unit: infrastructure and 

equipment) 

0 2  2   4 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Work acceptance report + visual 

observation during IDB inspection visits. 

Belle Anse (improvement of existing market), Bainet, Aquin, St 

Jean du Sud (local/regional distribution centers) 

Includes: 90m2 warehouse, 1 3000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system. 

Output 15: Landing areas 

improved (unit: infrastructure 

and equipment) 

0  21 20 28  69 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Beaching trolleys; improvement of accesses on board and 

boat shelters. 

Output 16: Technical 

assistance to the MARNDR for 

the monitoring of the public 

infrastructure works (unit: 

technical assistance) 

0 1     1 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Proof of recruitment (contractual term prior 

to first disbursement),  progress reports, supervision visit reports. 

 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 4: 

Establishment of rights based 

management systems  

       Source and year of baseline: Macias, 2014  

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys  

Note: The targeted area is composed by five fishing basins defined 

as fishing geographic area with a homogeneity in terms of fisheries 

perspective (eg narrow continental shelf, sandy bottoms, 

techniques and material) that the fishers usually operate together. 

Indicator 4.1: Fishing basins 

with rights based fishery 

management  established (unit: 

number) 

0     2 2 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 5 of 5 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 5: Increase 

artisanal fishing productivity 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys 

(Total catches of pelagic fishes per boat / total number of fishing 

trips per month) / number of fishers per boat 

Indicator 5.1: Catches of 

pelagic fishes by trip and by 

fisher (unit: KG) 

0.373      1 

OUTCOME 6: Reduce 

economic losses 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator 6.1: Percentage of 

total catches sold fresh (%) 

69%      78.3% 

OUTPUTS 

Output 17: Fishers 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  40 15   55 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of fishers are men 

Output 18: Merchants 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  10  15  25  Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of the beneficiaries of the merchant training will be women 

Output 19: Fishers and 

Merchants associations having 

access to technologies through 

matching grant system (unit: 

association) 

0   20 20 15 55 Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Associations will be able to choose from a list of predefined 

technologies. 

Output 20: Pilot on new 

fishing techniques 

implemented in the targeted 

area and rights based 

management fishery system 

(unit=pilot) 

0     1 1 Source and year of baseline: the implementation of this pilot will 

be based on the studies conducted in component I.  

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 20.1: Number of 

beneficiaries of improved 

management and sustainable 

use of natural and cultural 

capital 

0     4490 4490 Core Sector Indicator (CSI) 

Number of total beneficiairies in the associations. To be 

desagregated as follows: 

2829 fishers (men) and 1661 merchants (women) 

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 1 of 8 

 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 

 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROJECT Nº :  HA-L1096 

NAME:  Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) 

FIDUCIARY TEAM:  Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. Executive Summary 
 

1.1 The objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grand Anse) through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and 

Rural Development (MARNDR) will execute the project through its Fishery Directorate 

(FD). Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit while the Central Procurement Unit of the Ministry 

(“Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics” - UPMP for its French acronym) will execute 

all procurement activities.  

 

1.2 The project amount is US$16,500,000 financed by the IDB Grant Facility up to the 
amount of US$15,000,000 and the national counterpart up to the amount of 

US$1,500,000. 

 

II. General Context of National Financial Management and Procurement Systems 
 

2.1 The most recent evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic   
of Haiti is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 

assessment report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. Country financial 

management systems and external control mechanism, as evidenced by this latest 

diagnostic, would require further improvements to conform to levels consistent with 

fiduciary management of Bank’s funded projects. As a result, no country systems will be 

used for the financial management of the project.  

 

2.2 An evaluation of the National Procurement System was performed in 2013, applying the 
methodology established by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development (OECD/DAC). A certain number of recommendations were identified 

through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system; 

however, the implementation of this plan still needs to be initiated. Based on the current 

situation and the need to align the national system to international standards and best 

practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement activities foreseen 

under this program. 

2.3 To mitigate these risks the Bank will continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on 
special project execution units for the execution of all projects; and (ii) to implement 

special fiduciary arrangements for the implementation of its projects and to conduct close 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 2 of 8 

 

 

operation supervision of project execution units. External control will be performed for 

all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance with 

the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

 

III. Executing Agency´s Fiduciary Context  
 

3.1 The MARNDR will execute the project through its FD and will be responsible for the 
overall management of the project including the preparation of the PEP and POA, 

technical supervision of activities as well as the monitoring and evaluation of project 

results. Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit which has extensive experience in the financial 

management of Bank financed operations
1
 and will report to the Director of the FD. 

BCP-ProGEBA will be responsible for the overall administrative and financial 

management of project resources including budgeting, accounting and reporting on use of 

funds, payments and disbursement requests and the recruitment project auditors.  The 

implementation of this new project will result in an increase in workload which may have 

an impact on project execution.  

 

3.2 The UPMP, created through the Ministerial Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” 
on September 17, 2013, has been in place and operational since early 2014. Based on 

findings of the technical assistance conducted by the Bank’s procurement team, this Unit 

has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge in the application of Bank’s 

procurement policies. The Coordinator of the Unit, a Senior Procurement Specialist who 

has worked in specific Bank projects in the past, has been handling all procurement 

activities of the Ministry with a high focus on the quality of the processes and an 

increased collaboration with the technical teams. The Unit is composed of several 

procurement specialists and has an organized system to treat purchase requests and 

conduct procurement processes and is now working on the establishment of an improved 

filing system. With an increased number of projects handled by this Unit, the 

management of the workload may have an impact on execution. 

 

IV. Fiduciary Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Actions  
 

4.1 The latest assessment of BCP-ProGEBA was updated in July 2014 and confirms 
improvement in its financial management risk rating from medium to low.                 

BCP-ProGEBA has updated its accounting system and its accounting manual to include 

mechanisms followed for the monitoring of budget, the safeguarding of financial 

information, and the management of fixed assets. Nonetheless, due to the increase in 

volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the fiduciary team of         

BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1050 and HA-L1096), the Bank considers financial management 

risk rating to be medium and to mitigate this risk recommends the strengthening of its 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an administrative 

assistant dedicated to the implementation of this new project. In addition the operation 

                                                 
1
  The unit has successfully executed operations HA0016, HA-L1021 in the Artibonite Valley and is currently 

implementing HA-L1087. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 3 of 8 

 

 

manual of the project will include among other sections: (i) procedures for the approval 

and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy and procedures for 

inventory administration. The hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the 

administrative assistant and the approval of the project’s operation manual will be 

condition prior to first disbursements. In addition, during the first year of the project, 

Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual basis to review the 

execution of financial plan, the preparation of financial reports and the review of project 

expenses and documentation. 

 

4.2 The fiduciary risk level for procurement under this project is defined as medium mainly 
due to the workload that is being handled by the UPMP through the procurement 

execution of several projects. The following specific risks and related mitigation 

measures have been identified: (i) clearance of all procurement processes is currently 

centralized with the coordinator of the Unit which can result in delays in procurement 

execution. Mitigation: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be 

hired in order to support the additional workload of the Unit; (ii) with a centralized 

structure, the high number of transactions may also negatively impact the execution 

timeframe. Mitigation: The Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans in order to 

improve its planning capacity and identify recurrent purchases so as to reduce 

transactional costs and achieve best value for money; (iii) the increased number of 

contracts handled by the Unit may impede the effectiveness of contract management. 

Mitigation: Identify a mechanism to ensure proper follow up on contract management 

matters; (iv) the technical staff has not executed Bank’s projects previously and is new to 

Bank’s procurement policies and procedures. Mitigation: As for all other projects, it is 

recommended that the technical staff is trained on procurement matters such as: 

preparation of Terms of Reference, establishment of selection criteria, evaluation of 

technical and financial offers and contract monitoring during execution; and (v) while a 

filing system has been put in place, the Unit does not have a dedicated space to stock 

archives and does not have a person dedicated to the management of files. Mitigation: 

Recruitment of a dedicated person for the management of archives. 

 

V. Aspects to be Considered in the Special Conditions of Contract 
 

1. Special conditions precedent to first disbursement: 
 

5.1 Special Accounts: FD will open two separate bank accounts (in US dollars and in local 
currency) for the management of grant resources. Local counterpart funds will be 

processed through the Compte Unique du Trésor (CUT- according to its French acronym) 

the MARNDR single treasury account which became operational in October 2014 for 

funds disbursed by the Government of Haiti. 

 

5.2 The preparation of an operation manual to include: (i) procedures for the approval and 
disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) inventory, equipment and 

consumable stocks management and fuel consumption control procedures.  

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 4 of 8 

 

 

5.3 The Central Bank exchange rate at the day of transaction will be used at the reference 
rate. 

 

5.4 Procurement: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be hired in 
order to support the workload of the UPMP. 

 

5.5 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) Audit of project: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the program 

as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit the internal 

control processes and the review of procurement processes to be submitted within 120 

days following the end of each fiscal year and a final financial audit of the program to be 

submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  For accounting and 

audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of 

execution, the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after 

the end of each quarter. For the following years, the frequency for the submission of 

unaudited reports will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision 

missions. 

 

5.6 Special disbursement: An initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 
extent the beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in grant agreements, except for (i) the 

submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable financial 

information systems and internal control mechanism. US$125,000 will enable the 

executing agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first disbursement and shall include: 

(i) the hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the administrative assistant to 

strengthen the fiduciary team of the BCP-ProGEBA; (ii) the hiring of a procurement 

specialist to support the Coordinator of the UPMP; (iii) the selection of a consultant 

responsible for elaborating the operation manual of the program; (iv) the hiring of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist to support the FD Coordinator; (v) the 

hiring of a consultant for the formatting of the BCP-ProGEBA accounting system to 

include the chart of accounts of this new operation and the financial reports to be 

submitted to the Bank including the training of new accounting personnel; and (vi) the 

purchase of office and Information Technology (IT) equipment. 

 

VI. Fiduciary Arrangements for Procurement Execution  
 

6.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the project. 

 

1. Procurement Execution  
 

6.2 All project related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit following the Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the 

Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 5 of 8 

 

 

the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9) and the Special Procurement 

Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654). 

 

a. Procurement of works, goods and non-consulting services: The contracts for works, 
goods, and non-consulting services

2
 generated under the project and subject to 

International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the Standard 

Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to National 

Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National Bidding 

Documents agreed to by the Bank. The technical specifications review during the 

preparation of the selection process, is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

Some contracts for the purchase of equipment will be executed using matching grant 

mechanisms (the cost of the equipment will be borne by the project and partially through 

beneficiaries’ contributions). As such, specific contractual modalities will be identified in 

order to reflect this specific execution mechanism. A contract with a financial institution 

is foreseen to allow the purchase of this equipment by fishermen associations through a 

voucher system.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: The consulting services contracts generated 
under this project will be executed through the use of the Standard Request for Proposals 

(SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. The terms of reference review for the selection 

of consulting services is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

c. Selection of individual consultants: The selection will be made in accordance with 
Bank’s Procurement rules and procedures and will consist in evaluating the capacity of at 

least three candidates against set and agreed Terms of References.  

d. Direct contracting: No Direct Contracting is foreseen under this project for the time 
being. Should any direct contracting be required during the execution of the operation, a 

revised Procurement Plan will reflect this change and will be submitted to the Bank for 

non-objection. 

2. Thresholds (thousands US$) 
 

6.3 The thresholds established in the Special Procurement Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654), 
until these will be in place, will be applied to the procurement activities foreseen under 

this operation, as detailed in the following table: 

 
Table 1. Thresholds in force since January 1, 2012 (In thousands of US$) 

HAITI   

Works Goods Consulting Services 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

Short list of national 

firms only 

>1.000 <1.000 >100 <100 <100 

 
 

                                                 
2
  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: The services 

different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of goods. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 6 of 8 

 

 

3. Main Procurement Activities 

Table 2. Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Procureme

nt Method 

Estimated 

Date 

Estimated Amount 

thousands US$ 

Goods    

Purchase of  70 boats ICB Feb-2016 385,000 

Purchase of  80 engines ICB Feb-2016 320,000  

Purchase of 930  coolers for fish merchants ICB Feb-2016 210,000  

Works    

Construction of 23 fisheries infrastructures  
ICB Jan-2016 1,700,000  

Construction of  2 docks  (Marigot et Anse d'Hainault) ICB Jan-2016 510,000  

Services    

Contract with financial institution for the provision of vouchers to 

fishers’ associations 

NCB Jan-2016 60,000 

Preparation of a national census of fishermen ICB Jan-2016 400,000 

Firms    

Supervision of fisheries infrastructure works QCS Jan-2016 1,756,000  

Operators to strengthen fishermen’s associations QCS Mar-2016 1,200,000  

Communication campaign QCS Mar-2016 525,000  

Design and implementation of an  information system for 

fisheries 

QCS April-2016 450,000  

*To access the 18 month procurement plan, click here  

 

4. Procurement Supervision 
 

6.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 

activities using the shopping method for goods and for works falling below the threshold 

of US$200,000 and the recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive 

method will be subject to ex post review. The external audit firm recruited under this 

operation as per paragraph 4.2 will conduct the ex-post review on these contracts, on 

behalf of the Bank. 

 

5. Records and Files 
 

6.5 The executing agency will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement 
related activities financed by the Bank in their office in accordance with the Bank’s 

procurement rules and procedures and to the project’s operational rules in such a way that 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542989/R


ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 7 of 8 

 

 

it be available for supervision visit by the fiduciary team. It is also recommended that the 

executing agency develops electronic filing so as to ensure the efficiency of the system. It 

is important however to note that the national legislation in Haiti does not recognize 

electronic documents, hence this filing method should not replace paper files. 

 

VII. Financial Management 
 

A. Programming and Budget 
 

7.1 Programming and budget execution and monitoring at the project level will rely on the 
Bank’s project financial management formats and procedures. The FD will prepare 

annually, an operation plan (AOP) which includes a procurement plan and a            

twelve-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans will respect the budget lines 

defined in the grant agreement (investment categories). During the first year of execution, 

the program’s financial plans will be reviewed on a quarterly basis.  

 

B. Accounting and Information Systems 
 

7.2 BCP-ProGEBA’s financial management systems will be used for the financial 
management of the project. The system will be programmed to generate income and 

expense reports by investment categories and source of funds and to generate financial 

statements required by bank. 

 

C. Disbursements and Funds Flow  
 

7.3 Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of project funds for an 
amount equivalent to three-month funding needs.  The FD will open separate bank 

accounts for the management of grant resources. Disbursement Supervision will be 

expost. As specified in section 5.6 above, an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 

will be made by the Bank grant to fulfill conditions prior to first disbursements. No 

financial resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of the 

program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishermen and 

sellers through their association to be implemented by Departmental Agricultural 

Directorate (DDA) via a technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator 

(one operator per department in the South and Grand’Anse) to be financed under 

Component III of the program. The local national counterpart will be used to finance 

operation costs including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at the 

decentralized level; managerial (eight) and technical (18) staff. GoH funding will be 

processed through the MARNDR single treasury account. The project will also subsidize 

the purchase of equipment through matching grants based on eligible criteria is to be 

defined in the operation manual. Funds will be used for the purchase of improve 

productive equipment. Each association will contribute to a certain percentage of the cost 

based on their financial capacity and further defined in the operation manual. Exchange 

rate valid at the day of transaction will be used to record all expenses made in local 

currency. The Central Bank exchange rate will be used at the reference rate.  



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 8 of 8 

 

 

 

D. Internal Control and Audit 
 

7.4 The internal auditor of MARNDR will fulfill the internal audit function. The internal 
control environment of the project will be strengthened with the preparation and 

implementation of the project operation manual referred to in section 4.2. 

 

E. External Control and Reporting 
 

7.5 Audits will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for Financial Reports and 
External Audits as described in point 4.5. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB 

grant and estimated at US$200,000. The program financial statements will correspond to 

the fiscal year. The audit firm will carry out audit on the basis of specific terms of 

reference to be agreed between the FD and the Bank. During the first year of execution, 

the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of 

each quarter. The frequency for the submission of unaudited report, for subsequent years, 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

 

F. Financial Supervision Plan 
 

7.6 During the first year of execution, Fiduciary staff will review the execution of financial 
plan on a quarterly basis and on a semi-annual basis for the following years. Semi-annual 

inspection visit will be performed by financial management specialist, during the first 

year of execution however frequency of visit are subject to change based on findings 

raised during supervision missions. 

 

G. Execution Mechanism 
 

7.7 The FD will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare AOPs (see 
7.1.) indicating cash flow needs for the execution of program’s activities. The        

twelve-month financial plan will serve as the basis for advance of funds disbursements. 

Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs required 

for three months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in point 

7.3. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 

 

 

 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 

Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

 

 

 

The Board of Executive Directors 

 

RESOLVES: 

 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 

in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility (hereinafter 

referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with 

the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing 

to cooperate in the execution of the Artisanal Fisheries Development Program. Such 

nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000, which form part 

of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 

Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 

 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2015) 

 

 

 
LEG/SGO/HA/IDBDOCS#39566710 
HA-L1096 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR) 
and Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; César Falconi (CSD/RND); 
Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR); Fernando Balcázar (RND/CCO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Alberto 
Villalba (VPS/ESG); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components and cost ................................................................. 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 

 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 

2. Annual work plan 

3. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic analysis of the program 

2. Institutional capacity assessment  

3. Draft Operating Regulations for the program 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670736
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670729
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BSE Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
CAO Cámara Agropecuaria del Oriente 
DALY Disability-adjusted life year 
EGDI E-Government Development Index 
FMD  Foot and mouth disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
IBCE Instituto Boliviano de Comercio Exterior [Bolivian Foreign Trade 

Institute] 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICB International competitive bidding 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística [National Statistics Institute] 
IPPC International Plant Protection Convention 
IRR Internal rate of return 
NB-SABS Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios 

[Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management System] 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PVS OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services 
RASFF Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 
SCF Single Currency Facility 
SENASAG Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria 

[National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] 
SIAP-BID Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco [Administration 

System for Bank Projects] 
SICOES Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [Public Procurement System] 
SIGEP Sistema Integrado de Gestión Pública [Integrated Public Management 

System] 
UDAPE Unidad de Análisis de Políticas Sociales y Económicas [Economic and 

Social Policy Analysis Unit] 
 
 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 



Annex I -BO-L1179 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or 

country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.7 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 4.0

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 1.9

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Intraregional trade in goods (%)

-Government effectiveness (average LAC percentile) 

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Economic Integration

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Public agencies' processing times of international trade of goods and services 

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve 

public service delivery (#)

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector by reducing production losses due to livestock and crop diseases, facilitating access to international markets, and improving the service to users 

of the national animal health system. The Program will implement four components: (i) Strengthening of user services; (ii) Strengthening of the animal health system; (iii) Strengthening of the plant health system; and (iv) 

Strengthening the food safety system. 

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the major challenges faced by the sector that contribute to low levels of productivity, including the significant losses of agricultural production due to animal and 

plant diseases, the difficulty of accessing key markets due to phytosanitary restrictions, scarce information about food safety due to limited diagnostic capabilities of national laboratories, as well as the inefficiency and low 

quality of service provision by the animal health system. The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified. While the results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program, a clear vertical 

logic cannot be established due to an incomplete discussion of the current political restrictions on the exports of animal products which may inhibit market access even if domestic sanitary conditions are improved. The key 

outcome indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the four components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact (except for 

one), outcomes (except for one) and outputs with their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a Cost-Benefit Analysis that compares the expected benefits generated by the distinct program components (reduced production losses, improved market access, improved efficiency of 

the animal health system) with program costs (main investments and costs of operation, personnel, and maintenance). In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; however, the analysis fails to address the concerns of 

export restrictions that may considerably limit expected benefits of market access. The CBA estimates an IRR of 23.5%. A sensitivity analysis presents four alternate scenarios: (i) if costs increase to 20% above budget, the IRR 

is reduced to 17%; (ii) if adoption rates among farmers affected by the Fruit Fly and Newcastle disease drop to 70%, the IRR is 17.3%; (iii) if only 40% of all service procedures in the animal health system are improved, the 

IRR drops to 20.5%; and (iv) if only 40% of all market access improving measures are achieved, the IRR drops to 18.3%.

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy for the evaluation of the pilot program for Fruit Fly eradication. The robust identification strategy proposes both a 

difference-in-difference approach (with propensity score matching) using an untreated municipality as a reasonable counterfactual, as well as randomized offering within the treated municipality to increase participation and 

adoption rates and identify the optimal design of the program. The evaluation also allows for the quantification of potentially important spillover effects. Given the scant literature on the effectiveness of plant health 

interventions, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable; eight are classified as Medium and five are classified as Low. It includes mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The program will generate valuable information on the causal link between the 

control of the fruit fly and the increase of income of UPAS and agricultural yields.



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 
(see detailed/complete results matrix) 

Objective: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce 
production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

 

Impacts 
Baseline 

(2016) 
Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Observations 

Impact: Increased exports of agricultural 
products  

  
  

Indicator: Annual export value of agricultural 
products (US$ millions) 

1,488  
(2015) 

1,963 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: Projection of the average 
growth rate for 2010-2015 over the 
period 2016-2021. 

Impact: Increased economic value of livestock 
sector production 

Indicator: Gross value of annual production of 
the livestock sector (cattle, poultry, and swine) 
(US$ millions) 

    

Impact: Higher agricultural yields      

Indicator: Difference between average 
agricultural yields per hectare among 
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the fruit 
fly pilot program (in kilograms per hectare). 

1,293  
(2015) 

1,815 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: gross estimate based on 
2010-2015 trend and projection of 
sector benchmarks. 

Baseline by type of product     

Mandarins 8,174 9,809 Impact evaluation to be 
performed under the program. 

- The baseline value comes from 
departmental government and 
SENASAG studies. They will be 
revised in light of the baseline 
surveys. 

-  There is no information 
disaggregated between baseline 
data for the treatment and 
control groups. 

-  The target value comes from the 
technical estimates. 

Oranges 7,630 9,156 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40692440


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 1: Reduced losses in agricultural 
production caused by pests and diseases. 

Indicator:  

Difference between losses in production caused by 
the fruit fly (measured as percentages of harvest) 
among beneficiaries (B) and non-beneficiaries (NB) 
in the pilot project. 




















NB

2017

NB

2022

B

2017

B

2022 %QP%QP%QP%QP  

30% 15% 

Baseline survey of 
producers. 

Annual reports of 
SENASAG based on the 
technical report monitoring 
program execution. 

Producer survey for 
evaluation of impact at the 
end of program. 

Production losses  
Baseline: 
30% (Santa Cruz) 
36% (La Paz) 

Target: 
15% (Santa Cruz) 
18% (La Paz) 

LB: SENASAG technical 
evaluation based on 
departmental data  

QP: production losses by volume. 

Outcome 2: Fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and 
agrifood products. 

Indicator:  

 New international agreements validating health 
status and safety of Bolivian agricultural products 
(quantity). 

0 20 

SENASAG based on IBCA 
and INE sector information 
and statistics. 
Evidence: international 
agreements signed by 
SENASAG. 

International agreements are 
instruments such as bilateral or 
multilateral agreements, 
protocols between countries, or 
similar instruments. They involve 
the opening of a new country for 
exportation of an agricultural 
product (e.g. chicken to Ecuador, 
citrus fruits to Brazil) 

Outcome 3: Improved zoosanitary conditions in the 
country  

  

SENASAG based on 
evaluations, resolutions, 
and OIE methodology. 

BSE: application presented to 
OIE. 

Indicator:  

 maintenance of Bolivia’s FMD-free status  
1 1 

 self-declaration of zones free of Newcastle 
disease 

0 2 

Outcome 4: Improved phytosanitary conditions in 
the country  

  
SENASAG based on 
technical studies of 
progress under the fruit fly 
pilot project. 

Based on IPPC international 
standards for phytosanitary 
measures. 

Indicator:  

 Declaration of zones of low prevalence of fruit fly 
pests 

0 2 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 5: Improved service to users with 
incorporation of the Virtual Office and Electronic 
Signature.  

  

Program execution unit 
report with details from 
administrative records, 
based on the Gran Paitití 
processing system and 
help desks. 

Average time includes user 
waiting time. 

It does not include the time 
needed to complete the forms. 

Indicator:  

 Average wait time for in-person service 
(submission of requirements and delivery of 
permit/certificate) in two selected services (food 
safety permit for importation, phytosanitary 
certificate for exportation) (minutes). 

36 0 

 Average processing time for approval of business 
registration (days)  

32 20 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

Country: Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project: BO-L1179 Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

Executing agency: National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero and Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the Institutional 
Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) review of SENASAG. 

1.2 Accounting activities, budgetary management, and cash management will be 
carried out using the Integrated Public Management System (SIGEP) and 
SENASAG’s institutional accounting system (VISUAL). For the financial reports 
required by the Bank, the SIAP-BID1 will be used. For tendering processes, the 
standard bidding documents of the Bank or those agreed upon with the Office of 
the Deputy Minister of Public Investment and External Finance (VIPFE) will be 
used and made available through the Public Procurement System (SICOES),2 
where calls for proposals and the results of national bidding processes will be 
published. 

1.3 At present, the Bolivian government and the Bank are preparing an agreement to 
adopt partial use of the Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management 
System (NB-SABS) in operations financed by the Bank in Bolivia. This program 
could apply that agreement once it is signed and in effect. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY  

2.1 SENASAG was created on 16 March 2000 by Law 2061 as an operational 
structure of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands. It is 
responsible for administering the Agricultural Health and Food Safety System, in 
the framework of Article 9 of the Law on Organization of the Executive Branch. 
Supreme Decree 25729 of 7 April 2000 regulates the organization and powers of 
the SENASAG and also establishes its technical, administrative, and managerial 
independence, and its competencies, jurisdiction, and presence throughout Bolivia, 
in accordance with Law 1178 on Governmental Administration and Control, 3 
approved on 20 July 1990. 

                                                
1 Administration System for Bank Projects, developed by the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 
2 Public Procurement System. A set of bidding documents agreed upon between the Bank and the VIPFE 

for use in processes below the threshold for international competitive bidding (ICB). 
3 This law governs the systems for administration and control of funds of the Plurinational State of Bolivia 

and their linkages with the national planning and public investment systems. 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

2.2 For procurements, SENASAG applies the NB-SABS or the rules indicated in 
external financing agreements. 

2.3 Financial transactions are handled in the SIGEP and in SENASAG’s institutional 
system, which provides secure and reliable information on budget execution. This 
system produces financial information in the official currency, classified for 
accounting purposes by expenditure item. In addition, the entity has implemented 
the PLANEA system, which is the primary register for budgetary control and use of 
resources. The accounting records will be kept in accordance with the government 
accounting system. The financial reports required by the Bank will be prepared in 
SIAP-BID until the SIGEP accounting module for external resources enters into 
effect. 

2.4 Project contracting and payments will be conducted by SENASAG, through the 
execution unit, which will work exclusively on program execution and will be 
formally created within the organizational structure of that entity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES  

3.1 The ICAS review of SENASAG indicates an adequate degree of development and 
institutional capacity from the viewpoint of administrative definitions, regulations, 
etc. However, the analysis of risks associated with the program’s fiduciary 
management yields a medium risk classification. 

3.2 To mitigate the risk factors, three specific measures have been planned for 
program execution in order to strengthen fiduciary management: (i) the SENASAG 
team will be reinforced with professional personnel specialized in financial 
management and procurement management for program execution; 
(ii) administrative and internal control processes adapted to program needs for 
adequate financial and administrative management of procurements and 
contracting, including control mechanisms and targets for processing times, will be 
incorporated into the program Operating Regulations; (iii) SENASAG will adopt in 
full the national systems for integrated financial management currently used for 
planning, budgeting, accounting, and cash management functions, including the 
SIGEP, PLANEA, and VISUAL platforms, to ensure access to financial information 
in real time; and (iv) with respect to technical matters, staff capabilities will be 
strengthened in the areas of animal health, plant health, and food safety so as to 
ensure technical soundness in the preparation of technical specifications, terms of 
reference, and other basic inputs for procurement activities. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT  

4.1 Operating Regulations. These will cover the execution mechanism, procedures, 
and information flows, as previously agreed between the executing agency and the 
Bank. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for financial 
reporting. The exchange rate used will be the rate in effect in the country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the program 
disbursement period, audited financial statements for the program will be 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the 
executing agency. The statements will be duly audited by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank 
within 120 days following the date stipulated for the final disbursement. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the firm of independent auditors will 
be subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs stemming from 
the International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the 
program and other tasks. The scope will be governed by the Financial 
Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6) and the 
Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements and External Audits. 

4.5 Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the policies set 
forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9, with partial use of the NB-SABS 
(paragraph 1.3). 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION  

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement processes for the program will be detailed 
in the procurement plan approved by the Bank and will be conducted within the 
framework of the policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 (with 
no exceptions anticipated), or through partial use of the NB-SABS. 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services. In the case of 
international competitive bidding (ICB), the current standard bidding documents 
issued by the Bank will be used. For other processes, the documents available in 
the SICOES will be used. Any changes to those documents will require the Bank’s 
no objection. 

5.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services will 
be executed considering the following: 

(i) Selection of consulting firms. The Bank’s standard request for 
proposals will be used. For contracts in amounts of less than 
US$200,000, the documents available in SICOES will be used. Any 
changes to these documents will require the Bank’s no objection. 

(ii) Short list of consulting firms. This may be composed entirely of 
local firms for contracts where the value is less than the US$200,000 
threshold established for Bolivia. 

(iii) Selection of individual consultants. This will be based on 
qualifications for the assignment, comparing the CVs of at least three 
candidates, and as a rule no interviews will be held. When the 
assignments are linked to other specific advisory services, consulting 
firms will be used, except in circumstances (to be analyzed case-by-
case) where it is deemed appropriate to provide backup support to the 
individual consultant.  

5.4 Procurement planning. Program execution will adhere to the procurement plan 
administered by SENASAG and agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 
SENASAG will publish the procurement plan in the Procurement Plan Execution 
System (SEPA) and will update it annually or as needed.  



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

5.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. No advance procurement that 
would require retroactive recognition of financing is anticipated. 

5.6 National preference. The application of national preference will not be considered 
in procurement processes. 

5.7 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The Project Team Leader is 
responsible for reviewing the criteria for the selection of shortlists, terms of 
reference, and technical specifications, which will be agreed upon with the 
executing agency prior to execution of the processes. 

5.8 Table of threshold amounts. 

 
Table 1. Threshold amounts (US$000) 

Works Goods Consulting firms 

ICB NCB Shopping ICB NCB Shopping 
International 

publicity* 
National 

publicity** 

More than 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$1,500 

More 
than 

US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

Less than 
or equal 

to US$50 

More than 
US$200 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$200 

* Shortlist with maximum of two firms of the same nationality. 
** Shortlist may be 100% national. 

5.9 Main procurement processes. These are detailed in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Planning of main procurement item 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Consulting firms    

3 contracts with international firms to prepare designs for the works and conduct 
the program impact evaluation  

CQS/ 

QCBS 
TBD 359 

3 contracts with local firms to develop the data warehouse, supervise the works, 
and perform the external financial audit of the program  

CQS/ 
QCBS 

TBD 377 

Works    

Construction of the food quality control module, and upgrade of infrastructure 
according to ISO 17025 for LIDIVET facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 904 

Refurbishment of installations and upgrade of infrastructure according to 
ISO 17025 for LIDIVECO facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 215 

Construction and improvements of infrastructure for the district office; diagnostic 
rooms; and plant health and pest control diagnostic laboratory in Santa Cruz 
(3 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 3,228 

Installation of plant and animal health demonstration plots  Shopping TBD 104 

Installation of border control posts for entry and exit of fruit  Shopping TBD 42 

Goods    

Computer equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,101 

4x4 vehicles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,870 

Motorcycles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,231 

Other equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,128 

Laboratory equipment, materials, and inputs (various purchases during execution), TBD TBD 7,044 

Furnishings (various purchases during execution)  TBD TBD 154 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

*Click here for the procurement plan for the first 18 months. 

 

5.10 Procurement supervision. Annual supervision visits will be conducted. If 
necessary, annual ex post review visits will be held. 

5.11 The thresholds for ex post review are shown in Tables 3 and 4 (direct contracting 
and unlisted procurements will be subject to ex ante review). The external audit 
firm will perform the ex post review. 

 
Table 3. Thresholds for ex post review of procurement (US$000) 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting 
services 

Consulting firms 
Individual 

consultants 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$1,500 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$200 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$50 

Those that are not 
considered key and 
are not part of the 

execution unit 

 

5.12 Operating or recurring expenses.4 These will be agreed upon with the Project 
Team Leader, recorded in the project budget, and included in the procurement 
plan. They will be contracted using the NB-SABS. The Bank may decline to 
finance these expenses if it finds that they have violated the basic principles of 
competition, efficiency, and economy. The external audit firm will be responsible 
for reviewing the supporting documentation for these expenses. 

5.13 Records and files. SENASAG will be responsible for establishing the supporting 
documentation, procedures and controls necessary to safeguard the 
documentation generated by the program. The Bank may, at any time, verify the 
standards for organization, control, and security of files. 

                                                
4 Operating or recurring expenses encompass leasing of premises, notifications, announcements, or 

communications made on radio, in the written press, or on television, translations, bank fees, office 
supplies, photocopies, postage, fuel, maintenance, short courses, and travel for line personnel. 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Individual consultants    

Program execution unit staff including coordination, planning, finance, 
procurement (2), legal, environmental and social management, and coordination 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, and administrative assistance 
in support of program execution  

NICQ TBD 766 

Technical team to develop the online web applications in the framework of “Gran 
Paitití” 

NICQ TBD 754 

13 international professionals to provide technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

IICQ TBD 305 

10 national professionals to carry out technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

NICQ TBD 133 

Nonconsulting services    

About 48 contracts for training services and awareness-raising workshops; 
equipment maintenance and calibration; validation of methods; site visits; etc. 

Shopping/ 
NCB 

TBD 2,947 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738


Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. SENASAG will handle both the formulation of the 
budget and any future changes, on the basis of the approved annual work plan, 
and will arrange to have the program recorded as an investment budget to be 
reported in the SIGEP. As an institutional tool, it has the PLANEA system for 
monitoring the institutional budget and the program.  

6.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded in 
the SIGEP. The system integrates the different accounting stages in a single file 
and complies with the requirements for budgeting (budget execution), accounts 
(allocation of assets, liabilities, equity, and results), and cash management (cash 
transfer), on an accrual accounting basis. In addition, for purposes of program 
accounts, a chart of accounts will be prepared that will identify expenditures made 
at each step on a cash basis, harmonizing the program’s investment categories 
with the budgetary items and their respective accounts. In addition, the executing 
agency will use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis as a supplement for 
issuing the program financial reports, until the SIGEP accounting management 
module enters into effect. 

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. Loan proceeds will be disbursed as advances of 
funds and direct payments, on the basis of the financial program, which will be 
periodically updated by SENASAG. The Bank will process a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances has been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars and subsequently 
transferred to a different account in local currency, both within the CUT.5  

6.4 Internal control and internal audit. The financial management of the executing 
agency is subject to an annual reliability review by the Internal Audit Unit, and the 
program is expected to be included in this type of review. As a strategic activity 
within its mandate, the Bank will hold regular coordination meetings with the 
Internal Audit Unit to identify program monitoring needs. 

6.5 External control and reports. The SENASAG will contract a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank on an annual basis, following Bank policies. This 
will be a multiyear contract (covering at least three fiscal years), in order to avoid 
transaction costs and ensure continuity in the work of the auditors, as well as to 
guarantee timely interventions that will allow for preliminary reviews at semiannual 
intervals. 

6.6 The terms of reference for contracting the firm of independent auditors will have 
the Bank’s no objection. 

6.7 Financial supervision plan. Activities may be adjusted on the basis of the 
program’s risk assessment conducted by the fiduciary team with the executing 
agency, and the external audit reports. Expenditures will be supervised on an 
ex post basis. However, at a minimum, the annual supervision plan will provide for 
a comprehensive visit (procurement and finances) by the Bank.  

                                                
5 Cuenta Única del Tesoro (CUT) [Single Treasury Account]. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$21,250,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ _________ 201_) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/ CAN/IDBDOCS#40715591-16 
Pipeline No. BO-L1179 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$3,750,000 from the resources of 
the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of 
the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to 
the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project 
Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 201_ 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40714969-16 
BO-L1179 


	RES-final-version-con-cambios-vps_lp---resoluciones-legales-ingls---bo-l1179.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40715591-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-OC
	IDBDOCS-#40714969-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-FOE





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Lina Salazar (INE/RND) and 
Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders. Project team members: 
Fernando Balcazar (RND/CCO); Pedro Martel (INE/RND); L. Hernando Hintze (RND/CEC); 
Joseph Milewski (RND/CGU); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Mario González and Paul Winters (SPD/SDV); Catalina Mihotek 
(GDI/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Julián Aramburu and Elizabeth Chavez (INE/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive 
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board 
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus 
superseding and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES ............................................................................... 1 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design .................. 1 
B. Conceptual design ........................................................................................ 3 
C. Objectives, components, and costs .............................................................. 5 
D. Results Matrix and key indicators ................................................................. 7 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS ......................................................................... 8 

A. Financing instrument .................................................................................... 8 
B. Economic viability ......................................................................................... 9 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 10 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
E. Other risks .................................................................................................. 11 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Implementation and management .............................................................. 11 
B. Monitoring and evaluation plan ................................................................... 12 

 
  

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283 

2.  Work plan for the first 18 months of implementation (AWP) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579 

3. Monitoring plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418 

4. Impact evaluation plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707 

5. Procurement plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic appraisal 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784 

2. Itemized budget 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566 

3. Operating Regulations 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853 

4. Institutional capacity assessment (ICAS) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081 

5. Initial technology menu – Subcomponent 1 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555 

6. Analysis and design of Subcomponent 2 - Technical assistance 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944 

7. Baseline study 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551 

8. Environmental and social strategy 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives (Project I) 
CUMAT Capacidad de Uso Mayor de la Tierra [Capacity for Greater Land-use] 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 
INIAF Instituto Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria y Forestal [National 

Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation] 
IPD-SA Institución Pública Desconcentrada Soberanía Alimentaria 

[Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty] 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural and Land Development 
NPV Net present value 
PCEU Program coordination and execution unit  
PCU Project coordinating unit 
SIGESEVA Sistema de Gestión, Seguimiento y Evaluación [Management, 

Monitoring, and Evaluation System] (CRIAR project information system) 
SIGMA Sistema Integrado de Gestión y Modernización Administrativa 

[Integrated System of Management and Administrative Modernization] 
VAM Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (food insecurity) 

 



 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 



Annex I - BO-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2631-1

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project
Yes

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or 

in the evaluation plan

Yes

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

The objective of the program is to increase the incomes of small Bolivian farmers, through the promotion of technologies that increase productivity, helping to reduce levels of 

vulnerability to food insecurity. For this, the program will finance the provision of nonrefundable subsidies to partially cover the costs of adopting a selected technology. It is expected 

that the number of beneficiaries of the program ascend to 45,500 producers. The program is a continuation of the 2223/BL-BO operation, currently in its final stages of execution.

Project documentation contains a solid and well-structured diagnosis on the low productivity of the agricultural sector and its contributing factors, including the lack of innovation and 

technology transfer, and presents some evidence that validates the effectiveness of the proposed intervention. The results matrix reflects the objectives and activities of the project 

and has a clear vertical logic. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the evaluation of CRIAR I and an ex-ante economic analysis. Lower-level indicators reflect 

the project design. SMART indicators at the level of impact, results and products, with their respective baseline and target values are provided and the means of collecting the 

information are noted.

The economic analysis presented is based on increases in the margins of agricultural production expected by technology. In general, assumptions seem reasonable, and are largely 

anchored in the evaluation findings of CRIAR I. The sensitivity analysis is differentiated by technology, thus avoiding that the relative high profitability of irrigation diversification 

camouflage sensitivity to relatively minor changes in the variables of interest of other less profitable technologies.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes an identification strategy based on experimental methods, with random selection at the level of municipalities and beneficiary 

communities, allowing for the capture of spillover effects that in these types of interventions are often substantial, and therefore important to measure.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and include compliance indicators, as well as defining responsibility and dates for monitoring.

The project will track specific gender indicators and has 

cross-cutting activities to promote the participation of 

women.

The project promotes the adoption of technologies with 

positive or neutral environmental impacts.

BO-T1207 supported the design of the project.

The Impact Evaluation proposal will provide rigorous 

empirical evidence (experimental methodology) on the 

impact of technology transfer programs in the short, 

medium and long term.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

C

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Adaptation to climate change.

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational 

Program.

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support climate change initiatives, renewable energy and environmental 

sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II  
Page 1 of 3 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

          

General objective 
The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity.  

Specific objective 
The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, and 
productive efficiency. 

Impact 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

(2013) 
Target 
(2019) 

Observations 

Impact: Increase in family farming income of 

small-scale agricultural producers (male and 
female) 

 

   

Means of verification: Randomization ensures that the initial difference between 

the beneficiaries and the control group will be zero. The target value is drawn from 
the CRIAR baseline study, which analyzed impact on income of beneficiaries 
versus a control group. This study found an income differential between the two 
groups of US$133 (939 bolivianos), or about 12% of total income (US$1,090, 
National Institute of Statistics (2011)). This is a conservative scenario, since the 
study in question was conducted during the agricultural cycle immediately 
following the technology transfer. 
Observations: These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring 

surveys for the impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Percentage difference in the 

increase in agricultural income among 
beneficiary versus control producers  

% 0 
 

12 
 

Impact: Improvement in level of food security 

among small-scale agricultural producers (male 
and female). 

  
  

Means of verification: The baseline value is zero because randomization 

ensures that the difference between the beneficiaries and the control group will be 
zero. The target value is drawn from the short-term impact evaluation of CRIAR, 
which found a change of 6% in the program’s first year.  
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who are 
not food insecure according to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization’s food security index. 

% 0 8 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 

Outcomes 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

(2013) 
Target Observations 

Final outcome: Increase in agricultural 

productivity of small-scale producers (male and 
female) 

 

      Means of verification: 
- The baseline value is an average of the crops used for the economic appraisal, 

the calculations for which were based on data from the CRIAR impact evaluation, 
FAOSTAT, consultant reports, and the state-owned food production support 
enterprise EMAPA.  

- The target value is drawn from estimates in the economic appraisal. 
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 
  

Indicator 1: Value of agricultural production 

(median value per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

840 2,686 

Indicator 2: Average gross production margin 

per hectare for agricultural activities (median 
U.S. dollars per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

420 1,643 

Intermediate outcome 1: Increase in 

technology adoption by participating producers 
(male and female) 

      

Observations: The percentage reflects the number of farmers who use the 

purchased technology during the last two agricultural cycles under the program 
and is based on the data collected by CIES Internacional for the impact evaluation 
of CRIAR.  

 

Means of verification: The target value is drawn from the data collected for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR and from existing literature.  

- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who utilize 
the technologies promoted by the program 

% 0 75 

Intermediate outcome 2: Improved 

association-building among beneficiary 
producers (male and female) 

      
Means of verification: Charter of the producers’ association, signed by the 

community or by the Organización Económica Comunitaria [Community Economic 
Organization] (OECOM). Randomization ensures that the difference between the 
beneficiaries and the control group will be zero in the baseline.  

Indicator: Percentage of participating producers 

(male and female) who form new associations 

 

% 0 5 

  



Annex II  
Page 3 of 3 

 

Component: Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies 

  Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3  Year 4 Year 5 Target Observations 

Output 1: Technologies delivered to 
participating producers (male and female) 

  
            

 Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Milestone 1: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

beneficiary producers (male and female) 
 0 10,500  12,000  15,000  8,000   45,500  Voucher exchange will occur during the fairs, and 

occurs when the beneficiary pays the counterpart 
contribution.  
  

Milestone 2: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

female heads of household 
 0 1,500 2,500  3,500 4,000   11,500 

Milestone 3: Number of technologies installed 

on beneficiary producers’ plots (male 
 and female) 

0  8,000  11,500 12,500  11,000 2,500  45,500 Corresponds to the time of request by the supplier. 

Milestone 4: Number of participating producers 

(male and female) who have received training in 
technology maintenance and use 

0 8,000 11,500 12,500 11,000 2,500 45,500 
This training will be given directly by the technology 
provider. 

Indicator 1.1: Number of technologies for 

participating producers (male and female) paid 
for by the PCEU 

0 0 6,500 8,000 10,000 21,000 45,500 
Refers to the technologies for which the PCEU has paid 
suppliers as the final step in the process. This number 
includes the verified technologies. 

Output 2: Participating producers (male and 
female) having received technical assistance  

              Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Indicator: Number of beneficiary producers 

(male and female) who have received technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and 
association management during an agricultural 
cycle 

0 0 4,000 8,500  14,000  19,000  45,500   

  



Annex III  
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project No./Name: BO-L1096 – Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural 
Agrifood Initiatives II  (CRIAR II) 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land Development 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the following in 
determining the level of fiduciary risk associated with the project: (i) the institutional 
capacity assessment of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 2223/BO-BL; 
and (ii) the fiduciary supervision by financial management and procurement 
specialists at the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (FMP/CBO) during the execution 
of loan 2223/BO-BL.

1
 

1.2 Program execution will fall to a program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) 
attached to the new Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty 
(IPD-SA) under the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be kept in the Integrated System of 
Management and Administrative Modernization (SIGMA).

2
 SIAP-BID

3
 will be used 

for financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s Standard Bidding Documents 
or other documents agreed with the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing and made available through SICOES

4
 will be used for 

execution of this operation; SICOES will also be used for the publication of specific 
procurement notices. 

1.4 Use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services Management System 
(NB-SABS) is acceptable to the Bank

5
 as relates to the National Production and 

Employment Support (ANPE) procurement modality for: (i) works contracts for 
amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the shopping 
method (for reference: US$250,000); (ii) contracts for goods and nonconsulting 
services for amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the 
shopping method (for reference: US$50,000); (iii) all individual consulting 
 

                                                 
1
   The PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the project 

coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 
2
   The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed the Sistema de Gestión Pública [Public 

Management System] (SIGEP), which in the medium term will replace SIGMA. 
3
   Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System]. 

4
   A national procurement subsystem that has been approved for use in Bank operations. 

5
   See document GN-2538-11 for what the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates 

to acceptance of the partial use of the country procurement system in Bolivia. The agreement for the 
implementation and use of country systems in IDB-financed operations is currently being finalized, and 
will be applied once it enters into force. 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

contracts;
6
 and (iv) use of the SICOES system

7
 as a mechanism for advertising 

requests for proposals and the results of national bidding processes and simplified 
procurement processes in Bolivia.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

2.1 As a government agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 
for Government Administration and Control (SAFCO). This law regulates the 
administrative and control systems for government finances, and their relationship 
with country planning and public investment systems. 

2.2 The MDRyT uses SIGMA for all of its financial records.
8
 SIGMA offers secure and 

reliable access to budget execution information. It does not provide data in foreign 
currency, or on the basis of the investment categories established in the program 
costs table. The MEFP

9
 has, however, with Bank support, developed the 

Accounting Management Module, which allows reports to be issued based on the 
financing structures and the currency of loans from international development 
partners, meaning that these limitations should be overcome. Despite this, until 
such time as this module has been fully implemented, it has been agreed that the 
PCEU will use SIAP-BID

10
 as a supplementary accounting and reporting system for 

rendering accounts and financial reporting. As a state agency, the MDRyT is 
supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 The institutional capacity assessment, together with the observations of the 
FMP/CBO team during execution of loan 2223/BL-BO, indicate an ADEQUATE 
level of institutional development and capacity, and a LOW level of fiduciary risk.  

3.2 Coordination. To ensure optimum overall coordination, the program Operating 
Regulations will include flow charts featuring independent and exclusive 
administrative and legal functions, as well as the coordination mechanism that will 
govern participants under the this program. It is recommended that the MDRyT 
maintain the structure established for the PCU, which, as executing agency for 
current loan 2223/BO-BL, has acquired the knowledge and experience needed to 
ensure compliance with the fiduciary agreements and requirements set out in this 
document. 

3.3 Procurement. Although the level of turnover among local authorities and 
administrative personnel (including high-, mid-, and low-level management 
procurement personnel) is generally high in the country, this has not been the case 
with the PCU.  To avoid adversely affecting the transfer and strengthening of 
procurement-related knowledge or the pace of execution, efforts should continue to 

                                                 
6
   Except in rare cases in which the Bank authorizes the use of the policy set forth in document 

GN-2350-9. 
7
   Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [State Procurement System] www.sicoes.gob.bo  

8
  The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed SIGEP, which in the medium term will replace 

SIGMA. 
9
   Ministry of Economy and Public Finance. 

10
  Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System], developed by 

Country Department Andean Group staff in the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

 

 

retain for the PCEU fiduciary staff (procurement and financial management 
specialists) who currently work in the PCU

11
 for loan 2223/BO-BL.  

3.4 Internal legal and administrative processes and procedures. It is highly 
recommended that the staff of the legal and administrative departments of the 
MDRyT and the IPD-SA continue to strengthen their knowledge of fiduciary 
management according to IDB guidelines, and that they participate in the early 
stages of procurement processes (preparation of bidding documents, draft or 
model contracts, etc.). Accordingly, the Bank will continue to provide training to 
agency staff (PCEU and other entities), supplemented by training offered by the 
Bank in the use program management tools (GRP, PM4R, MS Program). 

3.5 Public financial management. The PCEU will have access to SIGMA for the 
timely recording of payment requests and financial records. In addition, until such 
time as the SIGEP Accounting Management Module has entered into operation, 
SIAP-BID will be used as a supplementary system for recording program 
transactions. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. Based on prior agreement between the Bank and the 
parties, the Operating Regulations will include details of execution arrangements, 
procedures, and information flows. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed on with the executing agency for financial reporting. 
The exchange rate used will be the prevailing rate in the borrowing country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. Each year, for the duration of 
the loan disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the close of the executing agency’s 
fiscal year. These statements will be duly audited by an independent audit firm 
acceptable to the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the independent audit firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs consistent with the 
International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the program 
and related audit tasks. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be conducted consistent with what the 
Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates to the acceptance of 
the partial use of the country procurement system of Bolivia (document 
GN-2538-11) once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
systems in Bank-financed operations enters into force; and with the policies in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for everything not covered in document 
GN-2538-11 and the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations. 

                                                 
11

  Note that the PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Program-related 
contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services subject to international 
competitive bidding will be carried out using the Standard Bidding Documents 
issued by the Bank.  

5.3 Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) will be carried out 
using national bidding documents agreed on with the Bank (or satisfactory to the 
Bank) for amounts up to US$400,000, as such contracts can be fulfilled by local 
vendors and because it has been observed that contracts for amounts below 
US$400,000 have not generated interest among foreign bidders in recent years. 
Shopping will be applied in those cases indicated in the procurement plan, using 
the bidding documents agreed on with the Bank, or the ANPE procurement 
modality once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations has entered into force. Calls for bids may 
be published in the SICOES.   

5.4 This program does not envisage the contracting of works. If required, however, 
works valued at or below US$1 million will be contracted using the shopping 
method.  

5.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
under the program will be listed in the initial procurement plan, and will be 
executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals or one agreed 
with the Bank (or satisfactory to the Bank if no agreement has been reached). 

a. Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms will be selected for the 
program using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals. 

b. Shortlist of consulting firms. For contracts valued below the thresholds 
established by the Bank for the country, the shortlist may comprise entirely 
(100%) Bolivian firms.

12
 For Bolivia this threshold is US$200,000. 

c. Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be selected 
taking into account their qualifications for the assignment, based on a 
comparison of the qualifications of at least three candidates. As a rule, no 
interviews will take place. When the work necessitates the involvement of 
additional persons, to provide specific support and advisory services, 
consulting firms should normally be used. In circumstances where two or three 
persons would provide this support, the suitability of relying on individual 
consultants with complementary services will be analyzed on a case-by-case 
basis. The ANPE procurement modality may be used once the agreement for 
the implementation and use of country subsystems in Bank-financed 
operations has entered into force. Requests for proposals may be published in 
the SICOES. 

5.6 Procurement planning. The PCEU will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once a 
year, or as necessary to reflect the program’s actual progress and requirements for 
execution. 

5.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively 
recognize eligible expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing 

                                                 
12

  Includes nonconsulting services. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

 

amount, provided that they meet requirements substantially similar to those set out 
in the loan contract. These expenditures must have been incurred during the 
18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank. The following will be 
considered eligible expenses: (i) preliminary studies for execution of the 
subcomponents; (ii) set-up of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key 
PCEU personnel as stipulated in the procurement plan.

13
   

5.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement of goods envisaged for this operation. 

5.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The project team leader will 
review terms of reference and/or technical specifications. 

5.10 Table of threshold amounts (thousands of U.S. dollars). 

 

Works Goods and nonconsulting services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
advertising  

Shortlist 
100% 

national  

Greater than 
US$5,000 

Less than or 
equal to 

US$5,000 

Less than 
US$1,000 

Greater than 
US$400 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$400 

Less than 
or equal 

to 
US$200 

Greater than 
US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

 

5.11 Main procurements. The main procurements for this operation are detailed 
below:* 

*To access and review the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click: (here). 

5.12 Procurement supervision. The thresholds for post review are set based on the 
fiduciary capacity of the executing agency, the complexity of procurement, and/or 

                                                 
13

  Key personnel include: (i) national project coordinator; (ii) technical specialist I, PCEU; (iii) information 
technology expert; (iv) officer IV, planning, monitoring, and evaluation; (v) officer IV, legal affairs; 
(vi) officer III, agrifood technologies; (vii) officer III, voucher management; (viii) officer IV, SIGESEVA 
management and monitoring; (ix) officer IV, communications and training; (x) administrative specialist I, 
PCEU; and (xi) officer IV, goods and services (procurement specialist). 

Activity 
Bidding 
process 

Estimated 
date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Goods or nonconsulting services    

Engagement of several service providers/firms to 
verify that technical assistance was provided to 
beneficiaries (US$365,000 average contract) 

NCB Q3-2015 1,820 

Engagement of two service providers/firms to design 
and implement the program’s information campaign 

NCB Q1-2015 500 

Engagement of three service providers/firms to verify 
the installation of technology for program beneficiaries 

NCB Q2-2015 1,365 

Purchase of transport units Shopping Q2-2015 200 

Consulting services    

Engagement of several consulting firms (eight 
contracts on average) to provide technical assistance 
to program beneficiaries 

FBS Q2-2015 9,100 

Consultancy for the program impact evaluation QCBS 
Q4-2019  
Q2-2019 

500 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556


Annex III  
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

external factors that may affect the timeliness and manner of procurement 
execution. Given the current fiduciary management capabilities of the PCU (the 
PCEU for project BO-L1096) as relate to procurement, the program may be 
executed using ex post review for procurement processes worth up to 100% of the 
threshold for NCB, as set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and 
procurements not listed in the table will be subject to ex ante review). Based on the 
matrix of risks identified for the program, the level of fiduciary risk in relation to 
program procurement is LOW. Accordingly, annual procurement supervision visits 
and ex post review visits will be made with a view to updating the level of fiduciary 
risk and monitoring progress in procurement management under the program.  

 

Threshold for ex post review 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting services 

Consulting services - 
Firms 

Shortlist may be 100% 
national 

Consulting 
services - 
Individual 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$5,000,000 

Contracts for amounts less 
than or equal to 
US$400,000 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$200,000 

No threshold 
amount 

5.13 Operating expenses. Operating expenses are recurring and maintenance 
expenses needed for program implementation. These will be agreed on with the 
project team leader and included in the procurement plan. Procurement relating to 
recurring expenses will be governed by the executing agency’s administrative 
procedures (generally the NB-SABS regulations), as referenced in the Operating 
Regulations. 

5.14 Direct contracting. Under this program, direct contracting may be used in the 
following cases: (i) key PCU personnel executing loan 2223/BO-BL (CRIAR); and 
(ii) contracts valued at less than US$500 individually, or US$5,000 when bundled, 
may be contracted directly in order to ensure efficient, timely execution. This must 
be approved by the project team leader, and the procurement plan must also be 
updated. 

5.15 Records and files. The PCEU for operation BO-L1096 will establish the 
supporting documentation, procedures, and controls necessary for project 
execution, and maintain them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract 
and local laws.  

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. The PCU for loan 2223/BO-BL, which is currently in 
operation, has an administrative department

14
 within which the project will be set 

up, thus allowing budget records to be kept with individual identification of the 
sources of financing and funds used in project execution. Inclusion in the budget as 
well as future budget modifications (requested via ministerial resolution) must go 
through the Bureau of Administrative Affairs (DGAA), based on the annual work 
plan and the project execution plan agreed with the Bank, thus ensuring that the 

                                                 
14

  Under SIGMA’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative department may include several 
projects with independent records and controls.  



Annex III  
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

 

 

funds required for each year of project execution will be available. Budget 
modifications also must be submitted to the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing, for approval via a ministerial resolution from the Ministry of 
Development Planning. 

6.2 Accounting and information systems. The PCEU for the proposed program 
(BO-L1096) will record project transactions in SIGMA. This system combines in a 
single registry the following accounting records: Budget (budget execution), Net 
worth (assets, liabilities, equity, and earnings), and Treasury (cash transfers), on 
an accrual basis. In addition, for project accounting purposes, a chart of accounts 
will be prepared to allow the identification of expenditures incurred by transaction 
on a cash basis, aligning the project’s investment categories with the respective 
budget line items and accounts. In addition, until such time as the SIGEP 
Accounting Management Module (currently SIGMA) is in operation, the PCEU will 
use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis for program accounting and as a 
supplementary accounting system for financial reporting.  

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will be disbursed in the form of 
independent advances of funds to the PCEU. The frequency of advances will be 
determined as a function of the project’s financial programming, which will be 
updated periodically by the PCEU. The Bank may make a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in an independent account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency, both under the 
CUT.

15
 The MDRyT, through the PCEU, will be responsible for the management of 

funds disbursed to it.  

6.4 Internal controls and audits. Financial management by the PCEU is subject to 
yearly reliability reviews by the Internal Audit Unit; the project is expected to be 
included in this type of review. As a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank 
will organize annual workshops for the MDRyT Internal Audit Unit, with a view to 
strengthening its knowledge of project execution. These activities are coordinated 
with the Office of the Comptroller General (CGE). Additionally, the Bank has been 
supporting the CGE with a technical-cooperation operation that is seeking to 
strengthen the internal control system. With internal audit units as the main 
participants, it is equipping them with review tools and improving the application of 
their regulations. 

6.5 External controls and reporting. To meet the requirement of annual submittal of 
the project’s audited financial statements, the PCEU will need to hire an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies. A multiyear 
contract (spanning at least three fiscal periods) should be used so as to avoid 
transaction costs and give continuity to the auditors’ work, while also ensuring 
timely interventions that will enable preliminary reviews at semiannual cutoff points. 

6.6 Financial supervision plan. Supervision plans and timetables will be designed 
based on identified fiduciary risks. At a minimum, the following annual activities are 
envisaged: (i) a comprehensive visit (covering procurement and disbursements) by 
the external audit firm hired to review the project’s financial statements; (ii) a site 
visit to the areas targeted for investment under the loan; and (iii) a visit to verify 

                                                 
15

  CUT: Cuenta Única del Tesoro [General Treasury Account]. 



Annex III  
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

compliance with agreements based on the internal control recommendations 
issued by the project’s external auditor. 

6.7 Execution mechanism. Given that loan 2223/BO-BL is currently being executed 
by the PCU, no changes are anticipated in this area. The current structure, 
procedures, and arrangements will therefore be maintained for execution of the 
proposed operation, as will the PCU, along with its administrative, financial, and 
management autonomy. The PCEU for proposed project BO-L1096 will assume 
direct responsibility for implementation and will be devoted full-time to project 
execution. Its duties will include project planning, management, and monitoring, 
development of planning instruments, channeling of funds for execution, 
authorization and transfer of voucher payments, and consolidation and submittal to 
the Bank of financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, among 
others set forth in the Operating Regulations. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ___/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$49,600,000 
from the resources of the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds 
to a parallel loan within the framework of  the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance 
reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765860 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$12,400,000 
from the resources of the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan 
within the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, 
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765884 

 
 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ana Ríos (CSD/RND), Project 
Team Leader; Luis Hernando Hintze (RND/CUR), Project Team Co-leader; Gonzalo Muñoz 
and Maja Schling (CSD/RND), Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Elizabeth Chávez and 
Rosario Frugone (CSD/RND); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); Alberto Villalba 
(VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Federico Bachino and Adriana Torres (CSC/CUR); 
Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR); and Catherine Meola (SCL/GDI). 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of execution arrangements ......................................................... 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 
C. Impact evaluation ....................................................................................... 15 

 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan (PEP) and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Bibliography 

2. Diagnostic assessment for capacity building in technology generation and transfer, technical 
assistance, and rural extension 

3. Impact evaluation of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) 

4. Beneficiaries of RPDP requests for proposals and the registry of family producers 

5. Survey of nonbeneficiary family producers in RPDP requests for proposals 

6. RPDP evaluation 

7. Climate change 

8. Technology evaluation 

9. Gender 

10. Program economic evaluation 

11. Rural Development Bureau - Organizational chart 

12. Draft program Operating Regulations 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-44
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ATDR Agente Territorial de Desarrollo Rural [Regional Rural Development 
Agent] 

DGDR Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
GHG Greenhouse gas 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICTs Information and communication technologies 
INIA Instituto National de Investigación Agropecuaria [National Agricultural 

Research Institute] 
IPNEs Institutos Públicos no Estatales [Nonstate Public Institutes] 
MGAP Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
PMU Project Management Unit 
RPDP Rural Productive Development Program 
RTAE Rural Technical Assistance and Extension 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 



Annex I - UR-L1147 

Page 1 of 1

Summary

1. IDB Development Objectives

Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2836

Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915-2

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

3.1 Program Diagnosis

3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

1.0

9.1

3.0

3.6

2.5

9.0

3.0

3.0

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting, External Control.

Procurement: Information System.

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

9.3

2.5

6.8

0.0

Yes

Boosting productivity and competitiveness by promoting 

innovation

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

The objective of the Program is to contribute to improving the sustainability of family, small and medium-sized agricultural production units. The specific objectives are the 
increase in the adoption of climate-smart technologies (CS), and the strengthening of capacities in the generation and transfer of technologies, technical assistance and rural 
extension. CS technologies are those that contribute to increasing climate resilience and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions while improving performance in terms of 
production or profitability. The diagnosis provided is solid and substantiated in evidence, evaluation and lessons learned from the first Rural Productive Development Program.

The results matrix exhibits a clear vertical logic and is anchored in the two main dimensions that the program addresses to achieve the sustainability of production units of 
smaller scale: productive and environmental. The indicators of impact, result and product in general are SMART, with baselines and defined targets and with the means to verify 
compliance.

The economic analysis is based on the estimation of the benefits of increased productivity in the farms that benefit from the Program. The assumptions are reasonable and are 
based on the findings of previous evaluations, including of the first program. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that even under more conservative assumptions 
(linked to the rate of adoption of technologies, higher costs, limitations in access to technical assistance after the end of the intervention), the return of the program remains at 
levels above 12%

The Monitoring Plan complies with the requirements of the DEM. The evaluation proposal is to carry out a quasi-experimental impact assessment that takes advantage of the 
voluntary registration of producers to the calls made by the Program, implementing a random promotion to increase the participation rate in a group of randomly selected 
producers. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable to evaluate the impact of the program on the productivity of the beneficiaries.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food

security  (#)*



Annex II 
Page 1 of 8 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final target 
Means of 

verification 
Comments 

IMPACT 1 Improved sustainability of agricultural production by small and medium-sized family producers in Uruguay 

Partial productivity 
increased 

meat, kg/ha; 
milk, l/ha 

Meat: 
88 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.632 l/ha 

2018 

Meat: 
96 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.995 l/ha 

Impact 
evaluation 

Production plans that have lasted at least 36 months are 
considered to be beneficiaries. 

Current values are based on the RPDP I evaluation (conducted 
in 2018) and will be updated once the baseline from the impact 
evaluation is available (expected in 2019). 

A 10% increase in productivity is expected based on the results 
of the RPDP I evaluation. 

Beef, mutton, lamb and wool and milk segmented. 

Meat equivalent = beef + mutton and lamb + wool. 

Emissions per unit of 
output reduced 

Kg CO2-
eq/kg 

18.6 2018 11.1 

Initial survey: 
2019 

Final survey: 
2024 

INIA methodology (See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan). Values will be updated once the baseline 
from the impact evaluation is available. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

OUTCOME 1: Climate-smart improvements in agricultural production units  

Increased rate of climate-
smart technology adoption 
by beneficiaries* 

%  8.4 2017 64 Impact evaluation 

Those participating for at least 36 months are considered to be 
beneficiaries. 

Provisional baseline: Livestock Survey 2016/2017; the adoption 
rate is based on the question on innovation, item 8: 

“Management of the production process:“ ”Have you adopted 
(for the first time) livestock management practices aimed at 

introducing changes or improvements in the establishment?” 
This was restricted to producers of less than 150 Livestock Units 
(the average for the two lowest strata). Value will be updated 
once the baseline from the impact evaluation is available 
(expected in 2019). 

The target is based on the implementation of RPDP II plans. 

Increased percentage of 
producers who manage 
their lands with a safe 
carrying capacity 

% 28.5 2018 37.05 Impact evaluation 

Definition of safe carrying capacity (INIA/IPA) - see annex to the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. Natural land systems are 
considered to exist where improved pastures are no more than 
5% of the total area. 

The current baseline value represents the probability of 
exceeding carrying capacity based on data from the Livestock 
Survey for producers using natural lands. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 

  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

Measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Comments 

OUTCOME 2: Inclusion of new beneficiaries in MGAP (DGDR) interventions  

Increased percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

%  30 2017 50 Monitoring system 

New beneficiaries, in this context, are producers that have 
never participated in a DGDR program (including the first 
phase of the RPDP). 

The indicator shows the outcome of targeting actions on 
groups that do not typically have access to the incentives due 
to communication limitations. 

OUTCOME 3: Increase in the ongoing use of technical assistance from the RTAE system by family producers 

Increased number of 
beneficiary producers that 
continue to receive 
comprehensive technical 
assistance once the plan has 
been completed* 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

Meat:  
81 

(4%) 

Milk:  
323 

(16%) 

2016/2017 
livestock 

2014 dairy 

Meat:  
243 

(12%) 

Milk:  
972 

(48%) 

Rate for beneficiaries 

drawn from the 

monitoring system. 

Impact evaluation 

The baseline and final target are based on the 2,025 
producers whose management plans will be approved and 
implemented.  

The benchmark for the baseline is the current percentage for 
each group. The target is expected to be three times the 
number of producers to continue with technical assistance. 

This refers to technical assistance that is not provided by the 
DGDR, and which entails regular visits from technical staff 
(not one-off assistance). For livestock, agronomic technical 
assistance; for dairy, agronomic and veterinary technical 
assistance. 

OUTCOME 4: Strengthening the collective activities of rural organizations 

Increase in the percentage of 
users of services provided by 
rural organizations* 

% 29 2018 38 

Monitoring system: 

application form and 

closing form (at the 

end of the project) 

Includes: 

Technical assistance; 

Sale of inputs; 

Machinery or equipment services; 

Use of production services; 

Marketing of products. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline is the percentage of nonbeneficiaries 
participating in one or more rural organizations. This indicative 
value will be adjusted based on information from the rural 
organizations' registration forms, which will include an 
information request regarding the number of users. 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Baseline 

OUTCOME 5: Improved availability of technologies for small and medium-sized family producers 

Increase in new technologies 
validated for family production 

Number 0 2018 5 

Monitoring system 

Final report on each 

technology validated 

by the INIA 

Validation of a technology includes four categories of 
indicators: sociocultural, productive/economic, environmental, 
and reapplication. See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan. 

OUTCOME 6: Increased participation in DGDR interventions by rural women and young people  

Number of female 
beneficiaries increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

775 

(25%) 
2018 

992 

(32%) 
Monitoring system 

2018 study of 

beneficiaries 

Baseline source: Percentages are drawn from the RPDP I 
study of beneficiaries.  

Target source: Monitoring system. 

Target values are representative of the Uruguayan Registry of 
Family Producers. 

Estimates of absolute values are calculated from the 
respective percentages, based on 3,100 beneficiaries. 

Young beneficiaries are those aged between 15 and 
29 years, according to INJU. 

Number of young beneficiaries 
increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

124 

(4%) 
2018 

341 

(11%) 

OUTCOME 7: Increase in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) 

Increased rate of ICT adoption 
in family production* 

% 7 2018 11 

Monitoring system 

Specific baseline 

survey 2019 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

Final survey 2024 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

The target is for a 70% increase with respect to the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Component I: Improved productivity through technology adoption and alliance-building 

Management plans 
implemented 

10,107,237 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 0 0 600 750 450 225 2,025 
Monitoring 
system 

“Implemented” 
indicates that 60% of 
the activities included 
in the approved plans 
have been fulfilled and 
that the technology 
adoption evaluation 
has been conducted. 

Milestone 1: 
Management 
plans approved 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 400 600 600 700 400 0 2,700 
Monitoring 
system 

Approved plans are 
those presented by 
eligible producers that 
have passed technical 
evaluation and for 
which the contract has 
been signed. 

Days of technical 
assistance provided 
to beneficiaries 

6,353,121 
Days of 
technical 

assistance 
0 2019 2,000 5,000 6,000 6,500 7,000 0 26,500 

Monitoring 
system 

8-hour day. 

Tools designed for 
promoting alliance-
building initiatives, 
with emphasis on 
integration into the 
chain  

106,955 Report 0 2019 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 

Promotion 
tools 
approved by 
DGDR 
management 

Supporting 
technical 
document 

 

Producers 
participating in new 
alliance-building 
initiatives  

898,421 
Number of 

beneficiaries 
0 2019 0 200 0 200 0 0 400 

Monitoring 
system 

Alliance-building 
initiatives to resolve 
limitations of scale: 
sales contracts for 
output, product 
differentiation. 



Annex II 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Number of women 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

women 
0 2019 0 100 0 100 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

 

Number of youth 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

young people 
0 2019 100 0 100 0 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

Youth beneficiaries 
are those between 15 
and 29 years old, 
according to INJU. 

Component II: Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension 

Projects supervised 
for validating 
technologies aimed 
at family producers 

560,603 Projects 0 2019 0 0 3 10 2 0 15 
Reports by 
project 

 

Number of rural 
organizations with a 

“comprehensive 
technical 

assistance” team 

4,270,304 
Rural 

organizations 
0 2019 20 10 10 0 0 0 40 

DGDR 
reports 

ATDR 

“Comprehensive” 
means that their 
function is to provide 
technical assistance 
to improve the 
productivity of 
medium-sized family 
producers. 

Specific 
agreements 
implemented with 
IPNEs to provide 
RTAE to 
beneficiaries 

819,508 
Number of 

agreements 
0 2019 2 1 1 0 0 0 4 

Agreements 
signed 

 

Proposal for 
evaluation system 
formulated 

25,000 Consultancy 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Consultant 
report 

 



Annex II 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Monitoring tool for 
the RTAE system 
developed 

59,769 System 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Confirmation 
that system 
is operating 

Conceptual definition, 
methodology defined, 
procedures 
established, and 
computer program 
developed. 

Private technical 
staff trained in 
providing 
comprehensive 
support to 
producers 

270,000 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 100 50 25 25 0 0 200 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 

Public sector 
technical staff 
trained in strategy 
and methods for 
providing 
assistance and 
consolidation of 
rural extension 
processes 

72,600 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 50 30 10 10 0 0 100 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 



Annex II 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Annual 
dissemination and 
awareness-building 
plans implemented 
and evaluated 

684,859 
Number of 

plans 
0 2019 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 

DGDR 
reports 

 

ICT projects 
developed for family 
production  

305,000 Projects 0 2019 0 0 5 5 5 0 15 
DGDR 
reports 

 

Tools implemented 
for supporting the 
use of ICTs in 
family agricultural 
production systems 
and RTAE services  

117,000 
Number of 

tools 
0 2019 2 1 1 2 1 2 9 

DGDR 
reports 

Guiding strategy, 
surveys (3), 
workshops, training, 
events to exchange 
experiences. 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Country: Uruguay 

Project: UR-L1147 - Rural Productive Development Program II 

Executing agencies: The Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
through the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 

Fiduciary team: Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This operation is for US$27,121,000, of which US$24,232,000 will be financed by 
the Bank. The borrower is the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and the executing 
agency is the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) with the 
support of the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its Project Management 
Unit. The MGAP’s execution of loans 1131/OC-UR (the Agricultural Services 
Program), 1643/OC-UR (Program to Support the Productivity and Development of 
New Livestock Products), and 2182/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural 
Public Management I) has been satisfactory. It is currently executing loan 
2595/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II), for which 
fiduciary risk has been measured as low based on the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) methodology.1 The Project Monitoring Report 
indicates a satisfactory level of execution. 

The objective of the new loan (UR-L1147) is to help improve the sustainability of 
small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. The specific 
objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and 
strengthen alliance-building among participating producers. The expected impacts 
are an increase in income and productivity. The fiduciary activities—both financial 
execution arrangements and the procurement contracts included in the 
Procurement Plan attached to the Proposal for Operation Development for this 
operation—were identified based on the aforementioned objectives. The following 
sections describe the fiduciary mechanisms identified during the analysis mission. 
It should be noted that no exceptions to Bank policies are envisaged with respect 
to either financial management or procurement. Likewise, no retroactive financing 
or advance procurement is expected, consistent with the definitions in Section 1.9 
of document GN-2349-9 (Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works 
Financed by the IDB) and section 1.12 of document GN-2350-9 (Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB). 

1 Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II, loan 3800/OC-UR, ICAS Analysis Report, May 2016. 



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

 As mentioned above, the MGAP will be the executing agency for this operation 
through the DGDR and its Project Management Unit (PMU). Accounting, financial 
management, and procurement activities, together with support for the planning 
and monitoring of all operations involving external borrowing, are centralized in the 
PMU. Based on the information gathered during the analysis mission, the 
executing agency will have the same staff as for execution of the Program to 
Support Agricultural Public Management II. It was established that the executing 
agency has satisfactory experience in executing Bank-financed operations. 

 As reflected in the 2016 ICAS assessment mentioned in the previous section, “the 
MGAP’s key functions have been clearly defined in the areas of administration and 
financial accounting, and in management of the procurement cycle, on the basis 
of prior experience [...].” As further detailed in this Annex, the MGAP has executed 
several Bank-financed projects with a satisfactory level of performance, leading to 
the conclusion that its institutional capacity, as evaluated, is high. 

 In addition, the Ministry will be supported by its DGDR and PMU, as indicated in 
the matrix that describes the execution arrangements (comparing, in particular, the 
arrangements for loan 3800/OC-UR and the structure envisaged for the execution 
of UR-L1147). The aforementioned tool provides information including the 
following: 

a. With respect to the fulfillment of conditions in the area of procurement, 
technical aspects will be the responsibility of the DGDR while the UGP will be 
responsible for fiduciary requirements. 

b. The PMU will be responsible for: managing financial and audit reports; 
reporting on expenditure and requesting advance disbursements from the IDB; 
making payments to providers; preparing the procurement plan and the 
financial plan; and the accounting system. 

c. The DGDR will be responsible for: coordinating, implementing, and monitoring 
activities; planning, preparing, and organizing work plans; human resources; 
and filing documentation relating to program activities with the aim of providing 
information to the IDB and ensuring that supporting documentation is kept. 

 As indicated, execution arrangements are well established. Bearing in mind also 
the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in the executing agency’s institutional capacity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 Fiduciary risk is considered to be low. This finding is based on the institutional 
capacity assessment carried out under UR-L1135. It was agreed during the 
orientation mission for this new loan that since: (i) the exercise had been 
completed within a reasonable period; (ii) the fundamental structure of the 
executing agency remained identical; (iii) the indicators for measuring execution 
and the fulfillment of Bank requirements were satisfactory; and (iv) the new 
operation would use the same team of qualified staff with experience in executing 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Bank-financed operations, the May 2016 ICAS assessment identifying a low level 
of risk remained valid. 

3.2 In addition, neither the fiduciary activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the 
financial management activities are regarded as complex, thus confirming the low 
level of risk for this new operation due to the executing agency’s track record of 
performance and compliance. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

 The following considerations will be included in the special provisions: 

a. The program Operating Regulations will be updated to identify the 
administrative and financial management arrangements for the component 
involving the distribution of support. The total value of support will be 
US$20,231,000, of which $19,631,000 will be financed with Bank loan 
proceeds and US$600,000 with local counterpart funds. 

b. Exchange rate: for financial reporting in U.S. dollars, the exchange rate used 
will be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

c. Audited financial statements: During the project disbursement period, audited 
project financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the end of each of the MGAP’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by 
the Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR), or by 
an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank based on terms of reference 
agreed with the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days after the date stipulated for the final disbursement under the loan. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements for Procurement establish the rules 
governing the execution of all procurement planned under the project. 

 Procurement execution 

 The Bank’s procurement policies—documents GN-2349-9 (Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development 
Bank) and GN-2350-9 (Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
financed by the Inter-American Development Bank)—will apply to all planned 
procurement activities under this operation. These will be included in the 
Procurement Plan, which will cover an initial minimum period of 18 months with 
annual updates thereafter. Before initiating procurement, this procurement plan will 
be registered, approved, and published in the Procurement Plan Execution System 
(SEPA, www.iniciativasepa.org). Once registered, the plan will be updated 
annually, or whenever required by substantial changes to the original plan. 

 The relevance of each expenditure (i.e. terms of reference, technical 
specifications, and budget) is the responsibility of the project’s sector specialist 
and always requires a no objection before the procurement process may begin, 
based on the operational criteria of the Project Team Leader. 

http://www.iniciativasepa.org/


Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Project-
related contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services2 subject to 
international competitive bidding will be carried out using the standard bidding 
documents issued by the Bank. Contracts subject to national competitive 
bidding will be carried out using national bidding documents satisfactory to the 
Bank. The review of technical specifications for procurement during 
preparation of the selection processes is the responsibility of the project sector 
specialist. 

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Contracts for consulting services 
under the project will be executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request 
for Proposals (in the case of all contracts above the applicable threshold for 
international shortlists) or one satisfactory to the Bank (in the case of bidding 
processes for amounts below the threshold applicable to international 
competitive bidding). The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing 
the terms of reference for consulting service contracts. 

c. Direct contracting: As set out in the table below, direct contracting for a total 
amount of US$6,048,153 is envisaged, of which US$2,022,190 will be financed 
with local counterpart funds and US$4,025,963 with Bank resources. Direct 
contracts financed with local funds will not be subject to Bank review.  

Table 1. Direct contracts (US$) 

 IDB Local counterpart Total 

Consulting services, RPDP 
team 3,885,736  1,211,681  5,097,417  

Fuel 140,227   -  140,227  

Training  -  444,100  444,100  

Travel expenses  -  101,350  101,350  

Vehicle maintenance  -  109,686  109,686  

Postage  -  54,843  54,843  

Bank fees  -  10,530  10,530  

Audit, TCR  -  90,000  90,000  

Total 4,025,963  2,022,190  6,048,153  

 

(i) The contracts of the consultants belonging to the RPDP team are 
expected to be renewed under the operation. The team is made up of 
advisors, assistants, and the rural development field teams that are 
currently working under loan 2595/OC-UR. Consequently, and in 
accordance with sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 of the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-9) 
(which establish the principle of continuity of service where such 
continuity is more efficient than a new competition), the executing 
agency’s request has been deemed consistent with Bank policies 
based on the following factors: (i) initial selection of the consultants was 
done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received the Bank’s prior no 
objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed are 

                                                
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: The treatment of nonconsulting services is similar to that of goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and 
alternative human resources will be sought through a competitive 
process. The value of this activity is expected to total US$5,097,417 
over the six-year loan execution cycle, with US$3,885,736 financed 
from Bank loan proceeds and US$1,211,681 from local counterpart 
funds. This amount is considered reasonable given that: (i) the team 
comprises a total of 28 people; and (ii) their monthly salaries average 
US$2,462, which is within the reference scale for the Office of the 
President of the Republic. 

(ii) A budget of US$140,227 is also envisaged over the loan execution 
period for the direct purchase of fuel from the Administración Nacional 
de Combustibles, Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and 
Cement Administration] (ANCAP). The fuel will be used for transporting 
field teams in the project’s area of influence. This line is consistent with 
the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the Procurement 
of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be 
obtained from one source. ANCAP is an energy company that manages 
all of the country’s fuel supply plants and has a monopoly over fuel 
imports and exports in Uruguay. It also proposes fuel prices, which are 
then approved by the Executive Branch. Lastly, section 33.C.1 of the 
Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad y Administración Financiera 
[Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration] 
(TOCAF) indicates that government bodies or departments may 
engage in direct contracting with each other. As ANCAP is a state-run 
company, direct contracts with it are aligned with national requirements 
and the Bank’s policies. 

(iii) Training: The program includes training activities for a total of 
US$444,100. These will be financed using local counterpart funds, 
meaning that no interventions are expected in relation to procurement 
contracts using either the ex ante or ex post modalities. 

d. Selection of individual consultants: Selection of individual consultants is 
anticipated for a total amount of US$162,770, in accordance with the 
provisions of Section V of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB, observing in particular the procedures 
envisaged for the competitive selection of these consultants. 

 

Table 2. Thresholds for international competitive bidding and shortlists with international 
participants (US$ thousands) 

Works Goods and services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 
International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 

International 
advertising 

for 
consultants  

Shortlist 

100% 

national 

≥3,000,000 
≤3,000,000 

≤100,000 ≥250,000 
≤250,000 

≤50,000 ≥200,000 ≤200,000 
≥250,000 ≥50,000 

 



Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 Main procurement processes 

 The procurement activities identified for this operation will be divided as set out in 
the following table: 

 
Table 3. Procurement activities 

Category Total, IDB 
Total, local 
counterpart 

Total US$ 

Goods 58,324 7,076 65,400 

Training -  444,100 444,100 

Consulting firms 204,918 135,082 340,000 

Individual consultants 3,992,282 1,267,905 5,260,187 

Nonconsulting services 205,115 24,885 230,000 

Total procurement 4,460,639 1,879,048 6,339,687 

*See Procurement Plan. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

 Given the experience and performance of the executing agency, procurement 
activities will be subject to ex post review, with the exception of those cases in 
which ex ante supervision is justified and explicitly specified in the Procurement 
Plan. The following table sets out the thresholds applicable to the foregoing:3 

 
Table 4. Thresholds for ex post review (US$) 

Works Goods Consulting services 

≥3,000,000 ≥250,000 ≥200,000 

 

 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan. 

 Records and files 

 The agreed formats or procedures set out in the program Operating Regulations 
will be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

 Programming and budget. For preparation of the Executive Branch’s (five-year) 
national budget, the agencies of the central government submit their proposals to 
the MEF before 31 July of the first year of the administration’s term in office. The 
MEF coordinates the budget preparation process with assistance from the 
Planning and Budget Office and the National Civil Service Office. It submits the 
national budget proposal to the Executive Branch, which approves it and forwards 
it to the Legislative Branch by 31 August of the same year. The Legislative Branch 
has 120 days to analyze, approve, and express its opinion on the amounts, and it 
may not make amendments that increase expenditure. Reallocations and any 
increases in the annual budget are prepared by the Executive Branch when it 
presents its annual accountability and budget execution statements. Within six 

                                                
3  Note: Ex post review thresholds are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary execution 

capacity. They may be modified by the Bank as a result of changes in that capacity. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43


Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

months after the end of the fiscal year, the Executive Branch presents these 
reports to the Legislative Branch and may propose amendments for duly justified 
reasons. 

 The local counterpart contribution for this program is US$2.89 million. The 
executing agency will provide evidence to the Bank that local counterpart funds 
have been allocated for the first year of execution, both at the time of fulfillment of 
the conditions precedent and annually thereafter (by the end of February). 

 Accounting and information systems. Project accounts will be maintained in the 
project’s own system and in the country’s Integrated Financial Information System 
(SIIF). Budget credits approved for the program under the five-year budget law are 
allocated and executed using the SIIF; as a result, the procedures established by 
the General Accounting Office (CGN) will be followed when processing project-
related commitments and payments. 

 Project financial statements will be issued periodically on a modified cash basis. 
Project financial statements will be audited annually, and comprise the following: 
(i) statement of cash received and disbursements made; and (ii) statement of 
cumulative investment. 

 Disbursements and cash flow (in coordination with the use or nonuse of the 
national treasury system). Project funds will be managed through a National Single 
Account (CUN), to which end the National Treasury, at the request of the PMU, 
will open a special account at the Central Bank of Uruguay. This account will 
receive the funds disbursed by the Bank, but as it is a registered account (which 
cannot be used to make payments), a specific bank account will be opened for the 
program at the state-owned commercial bank (Banco de la República Oriental del 
Uruguay) for purposes of making the corresponding payments. 

 Disbursements will be made in the form of advances, based on actual liquidity 
needs and supported by adequate financial and disbursement projections. These 
advances will preferably be made every six months, once reporting has been filed 
for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As documentary support, the accounting 
forms will need to be presented along with the financial planning spreadsheet. 
Expenditures involving transfers to Rural Development Field Agents (ATDRs) will 
be documented in two stages: first, once the advances are made, and second, 
once the expense reports are received, supported by an accounting report that 
includes the exact amount used by each ATDR. 

 The eDisbursements system will be used to process disbursement requests. The 
exchange rate for the conversion of local currency payments into the currency 
used for the loan shall be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

 Internal control and audit. The internal control system is based on the national 
system defined in the laws and regulations currently in force. As established in the 
Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration, the TCR will 
exercise preventive intervention in all expenditures related to program execution. 
The level of reliability for execution of this operation is high. 

 The MGAP will maintain the conditions established for the execution of loan 
2595/OC-UR, thus ensuring the continuity and participation of fiduciary staff 
assigned full-time to the program, although for this program they will constitute a 
unit within the PMU. This will strengthen the fiduciary function, as the PMU’s 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

structure includes an Executive Management Department and an Administrative 
and Financial Department. In light of the formal structure specified by the Ministry, 
it is anticipated that the human resources and defined processes necessary to 
meet the Bank’s requirements will be available.  

 External control and reporting. The national external control system is executed 
by the TCR. The previous MGAP operation (2595/OC-UR) was audited by the 
TCR, and the corresponding annual reports were delivered in a timely manner and 
with unqualified audit opinions. For this program, the executing agency’s intention 
is for the TCR to continue providing these services. The TCR’s eligibility level is 
consistent with the type of entity and risk associated with the operation. 

 Annual financial audit reports and the respective evaluation of internal controls will 
be submitted for each fiscal year during the disbursement period by 30 April of the 
following year. The auditing standards issued by the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions will be considered. The cost of the audits will be agreed 
upon in the TCR Service Agreement Letter and will be financed with local 
counterpart funds. 

VII. FINANCIAL SUPERVISION PLAN 

 The initial financial supervision plan is based on the following: 

a. Participation in the launch workshop organized by the project team, with a brief 
presentation on project financial management considerations. 

b. Review of the financial conditions precedent (chart of accounts, agreement 
with the TCR, evidence of budgetary allocation of resources).  

c. Review of the annual work plan and initial financial plan prepared by the PMU 
as support for the first advance of funds (to be requested once the program’s 
eligibility has been established). 

d. If necessary, one financial visit will be carried out each year during program 
execution. The following issues will be covered: reconciliation of the account for 
advances and investments; implementation of external audit recommendations; 
quality and timeliness of accounting records; and maintenance of archives. 

 Execution mechanism. The MGAP will be accountable to the Bank for project 
execution, and it will maintain a direct relationship with the Bank. A description of 
the processes involving the use of the funds will be included in the program 
Operating Regulations; approval and entry into force of the Operating Regulations 
will be a condition precedent to the project’s first disbursement. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/18 

Uruguay. Loan ____/OC-UR to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Rural Productive Development Program II 

The Board of Executive Directors 

RESOLVES: 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Rural Productive 
Development Program II. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$24,232,000 from the 
resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and 
Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan 
Proposal. 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2018) 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1028536987-9657 
Pipeline No. UR-L1147 


	ur-l1147_summary_validation_dem_opc_spd.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 





















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Alvaro García Negro 
(RND/CPR) Project Team Leader; Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND) Project Team Co-leader; 
Viviana Alva Hart (RND/CAR); Héctor Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Ana Rios Galvez 
(CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González (VPC/FMP); Milagros 
Aime (VPS/ESG); Carolina Vera (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty 
Bigara (CSD/CCS); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale ............................................................. 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 12 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 12 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED  

1. Multiyear Execution Plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL  

1. Bibliography 

2. Economic analysis of the project 

3. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS)  

4. Program Operating Regulations  

5. Contribution to actions against climate change 

6. SENACSA user survey and demand study 

7. Animal health diagnostic study for SENACSA  

8. Environmental and Social Analysis and Environmental and Social Management Plan 

9. Public consultation report  

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-20
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-19
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BCP Central Bank of Paraguay 
CSF Classical Swine Fever 
CVP Permanent Veterinary Committee of the Southern Cone 
DIGEAF Bureau of Administration and Finance 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
FMD Foot-and-Mouth Disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GEF Global Environmental Facility 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PEU Program Execution Unit 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PVS Performance of Veterinary Services 
QCBS Quality- and Cost-Based Selection 
SCSP Public Sector Procurement System 
SEAM Ministry of the Environment 
SENACSA National Service for Animal Health and Quality 
SENASICA National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality 
SIAF Integrated Financial Management System  
SIGOR Regional Office Computerized Management System 
SISA Animal Health System 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23


Annex I - PR-L1148 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable
8 326 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

     4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the 

public sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the 

project

Yes

1.0

8.0

1.8

4.0

2.2

9.0

3.0

3.0

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

8.0

2.5

5.5

0.0

The objective of the program is to contribute to improving the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to improve the effectiveness of animal health 

services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including minor species. The relative low productivity of the livestock sector is 

well articulated and supported, as well as its relationship with livestock health. However, little empirical evidence is presented about current weaknesses in managing health 

risks.

The results matrix exhibits vertical logic and presents medium-term impact indicators associated with productivity. Not all indicators classified as outcome indicators are 

outcome indicators, or have well-established baselines and goals.

The ex-ante economic analysis captures the benefits associated with the reduction of losses, improvements in access to markets and prices, and administrative efficiency. 

The key assumptions are mostly clearly presented and well supported. The sensitivity analysis includes the key assumptions. Although the economic analysis incorporates 

improvements in administrative efficiency, these indicators are not part of the results matrix.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and 

Evaluation National System, Environmental 

Assessment National System.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: nformation System, parison.

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and 

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of 

food security  (#)*

Yes

Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and 

services

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II 
Page 1 of 4 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: 
The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness 
of animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final target Means of verification Comments 

IMPACT: Increase in the beef cattle offtake rate and the volume of pork and poultry meat exports 

Slaughter rate1/Cattle 
population  

Percentage 13.8% 
2014-2016 

average 
18% SENACSA report 3-year average 

Number of export 
markets 

Number of 
countries for 
which meat 
exports are 
authorized 

13 
2014-2016 

average 
16 SENACSA report 

Export markets with SENACSA health 
agreements 

Volume of pork and 
poultry meat, offal, and 
giblets exports  

Tons 5,754 2016 7,500 
Volume of exports 

reported by SENACSA 

This indicator is used as a proxy for production 
due to the lack of statistics. Annual growth 
estimated at 5% 

 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target1 

Means of verification Comments2 

OUTCOME 1: More effective risk management and animal health services  

Response time to 
notifications of 
suspected vesicular 
diseases 

Hours 4 2017 3 
SENACSA report based on 
specific records 

Refers to the response time between the notification of 
and attention to the suspected case 

Rating in Chapter II of 
the PVS (OIE)  

Rating 32 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report Chapter II is “Technical Authority and Capability” 

PVS critical 
competencies rating 
(OIE) 

Rating 3 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report 
Average rating obtained for critical competencies II.1 
(laboratories), II.5 (epidemiological surveillance and 
early detection) and II.6 (emergency response) 

                                                           
1  Slaughter in meat packing facilities with veterinary inspection. This is a more reliable proxy for the offtake rate that refers to the population addressed by the project.  
2  To be confirmed. In November 2017 an OIE mission performed the fieldwork for a new evaluation that will serve as a baseline for the project. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 

OUTCOME 2: Reduced prevalence of brucellosis 

Reduced prevalence of 
bovine brucellosis 

% 6% 2017 4.5% SENACSA report 
Number of positive reactions divided by total number 
of tested animals 

OUTCOME 3: Health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock  

Health plans in 
operation  

Number of 
plans 

2 2017 4 SENACSA report 

Implies the existence of a registry of establishments, 
owners, and the movements of poultry, sheep, goat, 
and pigs, used as a basis for the health actions 
defined by SENACSA. 

 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Component I: Health risk management  

SISA’s functions 
expanded and SISA 
integrated into SIGOR  

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Health surveillance 
unit implemented 

Command 
unit 

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Entry point controls 
operating in 
accordance with 
international 
standards 

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017    1  1 

SENACSA report and 
OIE observations 
contained in the PVS.  
CVP project reports 
(ATN/OC-16011-RG)  

 

Simulations of foot-
and-mouth disease 
outbreaks performed 

Number of 
simulations 

0 2016  1 1  1 3 
Foot-and-mouth 
disease outbreak 
simulation reports 

 

Samples processed 
by laboratory 
networks 
 
 
 
New diagnostic 
techniques 
implemented 

Number of 
samples 

(thousands) 
 
 
 
Number of 
techniques  

120 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0 

2016   

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
 
 
 

2 

30 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

240 
 
 
 
 
 

4 

Report based on 
laboratory 
management system 

In addition to the 
number of samples, the 
following should be 
verified: (a) SENACSA 
laboratory network has 
been integrated with 
equipped private 
laboratories 
(10 laboratories in total) 
and (b) comprehensive 
laboratory management 
software is operational  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 4 

 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

SENACSA facilities in 
the field built or 
renovated 

Number of 
facilities  

0 2017   7 4 6 17 
SENACSA report 
based on inspection 
of works 

 

Computer system 
implemented for 
managing individual 
traceability 

Computer 
application 

0 0    1  1 SENACSA report 

 

Properties treated in 
the brucellosis 
eradication program  

Number of 
properties  

0 2017  100 200   300 SENACSA report 

In addition to the 
properties in the 
brucellosis eradication 
program, the disease 
protocol should be 
checked.  

Strategic staff 
members trained for 
SENACSA's new 
management model 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

0 2017  50 100 100  250 

SENACSA report 
specifying 
implementation of the 
new management 
model and the 
number of persons 
trained for it 

 

Component II: Expansion of services 

Records of sheep and 
goat stock counted 
and control of 
movements 
functioning  

Records 
system 

0 2017     2 2 
SIGOR-based 
SENACSA reports 
 

 

Health plans that 
include 
epidemiological 
surveillance 
implemented for 
sheep and goats 

Health plans 0 2017  1 1   2 

SENACSA reports on 
epidemiological 
surveillance results 
for the two species 

 

Poultry and pig farms 
under surveillance 
and certification 
programs 

Number of 
farms 

0 2017   5 10 10 25 

SENACSA report 
including updated 
self-declaration of 
status as free from 
Newcastle disease, 
avian influenza, and 
CSF 

 

Small livestock PPP 
operating  

Not 
operating=0 
Operating=1 

0 2017 1     1 

Acting coordinator 
and documentation of 
periodic meetings of 
the PPP’s governing 
body 

 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Technicians and 
producers trained on 
sheep, goat, and pig 
health 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

Government 
technicians. 

Private 
technicians. 
Producers 

 

0  
30 
30 
 

30 
30 

400 

30 
30 

600 

 
 

600 

90 
90 

1,600 

Training reports 
prepared by the PPP 

The training sessions 
include materials for 
mass distribution to 
participants  

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

Online 
proce-
dures 

and pay-
ments 

% of proce-
dures 

20 2017   20 20 20 80 

SENACSA report 
with list of procedures 
at the start and end 
of the program 

Volume of online 
procedures/total 
volume of procedures 
(in person + electronic) 

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

New 
modules 
in SIGOR 

Number of 
modules 

12 2017  1 1 1 1 16 

Report on 
incorporated modules 
Initial baseline report 
with the current 
number of modules 
(2017) and a 
description thereof 

 

 



Annex III  
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: Paraguay 

Project name:  Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay  

Project number: PR-L1148 

Executing agency: National Service for Animal Health and Quality (SENACSA) 

Prepared by:  Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(fiduciary specialists)  

  

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional assessment for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
evaluation and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System on the 
executing agency SENACSA. The fiduciary agreements applicable to project 
execution have been prepared as a result of this assessment.  

II. THE COUNTRY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development. Nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for 
the execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared 
through auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the 
Integrated Financial Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting 
Subsystem (SICO), and other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage 
payment transfers to vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central 
Bank of Paraguay. The integration of these tools will allow audited financial 
statements for a program or project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future. Until 
then, parallel systems are being used. External control is currently performed 
through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s public sector procurement system (SCSP), Bank 
operations make full use of the public procurement information system, as well as 
the country’s electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems, for 
the amounts and categories established in the agreements for the use thereof 
signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  

III. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

3.1 The executing agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) with the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance 
(DIGEAF). The PMU reports to the Office of the President of the institution, and will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met; the PMU 
will be the main contact between the IDB and the borrower during execution. In 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

turn, the DIGEAF will handle administrative and financial activities, as well as 
procurement and contracting.  

3.2 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were assessed during 
the preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; 
capacity for executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems 
for managing staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According 
to the assessment, SENACSA has overall technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters. However, its lack of prior experience in executing projects with multilateral 
financing, principally in the area of procurement, is considered a weakness. 
Consequently, although the consolidated result for the SENACSA capacities 
assessed using the ICAS shows a satisfactory level of development, the program 
has been assigned a medium level of risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of SENACSA, opportunities for improvement should 
focus on:  

a. Implementing a financial and accounting information system that makes it 
possible to record the transactions and issue information required by the 
Ministry of Finance, SENACSA, and the Bank; 

b. Designing and developing the profiles of the PEU positions; 

c. Strengthening accounting and internal control in Bank financial management 
policies.  

4.2 Procurement management. In the September 2017 ICAS report, SENACSA was 
considered to have a satisfactory overall level of development. However, the 
specific assessment of the goods and services administration system yielded 
medium levels of development and risk. Accordingly, as mitigation actions, the 
area responsible for procurement needs to be strengthened with competent staff 
knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as well as through 
specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for 
monitoring project-related activities. Therefore, SENACSA will draw up these 
procedures in a fiduciary manual for the PEU, contained in the Operating 
Regulations and to be approved by the competent authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be considered in the special 
provisions: for the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties 
agree that the exchange rate to be applied will be the one indicated in section 
(b)(ii) of that article. The agreed-upon exchange rate will be the exchange rate on 
the effective date on which the borrower, the executing agency, or any other 
person or legal entity given the power to incur expenses, makes the respective 
payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary. 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved (in document 
GN-2538-11) the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (Law 2051/03). The 
use of other country systems accepted subsequent to approval of the project will 
be implemented automatically, and so stated in the Procurement Plan. 

 Procurement execution 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. In turn, the bidding procedures subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) 
will be executed using national competitive bidding documents agreed upon with 
the Bank. The project’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the 
technical specifications of procurement items during the preparation of selection 
processes. Initially, there are no plans for selection processes involving single-
source selection.  

6.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
arising under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals 
issued by or agreed upon with the Bank. The project’s sector specialist is 
responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. Procurement workshops will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of October 
2013, the use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the 
use of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000);  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the shopping method for complex 
works (for reference, US$250,000), and to contracts for goods and 
nonconsulting services up to the amount established by the Bank for 
the use of the shopping method for complex goods and services (for 
reference, US$50,000); 

(iii) Contracts for amounts greater than or equal to the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.4 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any 
system or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. 

                                                
1  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

The operation’s Procurement Plan and updates thereto will indicate which 
contracts are to be executed through the approved country systems.2 

6.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None foreseen for this operation. 

6.6 Domestic preference. None foreseen for this operation.  

Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and international shortlist (US$)  

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist in 

consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

Table 2. Main procurement items 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 

Estimated 
amount 
(US$) 

Works 

Contracting of construction firm for the construction of works for 
SENACSA 

ICB Year 3 3,380,000 

Goods 

Procurement of equipment for DIGELAB. 57 items ICB Year 1 2,307,500 

Procurement of equipment ICB Year 2 330,000 

Mobile inspections ICB Year 2 300,000 

Nonconsulting services     

Contracting of treatment services for infected establishments ICB Year 2 540,000 

Contracting of logistical support services for training sessions, 
workshops, and seminars 
 

ICB Year 1 285,000 

Consulting firms    

Development of software for traceability 
 

QCBS Year 1 1,830,000 

Design and development of new SIGOR features, systems 
security plan, and electronic signature functionality 

QCBS Year 1 705,000 

 

Table 3. Total amounts by category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 3,380,500 

Goods 3,862,500 

Nonconsulting services  895,000 

Consulting firms 4,535,500 

Individual consultants  1,256,500 

Training sessions 670,000 

Total, Procurement Plan 14,600,000 

 

6.7 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by procurement 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by 
the Bank. Supervision of all procurement processes governed by the SCSP 

                                                
2  If another system or subsystem is approved by the Bank, it will be applicable to the operation, in 

accordance with the loan contract. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) will be conducted through the country system.3 

6.8 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.9 Records and files. The systems, formats, and procedures available to or agreed 
upon with the Bank should be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL EXECUTION  

 Financial Management 

7.1 Programming and budget 

a. The PEU, reporting to the Office of the President of SENACSA and in 
coordination with the DIGEAF, will centralize the coordination of execution, 
supported by other departments and units of SENACSA, as necessary. 

b. SENACSA will be responsible for budget programming, administration, and 
execution, under the zero-based budget system.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses modified cash basis 
accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through the 
DIGEAF. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the 
Bank. These reports are prepared using different systems, which entails 
additional work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will typically be 
made through advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the 
monthly submission of one detailed financial plan for up to six months, and 
one for a longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual 
needs based on the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and 
procurement plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject 
to justification of at least 80% of the previous advance. If requested, 
disbursements may also be made as direct vendor payments or 
reimbursements for payments made. 

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency 
for accountability will be the monetization rate.  

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes that there is an 
advanced level of internal control. However, the SENACSA internal audit 
office does not include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency will deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, in accordance with the terms of reference previously approved by the 
Bank. The project’s financial statements include a cash flow statement, 
statement of accrued investments, notes to these financial statements, and 
the statement from the project management team. The audit report will 

                                                
3  Depending on the scope of the use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If 

so, it should be mentioned in this Annex. 



Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

include an evaluation of the internal control system. The project will require 
the selection of an eligible independent audit firm. External audits will be 
covered by the loan proceeds, estimated at US$200,000 over the planned 
five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based 
on project execution and audit reports. 

Table 4. Financial supervision plan 

Nature/scope Frequency   

 
Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

 
Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

 
Review of disbursement requests and attached 
reports 

2/3 per year 
 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 
 

7.3 Execution arrangements. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 

7.4 Other financial management agreements and requirements, as set forth in 
paragraph 3.11 of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/18 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA) 
Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in Paraguay 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA), as Borrower, and with 
the Republic of Paraguay, as Guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing to 
cooperate in the execution of the Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ____________ 2018) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-7480 
Pipeline No.: PR-L1148 

 


	DEM pr-l1148_spd_validation_opc.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 



















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Eirivelthon S. Lima 
(RND/CPE) and Juan Manuel Murguía Baysse (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; 
Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND); Mario González Flores 
(SPD/SDV); Michael Kent and Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); 
Carolina Escudero (FMP/CBO); Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); and 
Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND).  

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. 
Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 
available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.  

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale .......................................... 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to 

increase legal certainty over rural property. ................................................... 8 
C. Results matrix and key indicators. ................................................................ 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Economic viability ....................................................................................... 10 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
E. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements ............................................ 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan  

2. Annual Work Plan 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Plan  

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic Analysis of the Project 

2. Institutional Analysis 

3. Sector Analysis 

4. Strategic Environmental and Social Evaluation of the Program 

5. Draft Program Operating Regulations 

6. Consolidated Budget  

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319371
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319624
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319558
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319364
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319629
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319484
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320821
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319541


 - iii - 
 
 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ABT Autoridad de Fiscalización y Control Social de Bosques y Tierra [Forest 
and Land Social Control and Oversight Authority] 

APMT Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra [Mother Earth Plurinational 
Authority] 

AWP Annual Work Plan 
CIOC Comunidades Interculturales Originarias [Original Intercultural 

Communities] 
DDRR Registro de Derechos Reales [Real Property Rights Registry] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Planning Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas [National Statistics Institute] 
INRA Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria [National Agrarian Reform 

Institute] 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural Development and Land 
MEF Ministry of Economy and Public Finance 
MPD Ministry of Planning and Development 
PCR Program Completion Report 
SESA Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
SIC Sistema Integrado de Catastro [Integrated Cadastre System] 
SIMAT Sistema de Mantenimiento y Administración de Tierra [Land 

Maintenance and Management System] 
TIOC Territorios Indígena Comunitario Campesino [Rural Community 

Indigenous Territories] 
VIPFE Office of the Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External 

Financing  
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia  OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 
Executing Agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 51,000,000 51 
Inspection and supervision 
fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

IDB (FSO): 9,000,000 9 Interest rate: SCF fixed
(b) 

0.25% 

Local cofinancing: 40,000,000 40 
Credit fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

Approval currency: US$ US$ 

Total: 100,000,000 100 

Project at a Glance 

Program objective/description: To increase legal certainty over rural property. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of 

Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) will sign a 
subsidiary agreement defining the following matters, among others: (a) the method to be used to transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; 
and (b) INRA’s commitment to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); 
(ii) appointment of the Director of INRA’s Planning Bureau (DGP) as the program’s general coordinator and of the program 
component coordinators, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and the contracting of the following 
specialists: financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social management, through a competitive process, in 
accordance with terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) the entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7). 

Special contractual conditions by component: Evidence of the signing and entry into force of the following interagency 

cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA and the Real Property Rights Registry prior to the disbursement to finance activities 
related to public registries under Component 2 (paragraph 3.5); (ii) between INRA and the Forest and Land Social Control and 
Oversight Authority, the Madre Tierra [Mother Earth] Plurinational Authority, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, prior to 
disbursement to finance activities related to the program’s Environmental and Social Management Plan in Component 2 (paragraph 
3.5); and (iii) between INRA and the National Statistics Institute, prior to disbursement to finance activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan (paragraph 3.5). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(b)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-cutting issues
(c)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the 

Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies. 
(b)

 The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balances of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan at a LIBOR-based rate. Once the outstanding 
balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is greater, the rate will be set for this balance. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law). 

 
 

 



 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Property rights over land and agricultural competitiveness. The agriculture 
sector is one of the most important sectors of the Bolivian economy. Between 2002 
and 2014, average annual growth in the sector was 4.16%, accounting for close to 
13.4% of gross domestic product. It employs 30% of the total labor force nationally 
and is even more significant in rural areas where it employs 62% of the labor force. 
The agriculture sector also makes a significant contribution to Bolivian exports; 
between 1999 and 2014, exports grew at an average annual rate of 13%, leaping 
from US$247 million to US$1.29 billion. Over this period, the agriculture sector 
accounted for between 14% and 18% of the total value of the country’s exports.1 
Considering that the economy of rural households is closely tied to agricultural 
activities, growth in the sector contributed to a 21 percentage point reduction in 
rural poverty levels, with poverty falling from 62% to 39% (Castellani and Zenteno, 
2015).  

1.2 Despite the importance of the agriculture sector, a detailed examination shows low 
productivity levels. According to the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), agricultural yield from grain production is 57% of the average 
for South America and 39% in the case of starchy root crops. In addition, a Bank 
analysis shows that growth in Bolivia’s total factor productivity has been lower than 
the regional average, with a decline in efficiency but increases in technological 
change (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Data from the Social and Economic Policy Analysis 
Unit indicate that the area under cultivation increased by 460,000 hectares 
between 2006 and 2014. This means that sector growth has been due more to 
expansion of the area under cultivation than to increased productivity. Sector 
growth was concentrated in a small group of items intended for export in the 
eastern part of the country, where producers have benefited from the region’s 
natural characteristics (soils, topography, and water), a good level of public 
spending on sector public goods, and private investments in intensive systems of 
production with access to financing and the latest technologies. 

1.3 The agriculture sector’s potential contribution to economic growth and rural poverty 
reduction depends on farmers’ increased productivity, particularly among small and 
medium-sized producers (World Bank, 2008; Escobal, J., 2012). In Bolivia, most 
small and medium-sized producers are located in the valleys and highlands. The 
main items of those agricultural producers are crops such as potato, corn, and 
grains. More than 80% of the parcels with pending regularization and titling belong 
to the small farmer category, which includes rural producers with fewer than two 
hectares in the highlands and up to 50 hectares in the lowlands. These agricultural 
producers are estimated to represent 83% of the country’s rural households.2 

1.4 Improving agriculture sector productivity and thus efficiency and sustainability in 
the use of land in Bolivia requires investments in sector public goods to promote 
farmers’ private productive investments (Lopez, 2004, Blackman et al. 2014, 
Quisumbing and Kumar, 2014; Ali, et al., 2014). A requirement for achieving this 

                                                
1
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC). What Does Bolivia Export? 

(http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 
2
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura 

http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura


- 2 - 

objective is to establish secure property rights over land. According to the available 
empirical evidence, such rights reduce the risk of expropriation and give farmers 
the incentive to make investments that increase productivity and the sustainability 
of rural properties. In the Bolivian case, the empirical evidence is limited because 
no rigorous assessments of the impacts of titling on the productivity and 
sustainable management of agricultural producers’ natural resources have been 
done. Nonetheless, empirical evidence in the region shows the positive impact of 
titling on the use of inputs, increased productive investments, stimulation of the 
land market, reduced deforestation, and farmers’ income (Aldana and Fort, 2001, 
Ghatak and Besley, 2010; Deininger and Chamorro, 2004; Hernández and 
Reardon, 2012; Foltz, Larson and Lopez, 2000, Torrero and Field, 2005; Zegarra, 
2008, Gignoux, J. et al. 2013; Lawry et al. 2014; and Rockson et al., 2013). 

1.5 Property rights, sustainability, and conflicts. Property rights in and of 
themselves do not guarantee the sustainable use of natural resources. In 
Nicaragua, the assignment of property rights improved agricultural productivity and 
also increased the rate of deforestation (Liscow, 2013). The preliminary data for 
Bolivia (Santa Cruz) indicate that land titling, particularly for ranchers, increases 
deforestation (Murguia, 2016). Thus, if the regularization of rural property rights is 
not accompanied by a legal framework and the corresponding environmental 
management instruments, the results of rural titling tend to generate environmental 
degradation. In this regard, the evidence shows that a requirement for ensuring the 
positive impacts of rural land titling on environmental management is the ability to 
monitor and penalize violations (OECD, 2009). With respect to social conflicts, 
10% of the last 25 million hectares subject to intervention are paralyzed by social 
conflicts. This problem is estimated to be significant in the area where property 

rights are yet to be regularized, covering 15 million hectares (paragraph 1.6), in that 
small landholdings (minifundios) are involved (Carrasco, 2016). Under this 
scenario, dispute resolution is important to remove barriers to titling. 

1.6 Status of regularization and titling. The Bolivian government has made 
significant strides in the regularization of rural property and the regularization, 
cadastre, titling, and registration of rural lands is reaching its final stage. Table 1 
indicates that the regularization and titling target was approximately 106 million 
hectares. Between 1996 and 2014, the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 
has been involved in interventions covering approximately 93 million hectares as 
follows: (i) it regularized and titled approximately 41 million private hectares, which 
included collective properties (Territorios Indígenas Comunitarios Campesinos 
[Rural Community Indigenous Territories] (TIOCs) and Comunidades 
Interculturales Originarias [Native Intercultural Communities (CIOCs)) and 
individual properties; (ii) it regularized approximately 25 million hectares of public 
lands; and (iii) it made headway with the regularization of rural lands that did not 
yet comply with all the legal and technical requirements, involving 27 million 
hectares. The work of regularization, titling, and registration of rural lands that is 
pending for the next few years is to continue in the areas not yet subject to 
intervention, amounting to 15 million hectares, and to finalize the regularization 
process in 25 million hectares that were already subject to intervention but have 
not yet complied with all the requirements of the regularization process. 

1.7 The indigenous peoples and intercultural communities were the primary 
beneficiaries of INRA’s interventions, for a total of approximately 32 million titled 
hectares, which represents 78% of the total titled area in the country (Table 1). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 3 - 

This is the result of the effect of Law 3,545, which gave priority to the regularization 
and titling of TIOCs and CIOCs. Small and medium-sized properties occupy 
second place in terms of titled area, with 5.6 million hectares, which represents 
14% of the country’s titled area. According to INRA, this individual titling progress 
occurs in settlement areas, Andean-Amazonian transition areas, and integrated 
management areas of the Amboró National Park (Cochabamba and Santa Cruz). 
Lastly, three million hectares held by agricultural companies were dealt with in the 
regularization process, representing 8% of the country’s titled area. The company-
held properties are located in Santa Cruz, Pando, and Beni. 

Table 1. Status of Regularization and Titling between 1996 and 2014. 

Categories 
Titles 

(Number) 

Area 

(Hectares) 
% 

A. Regularization and titling target  - 106,751,722 100 

B. Titled Area 391,685 40,786,475 38.2 

B1. Small property  377,802 3,852,050 9.4 

B2. Medium-sized property 3,148 1,667,651 4.1 

B3. Agricultural company 1,374 3,091,530 7.6 

B4. Community properties (CIOCs)    8,921 9,176,971 22.5 

B5. Rural Community Indigenous Territories (TIOCs) 440 22,998,273 56.4 

C. Regularized public lands - 24,542,520 23.0 

D. Area in the process of being regularized - 26,867,679 25.2 

E. Area without regularization and titling - 14,555,048 13.6 

Source: INRA, 2016 and Colque et al. 2016. 

 

1.8 According to data from INRA (Andrade, 2016), the areas still not covered by the 
titling policy are distributed throughout the country. Nonetheless, the demand for 
titling of rural lands is concentrated primarily in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, 
Cochabamba, Beni, and Santa Cruz. In terms of the number of titles to be 
delivered, La Paz (48%) has the highest percentage, followed by Potosí (15%) and 
Cochabamba (14%). The departments with the largest areas to be titled are: 
Santa Cruz (30%), La Paz (22%), and Beni (22%). 

1.9 Institutional framework of property rights.  The institutional structure for 
establishing property rights over rural land was developed under the Agrarian Law 
of 1953. That law created the National Agrarian Reform Service, which is headed 
by the President and implemented through the National Agrarian Reform Council. 
The Council controlled the operational aspects of the work of titling rural lands at 
that time. This institutional framework was redesigned in 1996 with the enactment 
of Law 1,715/96. With the new law, the Council was replaced by INRA, identified 
under Law 1,715/96 as a technical and legal institution with operational 
responsibilities for defining rural land ownership rights. In 2006, Law 3,545/06, 
which reinstituted the agrarian reform on a community basis, amended Law 
1,715/96 by facilitating the titling of collective lands and establishing that all 
available public lands would preferably be assigned to indigenous or campesino 
peoples or communities that had limited land. It also established that private lands 
(medium-sized property owners and companies) would revert to the State if they 
failed to serve an economic and social function (Endo, 2016; Colque et al., 2016). 

1.10 Laws 1,715/96 and 3,545/06 retained the National Agrarian Reform Service as the 
body responsible for planning, executing, and consolidating the agrarian reform 
process. The Service is made up of: (i) the President, the supreme authority 



- 4 - 

responsible for signing title deeds, among other duties; (ii) the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land (MDRyT), which is responsible for implementing policies 
and other strategic activities in the sector; (iii) the National Agrarian Commission, a 
mixed government/civil society agency charged with community oversight and the 
strategic course of the agrarian reform process; (iv) the Agrarian Judicatura [bench 
of judges], a specialized body for the administration of agrarian justice, made up of 
the Agri-Environmental Tribunal and the Agri-Environmental Courts, for the 
resolution of disputes arising from land ownership and property rights, which was 
conceived as an independent institution and is thus not part of the Service; and 
(v) INRA, an autonomous decentralized public agency under the MDRyT 
responsible, among other things, for steering, coordinating, and executing agrarian 
property regularization policies (Endo, 2016; Colque, et al., 2016). 

1.11 Law 1,715/96 kept unchanged the rural property types previously defined by the 
Agrarian Law of 1953. Rural property types include: campesino site, small 
property, medium-sized property, and agricultural enterprise. However, Law 
1,715/96 added a new type of collective property, the Native Community Land, and 
recognized equal property rights for men and women, defining parity criteria in land 
distribution, management, tenure, and use. Another important change introduced 
by Law 1,715/96 was the development of new instruments recognizing rural 
property rights. The regularization instruments were developed to implement the 
multiple objectives of Law 1,715/96: to regularize property rights, consolidate 
indigenous territories, recover idle lands, certify public lands and distribute them to 
those who need them, resolve disputes, and develop the rural cadastre (Endo, 
2016). 

1.12 The Real Property Rights Registry (DDRR) supplements the institutional 
framework of property rights mentioned above. The DDRR is the Judicial Council 
entity responsible for recording all entries and annotations covering real property 
rights, including real estate and real estate rights, in Bolivia. It was created by the 
Law on the Registration of Real Property Rights of 1887; its operational rules are 
defined in the Civil Code and the regulations approved by Supreme Decree 29,757 
of 2004. For a large-scale rural land regularization and titling operation like that 
proposed in this program, the technical, operational, and technological link 
between INRA and the DDRR is very important for expediting the registration of 
rural properties that have been regularized and surveyed. The workloads 
generated by INRA exceed the existing capacities of the DDRR, which sometimes 
receives packets of more than 10,000 property titles in files and titling data maps 
all at once. 

1.13 Bank actions and other sources of financing. Various funding agencies have 
supported the activities involved in regularizing rural land property rights. The 
World Bank granted a loan of US$24.7 million; the Nordic Development Fund 
financed US$7.5 million; the Kingdom of the Netherlands provided support through 
a nonreimbursable fund of US$8.8 million; the European Union contributed 
US$4 million to the process. The Bank began its support for land titling in Bolivia 
through the “Environmental and Social Protection Project in the Santa Cruz – 
Puerto Suárez Corridor” (1099/SF-BO), through which it financed a titling 
subcomponent amounting to US$2.4 million. The Bank consolidated its 
participation in this area with a land titling operation for US$22 million called the 
“Land Regularization and Legal Cadastre Program” (1512/SF-BO). These funds 
totaled US$70 million and were executed between 1996 and 2012. 



- 5 - 

1.14 The advances made in the area of land regularization are part of a series of 
reforms in the country’s legal framework. Since the National Agrarian Reform 
Council was replaced by INRA, a series of rules was developed to expedite the 
process of regularizing rural lands. Although an institutional structure was created, 
INRA still lacked the capacity to implement the new legal framework for land 
regularization. To overcome the institutional constraints, the decision was made to 
contract land regularization companies, which transferred regularization 
technologies and trained local specialists during contract implementation. With the 
entry into force of Law 3,545/06, the method whereby companies were contracted 
for land regularization became obsolete and INRA assumed the direct execution of 
land regularization. The existing financial resources were thus reallocated to 
finance INRA’s specialized brigades (equipment, vehicles, and specialists). The 
Bank also supported the development, implementation, and linkage of the initial 
versions of the rural property cadastre and registration systems.3 

1.15 Problems in land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration. The 
diagnostic assessments of the process of regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural land indicate that the following issues need to be addressed:  

1.16 Limitations of the regulatory framework. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the existing legal framework (Endo, 2016), the latter permits 
program execution to start. Nonetheless, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) the regularization, titling, and cadastre 
manuals are outdated; (ii) the rural land regularization procedures are not entirely 
suited to the new areas of intervention; (iii) the rural land regularization procedures 
do not incorporate technological changes that will have a positive impact on titling; 
(iv) the current dispute resolution mechanism needs to be reformulated to reduce 
the burden of pending litigation in titling processes; (v) the ability to use land as a 
guarantee for obtaining credit is restricted to medium-sized property and 
agricultural enterprises; and (vi) the costs for maintaining the formal status of rural 
properties are high and the incentives for maintaining the rural cadastre are 
insufficient. 

1.17 Limitations of the regularization process. The cadastral sweep (barrido 
catastral)4 is the most efficient methodology for large-scale regularization of land 
tenure in rural areas with large numbers of producers and low titling levels. The 
cadastral sweep takes advantage of economies of scale; per title costs are thus 
lower than regularization based on individual demand. Operation 1512/SF-BO 
helped the government to implement the cadastral sweep method. Operation 
1512/SF-BO financed the basic inputs for implementing the sweep, including: 
(i) the formation of regularization specialist brigades – contracting of specialists; 
(ii) the purchase of equipment for the field work; and (iii) logistical support. 
According to the regularization diagnostic assessment (Andrade, 2016), in order to 
achieve the program targets, it is essential that: (i) brigade staff members working 
in INRA under contingent contracts be retained throughout program execution; 
(ii) equipment for the field work be modernized; and (iii) the logistical support 
infrastructure be replaced. An estimated 150 to 200 field brigades will need to be 

                                                
3
  The project completion reports (PCR) for project 1099/SF-BO and program 1512/SF-BO detail the efforts 

made by the Bank and the government to overcome the challenges of regularization work in Bolivia. 
4
  The cadastral sweep is a methodology for systemic surveying of each and every one of the rural parcels 

in an area to gather the technical and legal information on the property and its owner for the mass 
regularization of rural property tenure.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319504/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/37382628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/36662436/R


- 6 - 

financed each year. These brigades are made up of seven regularization 
specialists. Each brigade’s field operations require a minimum infrastructure of 
GPS equipment, portable computers, complete stations, and vehicles. 

1.18 Deficiencies of the technological platform. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the technological platform (Solíz, 2016), the current technology is 
capable of continuing the rural land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration 
process. However, the following problems must be overcome: (i) consolidating the 
Land Maintenance and Management System (SIMAT) and the Integrated Cadastre 
System (SIC) as technical tools; (ii) migrating data from the Integrated 
Regularization and Titling System (SIST) to the SIMAT/SIC systems; (iii) replacing 
the use of the SIST with the SIMAT/SIC in all INRA offices; (iv) improving the 
electronic link between INRA and the DDRR for the large-scale property tilting and 
registration process; (v) reorganizing the data centers and updating the data 
servers; (vi) updating the equipment (computers); (vii) developing the INRA nexus 
with GeoBolivia; (viii) reviewing and consolidating administrative systems; 
(ix) cleaning spatial data; (x) completing the process of digitization and indexation 
of the INRA documentary collection; and (xi) developing the INRA platform. 

1.19 Limitations of environmental and social management tools. According to the 
results from the program’s Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) (see Carrasco, 2016), the current legal framework is sufficiently developed 
for the environmental and social management of the rural property regularization 
process. However, the management tools for handling potential environmental and 
social problems stemming from rural property regularization are not fully 
developed. The main conclusion of the SESA indicates that the above weaknesses 
produce a situation in which current regulations are not fully enforced and/or 
compliance with them is not verified. Accordingly, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) forest coverage monitoring does not 
generate information in real time for monitoring and controlling deforestation; 
(ii) the rural cadastre does not include the environmental information needed to 
facilitate monitoring and control at each rural property; and (iii) the tools that INRA 
has for managing social conflicts are inadequate for addressing the complexity of 
the conflicts and the processes for resolving them.  

1.20 Lessons learned. The proposed project has taken into account lessons learned 
from loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO and other similar Bank-financed 
operations in the region (see Table 2).  

  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323300/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 7 - 

Table 2. Lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in the sector 

Problem by work area Reflected in project design 

Legal framework. It is necessary to 

ensure that the legal framework 
allows rural titling to be carried out. 

While the current legal framework allows for moving 
forward with the regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural lands, the program will finance activities to improve 
the regulatory framework. 

Institutional organization. Titling 

requires the participation of various 
public agencies that neither share 
information nor coordinate activities 
well. 

The project will finance the strengthening of key 
institutions involved in the process of regularizing rural 
property.  

Information safeguards. The rural 

cadastre information must be 
protected.  

The working methodology for the cadastral survey will be 
100% digital with backup systems.  

Cadastral survey. The cadastral 

sweep methodology has yielded good 
results. 

The sweep methodology will be improved for working in 
highland areas with small landholdings, through the use 
of unmanned aerial vehicles, for example. 

Monitoring and quality control 
system. The lack of monitoring 

systems makes it difficult to manage 
progress made in rural titling. 

The project will develop an integrated system for 
monitoring progress, including the reactivation of 
participatory monitoring mechanisms. 

Community participation. The 

communities’ participation in the 
titling process was a key factor in the 
success of the operation. 

The program will reinstall the interagency titling 
committees with the participation of authorities from 
indigenous communities and territories. 

Support for permanent institutions. 

It is important to focus efforts on 
supporting permanent institutions. 

The project will support INRA, the DDRR, the Forest and 
Land Social Control and Oversight Authority (ABT), and 
the Mother Earth Plurinational Authority (APMT), which 
are permanent government institutions, in the work of 
regularization and environmental and social 
management of rural property.  

Management of the regularization 
brigades. It is critical to design a 

cadastral sweep methodology with 
incentives and penalties. 

In the first year of program execution, funds will be 
earmarked for the design of a system to monitor the field 
brigades, taking into account incentives for achieving 
goals and penalties. 

Source: OVE, 2014. Comparative Evaluation: Land Regularization and Management, PCRs for the following 
projects: 906/OC-PE, 1340/OC-PE, 1099/SF-BO, and 1512/SF-BO. 

 

1.21 Conceptual overview of the operation. The project is conceived as an operation 
that continues the rural property regularization process initiated by the Government 
of Bolivia through loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO. The project design 
emphasizes the key aspects identified in the diagnostic assessment of the current 
situation: (i) the strengthening of integrated mass sweep campaigns for the 
regularization of rural property, which will make it possible to proceed with rural 
titling on a cost-effective basis; (ii) modernization of the cadastre and public 
registry system, which will help to strengthen the integration of titling entities and 
public registries, as well as the efficient and secure management of cadastral 
information; (iii) strengthening of environmental and social management tools, 
which will help to reduce the environmental and social problems identified; and 
(iv) maintenance of the cadastre and public registry of rural properties, which will 
help to reduce transaction costs for the end user. 

1.22 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020, 
the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019, and the Bank’s strategy 
with Bolivia 2016-2020. The program is consistent with the Update to the 
Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008). Specifically, the program is 



- 8 - 

in line with the challenge of low productivity and innovation, by increasing farmers’ 
productivity related to the establishment of secure land ownership rights. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 
(document GN-2843) in that it contributes to the priority area of increasing 
productivity and diversification in the economy as well as with its strategic 
objectives: (i) promotion of innovation and (ii) provision of quality public goods and 
services. The operation is included in the 2016 Country Programming Document  
and the 2016 Operational Program Report (document GN-2849). Lastly, the 
program is consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management 
Sector Framework (document GN-2709-5), which identifies security of land tenure 
as a key activity for improving productivity and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to increase 
legal certainty over rural property. 

1.23 Target population. The program beneficiaries are small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and indigenous communities. Small and medium-sized 
producers characteristically have small family farming operations, primarily for their 
own consumption and with low levels of access to financing and productive 
technologies. The livelihood of the indigenous communities is based on the use of 
natural resources, along with small-scale farming usually occupying less than one 
hectare.  

1.24 Component 1: Land regularization, titling, and registration (US$74.9 million). 
This component will support rural land regularization, titling, and registration. In this 
respect, the following stages in the process need to be financed: (i) preparatory 
stage, which will support: evaluations of the areas of intervention, preparation of 
the technical and legal diagnostic assessment, increased density of geodetic 
points; (ii) field survey, which will support: dissemination of regularization, signage 
of vertices and boundaries, signing of records of agreement, survey of the rural 
property file, verification of the social function and/or social and economic function, 
dispute resolution, and development of the cadastral database; and (iii) titling and 
registration, which will finance: the preparation of draft resolutions, the signing of 
resolutions, the issuance of property titles, and registration of the titles in the 
DDRR. This component will also support management of social conflicts and the 
activities to be financed include: dispute resolution training for INRA staff; 
implementation of dispute resolution brigades; strengthening of the 
Agri-Environmental Tribunal for dispute resolution, development and 
implementation of customer service protocols and mechanisms, and strengthening 
of INRA’s Transparency Unit. 

1.25 Component 1 will use loan proceeds to finance key inputs for continuing with rural 
land regularization (paragraph 1.17). The key inputs for carrying out the 
regularization work include: (i) retention of INRA temporary staff; (ii) purchase of 
computer equipment, navigation and measuring equipment, and furniture; and 
(iii)  purchase of logistical support vehicles. Up to US$47 million in loan proceeds 
will be used to finance staffing requirements, to hire technical personnel to perform 
land regularization work. The “service delivery contractor” model indicated in 
paragraph 3.21 of the Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants 
financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9) was identified as being suited to 
INRA’s needs. According to this Bank policy, this model is recommended when 



- 9 - 

project execution requires the hiring of large numbers of individuals who deliver 
services on a contract basis. 

1.26 Component 2: Land management (US$14.04 million). This component will 
finance: (i) modernization of INRA’s rural cadastre technological platform and the 
DDRR’s rural land registration platform to facilitate the administration of mass rural 
land cadastre, titling, and registration processes; and (ii) the program’s 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will contribute to the 
social and environmental management of titled land. 

1.27 To modernize INRA’s cadastral system, the component will finance: the 
consolidation of the SIMAT and SIC as technical tools for rural land administration, 
the development and implementation of the INRA–GeoBolivia nexus, the design 
and implementation of the INRA services platform, and the digitization and 
indexation of the INRA documentary collection. To modernize the DDRR 
registration system, the component includes: the development of the DDRR 
services platform; training for DDRR office staff in the use of the platform 
developed; and the implementation of the cadastral maintenance campaigns. To 
implement the ESMP, the component will finance: the strengthening of the national 
forest coverage monitoring system; the development of the environmental 
dimension of the rural cadastre; indigenous land management measures; and 
measures to strengthen the gender focus and interculturality in the titling process.5 

C. Results matrix and key indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with INRA; it shows 
impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, targets, and 
means of verification. The program’s main outcomes are: (i) to regularize and title 
approximately 24.5 million hectares; (ii) to record property rights in the DDRR for 
approximately 1,340,000 parcels of small and medium-sized rural producers, 
benefiting approximately 490,000 families; (iii) to regularize and title the pending 
indigenous territories; (iv) to modernize the cadastral and registration information 
systems; and (v) to institutionally strengthen the Bolivian government in order to 
improve the environmental and social management of land. Over the long-term, 
the impact of the program will be reflected in increased agricultural income for 
small and medium-sized agricultural producers.  

Table 3. Main Results Matrix Indicators 

Impact Indicators 
Frequency of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Per household agricultural 
income (US$) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraph 1.3. Increased productivity 
results in higher income.  

Gross value of agricultural 
production per hectare 
(US$/ha) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4. Greater 
certainty regarding land tenure increases 
productive investment; and this investment 
increases agricultural productivity. 

 

                                                
5
  In the final stage of the design of the Rural Land Regularization Program, the Ministry of the 

Environment and Water, the technical focal point for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), asked the 
IDB for an additional project to be financed by the GEF Fund to implement the environmental dimension 
of the rural cadastre in the amount of approximately US$6 million. This additional project will 
complement the activities envisaged in the program (ESMP). 



- 10 - 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is US$100 million, which will be financed by the Bank 
through a blended loan as follows: US$51 million from Ordinary Capital funds and 
US$9 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The local counterpart is 
US$40 million. The distribution of the financing by source is shown in Table 4 
below: 

Table 4. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Investment category IDB Local Total % 

I. Administration 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

Execution unit 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

II. Direct costs 56.32 35.56 91.88 91.88 

Component 1. Regularization, titling, and 

registration 
46.92 28.01 74.93 74.93 

Component 2. Land management 9.40 7.55 16.95 16.95 

III. Monitoring and evaluation 0.58 - 0.58 0.58 

IV. Audit 0.30 - 0.30 0.30 

Total 60.00 40.00 100.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

Table 5. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB Total  20.95  19.11 9.07  6.95 3.92 60.00 

% 34.9% 31.8% 15.1% 11.6% 6.5% 100% 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. 
The analysis is based on the program’s expected incremental costs and benefits 
using a time horizon of 15 years and a discount rate of 12%. Program costs 
include investment, operation, and maintenance. The benefits stem from an 
estimate of marginal changes in agricultural income as a result of improvements in 
land tenure certainty and reduced processing time for registering property. Data 
from the 2008 Agricultural Survey, the 2013 Agricultural Census, and INRA titling 
databases were used to quantify the direct benefits associated with an 
improvement in the land tenure situation. The results indicate that the families that 
obtained title to their land increased their annual agricultural income by US$336 
and the gross value of agricultural production by US$216/household. Surveys and 
process analyses at both INRA and the DDRR office were used to estimate the 
benefits of reduced costs and processing time at the DDRR office. The results 
show benefits amounting to US$22.1 million due to a 16% reduction in processing 
times. The cost-benefit analysis indicates that the program has a positive net 
present value and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 51%. An analysis was done of 
the sensitivity to variations in the speed with which the benefits of titling were 
generated. In the worst case, in which the benefits increase gradually, the IRR is 
36%. The benefits of reduced processing time for registration exceed the expected 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553


- 11 - 

costs of maintaining the cadastre, which increases system sustainability by 
transferring these benefits to the users. 

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.4 This program has been classified as a Category B operation in accordance with 
the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). During the 
preparation of the program a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) was developed; it determined that the program would have significant 
positive impacts and negative risks and impacts. The principal risks identified in the 
SESA were summarized in the program’s environmental and social management 
report (ESMR). They include: (i) failure to meet the indigenous peoples’ demand 
for titling due to conflicts already existing in the area of intervention; (ii) weakening 
of campesino communities’ organizations due to the demand for individual titling; 
(iii) maintenance of gender inequality in terms of access to and use of the land; 
(iv) exacerbation of existing social conflicts and creation of new conflicts due to 
land titling; and (v) loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services in lowlands due to 
the deforestation of titled properties. A program environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) was developed to mitigate these risks and negative 
impacts. Table 6 summarizes the main risks and mitigation measures proposed in 
the ESMP. Thus, the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies have been 
fulfilled, especially those of the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP-765). The ESMR 
presents compliance with the safeguards policies in detail (paragraph 3.18 of the 
ESMR). Lastly, consultation processes have been carried out, resulting in records 
of agreement with the program signed by the principal national organizations 
representing the program’s beneficiaries (paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23 of the ESMR). 

Table 6. Main Risks and Mitigation measures  

Problem and risks (ESMR) Main Mitigation Measures (ESMP) 

Problem: Remaining demand from indigenous 

people in lowlands consists of lands where 
third parties are present.  
Risk: Failure to provide titling for indigenous 

populations and potential fragmentation of 
their territories. 

(i) Participatory mechanisms will be implemented for the 
titling of the remaining areas; 
(ii) The extent to which the territorial demand of the 
indigenous populations is met will be evaluated; 
(iii) INRA will be trained to incorporate the intercultural 
approach in rural land titling activities.  

Problem: Parceling of collective lands in 

peasant communities. 
Risk: Weakening of community organizations. 

(i) Will contribute to making decisions that are appropriate 
for communities by providing information on the 
advantages and disadvantages of collective and individual 
titling. 

Problem: Gender inequality in access to and 

use of land. 
Risk: Continued gender inequality in access to 

and use of land through rural titling. 
 

(i) INRA’s Gender Unit will be strengthened; 
(ii) INRA will be trained to implement a gender approach 
in titling and registration; 
(iii) Women’s knowledge/exercise of their rights over the 
land will be promoted.  

Problem: Exacerbation of existing conflicts 

and emergence of new social conflicts; 
Risk: Delay in the regularization of property 

rights.  

(i) A comprehensive strategy for resolving disputes over 
rural land will be implemented; 
(ii) INRA staff will be trained in dispute resolution; 
(iii) Specialized dispute resolution brigades will be formed 
in INRA; 
(iv) The dispute resolution capacity of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal will be strengthened. 

Problem: Increased deforestation of titled 

properties; 
Risk: Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 

services.  

(i) The national plant cover monitoring system will be 
strengthened; 
(ii) The environmental dimension of the rural cadastre will 
be developed; 
(iii) Soil use plans will be updated. 

Source: Program’s Environmental and Social Management Report and Environmental and Social 

Management Plan, 2016. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319558/R


- 12 - 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, INRA has the institutional 
capacity needed to assume responsibilities as the executing agency for the 
proposed operation. The results indicate that programming and organizational 
capacity, execution capacity, and control capacity are at a satisfactory level of 
development and present a low level of risk. However, based on the risk analysis, 
some institutional weaknesses affecting the institution’s fiduciary capacity have 
been identified. Accordingly, an institutional development plan was drawn up to 
mitigate the risks identified. The main actions include: (i) contracting procurement 
and financing specialists to strengthen execution capacities; (ii) deepening and 
institutionalizing an operational framework for risk management; and 
(iii) developing a framework of internal procedures for accounting and cash flow, as 
well as updating internal administrative management documents. 

E. Other project risks 

2.6 The SESA has identified the risk that the presence of third parties with legitimate 
rights within the lowland TIOCs may become an obstacle for completing the titling 
of all the territory claimed by these TIOCs. This could turn into a reputational risk 
for the Bank. To mitigate this risk, Component 1 includes participatory titling 
mechanisms6 that involve the authorities of the TIOCs, to reach consensus on 
titling processes and results. In addition, the ESMP includes a diagnostic 
assessment of the extent to which the territorial demand of lowland indigenous 
peoples is met, as well as the formulation of new public policies in the event that 
this demand has not been addressed. An extensive process of consultation with 
the principal organizations representing those benefiting from and affected by land 
titling was carried out during the preparation of the program. These consultations 
have resulted in the signing of records of agreement with the program by the 
participants, beyond what is required for projects with the identified level of risk and 
impacts (see paragraphs 3.20 to 3.24 of the ESMR for more details on the 
consultations). 

2.7 As indicated earlier, the Bolivian government has been financially supporting the 
regularization of rural property for the last 20 years. The proposed program, with a 
total cost of US$100 million, will complete the work of regularizing rural lands 
throughout the country, involving 106 million hectares. Once the investment for 
regularizing rural properties is completed, long-term sustainability will depend on 
the ability of the key stakeholders to keep the information on rural properties up to 
date, both in the rural cadastre system (INRA) and in the Real Property Rights 
Registry (DDRR) system, as identified in the report on the legal framework for the 
regularization of rural property (Endo, 2016). The program seeks to improve, 
simplify, and reduce the costs of rural cadastre and property registration services, 
as well as to generate information on obligations and benefits so that owners will 
have incentives and will report to the official entities the existence of changes in 
property rights (through market transfers or inheritance) or through cadastral 
conservation processes (subdivisions or consolidations). 

                                                
6
  The Interagency Titling Committees are the main mechanism of participation. The participants in these 

committees are the authorities of indigenous and campesino organizations and the representatives of 
the program’s beneficiaries. The role of the committee is to reach agreement with INRA on the work 
plans for the titling of beneficiary communities and TIOCs and to promote the beneficiary population’s 
participation in and monitoring of the execution of these plans. The role of the committees will be duly 
clarified in the program’s Operating Regulations. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R


- 13 - 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the executing agency will 
be INRA, legally established under Law 1,715/96 as a decentralized public entity of 
the MDRyT with national jurisdiction and legal status.  

3.2 INRA’s responsibilities as executing agency include: (i) maintaining consolidated 
accounting records that make it possible to identify the sources and uses of 
program funds by component; (ii) preparing and submitting disbursement requests 
and supporting documentation to the Bank, together with the financial statements 
for the components under its responsibility; (iii) contracting the program’s annual 
external audits and submitting the respective reports to the Bank; (iv) preparing 
open calls for proposals and bid processes, processing contracts and payments, 
and providing technical supervision of the contracts for activities under its 
responsibility; (v) preparing the consolidated monitoring and evaluation reports 
required, submitting them to the Bank, and making them publicly available; and 
(vi) ensuring compliance with the contractual clauses established in the loan 
contract, the program’s Operating Regulations, and the agreements signed for 
program implementation. A condition precedent to the first disbursement will 
be the signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and INRA 
defining the following aspects among others: (i) the method to be used to 
transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; and (ii) INRA’s commitment to conduct 
program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.  

3.3 Program execution will use INRA’s existing organizational structure, in both 
technical and fiduciary (procurement and finances) and legal matters. In this 
respect, the Planning Bureau (DGP) will be designated as the entity responsible for 
the general coordination of the program and the ESMP; the Regularization and 
Titling Bureau will be designated as the entity responsible for the execution of 
Component 1; the Land Management Bureau will be designated as the entity 
responsible for the execution of Component 2; and, lastly, the Administration and 
Finances Bureau will manage the program’s budget, procurement, legal analysis, 
and financial control. 

3.4 The Director of INRA’s DGP will serve as the general coordinator of the program 
with sufficient autonomy to make operational decisions, prepare all documents, 
program actions, and coordinate with the participating entities and the IDB. A 
condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the appointment of the 
Director of INRA’s DGP as the general coordinator of the program, 
appointment of the program component coordinators, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, and the contracting of 
financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social 
management specialists through a competitive process, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.  

3.5 During program preparation, provision was made for the signing of interagency 
collaboration agreements between INRA and the DDRR Office, the APMT, INE, 
and the ABT. These agreements will lay the foundation for cooperation among 
those involved and will describe the activities covered under the agreement, the 
parties’ commitments, including the operation and maintenance of investments, 



- 14 - 

and other conditions necessary for execution. Evidence of the signing and entry 
into force of the following interagency cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA 
and the DDRR, will be a special condition for the disbursement of financing for 
activities related to public registries under Component 2; (ii) between INRA, the 
ABT, the APMT, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the program’s 
ESMP under Component 2; and (iii) between INRA and INE, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan. 

3.6 To facilitate implementation of the ESMP, in the context of the program, INRA may 
provide cooperation and technical coordination to the relevant public institutions 
that assist in achieving the program’s objective. 

3.7 Program Operating Regulations. Execution of the program will be governed by 
the program’s Operating Regulations. These regulations establish guidelines and 
operational procedures related to: (i) the responsibilities of the entities participating 
in the program; (ii) operational procedures for the planning and programming of the 
activities to be financed; (iii) financial and procurement instructions; (iv) procedures 
for the program’s environmental and social management; and (v) operational 
instructions for the implementation of activities to monitor and evaluate the 
program’s impact. The entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, will be a 
contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement.  

3.8 Procurement. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services funded 
with program resources will be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies 
as set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and the provisions of the 
loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (see 
Annex III), including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. That plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operations and computer equipment, furniture, 
the contracting of individual consultants and consulting firms, and other items. In 
addition, the procurement plan includes the contracting of “service delivery 
contractors” corresponding to the staff engaged in the regularization and titling 
process (paragraph 1.25). The contracting procedures currently used by INRA for 
annual or multiyear periods will continue to be used for these individual 
consultants. The procurement plan will be updated each year or whenever there 
are substantial changes, subject to the Bank’s approval. Procurement may be 
made using the ex post review method as established in Annex II. 

3.9 Recognition of retroactive expenses. The Bank may recognize and charge 
against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the local contribution) in 
eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to the loan approval date for operational 
and temporary staffing expenses, provided that requirements substantially similar 
to those established in the loan contract have been met. Said expenses must have 
been incurred on or after 6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in 
no case may they include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date. 

3.10 Audit. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the end of 
INRA’s fiscal year, the program’s annual audited financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank. The audit will be performed by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The determination of the scope and other related 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765


- 15 - 

aspects will be governed by the Guide to Financial Management for Projects 
Financed by the IDB (OP-273-6) and the guide on financial statements and 
external audit.  

B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements 

3.11 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. INRA will prepare 
and send a monitoring report to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of 
each six-month period during project execution. These reports will focus on the 
achievement of the output indicators and progress made in terms of outcomes, the 
identification of problems encountered and corrective measures adopted. INRA will 
submit to the Bank’s satisfaction the annual work plan (AWP) corresponding to the 
upcoming year, no later than within the final quarter of each year during project 
execution. INRA will perform two independent evaluations financed using loan 
proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no later than 
90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been executed; and (ii) the final 
evaluation will be conducted no later than 90 days after 90% of the project’s funds 
have been executed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of the 
data in the monitoring system, the degree to which the expected outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts established in the Results Matrix have been achieved, as 
well as the level of compliance with the ESMP, including progress made in the 
social and environmental indicators. 

3.12 Evaluation. The impact estimates will be based on the differences-in-differences 
method applied to a panel of households that includes a treatment group and two 
control groups. To this end, provision has been made for two surveys, a baseline 
and the final evaluation. The proposed sample includes the non-random 
identification of a group of municipios with a high percentage of titling in the first 
two years of the program. Later, through a propensity score matching process, a 
control group of municipios with a high percentage of titling prior to 2016 (control 
group 1) and another control group of municipios that will be titled at the end of the 
program (control group 2) will be identified. The municipios in control group 1 will 
serve to verify the proportion of attributable marginal change over time, while the 
municipios in control group 2 will be used to measure the program’s impact in the 
execution period. The sample for the baseline study is estimated to include 3,500 
farmers distributed in 50 municipios (20 treated and 30 in the two control groups; 
households will be selected at random within each municipio). A similar sample will 
be used for the final evaluation. The data collection budget has been included in 
the project. The design of the operation provides a good opportunity for generating 
empirical evidence on the impact of rural land titling on productivity, income, and 
the sustainable use of natural resources. 

 



Annex I - BO-L1113

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.8 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.3 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.7

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in 

the evaluation plan

Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase the legal security of rural property. This is expected to lead to the increase in income of beneficiary rural households, through an increase in the 

gross value of agricultural production. The diagnosis provided in the document and documentation that supports it is robust with respect to the current situation, shortcomings and causes 

of insecurity of tenure in the country. Likewise, the proposed interventions under components 1 and 2 clearly respond to the deficiencies identified in the diagnosis and evidence is 

presented that validates the effectiveness of the proposed actions in other contexts.

The vertical logic of the results matrix is well delineated. Overall, indicators at all levels are SMART. The baseline for some impact and results indicators is from 2008,  therefore does not 

represent the starting point of the program.

Ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. The benefits come from the estimated marginal changes in agricultural income by improving the security of 

land tenure and the reduction in processing time in the land registry.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes the identification of causal impacts through the use of differences in difference with Propensity Score Matching methods. Overall the plan 

meets the requirements established in the DEM Guidelines.

The Environmental and Social Management Plan includes 

a series of measures to strengthen the participation of 

women in the benefits of land titling. These include 

strengthening the INRA with a specialist in gender; the 

adoption of gender mainstreaming in all activities of 

INRA; a communications strategy to increase awareness 

by women of their rights and the benefits of titling.

The program will strengthen the deforestation monitoring 

system and the inclusion of the environmental dimension 

in the cadastre. These environmental management tools 

will improve the Government’s capacity to monitor and 

sanction environmental infractions such as illegal 

deforestation.

The program will generate valuable information on the 

causality between titling and: i) increased productivity; ii) 

increase in intra investments - property taxes; and iii) 

increased use of financial services.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and 

services.

The intervention is included in the 2016 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

I. Strategic Alignment



 Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
RESULTS MATRIX 

 

Project objective: The general objective of the program is to increase legal certainty over rural property.  

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure-
ment  

Baseline Target 
Means of verification Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Impact: Increase total net 

household incomes 

 

Indicator: Increase in total net 

household income 

US$/year 801 2008 974 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

Impact: Increase agricultural 

productivity of agricultural 

producers 

 

Indicator: Increase in the Gross 

Value of Agricultural Production 

(GVAP) 

US$/ha 870 2008 1,075 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

 

 

 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 

 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Expected outcomes 
Unit of 

measure
ment 

Baseline Intermediate Targets Means of 
verification 

Observations 
Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Final outcome. Increase in 

productive investment. 
 
Indicator. Value of  agricultural 

producers’ productive 
investment (machinery and 
equipment) 

US$ 
invested 
per year 

215 2008 - - 241 2021 

Program 

Impact 

Evaluation 

Report 

- The target value is based on estimates of the 
program’s economic evaluation. The estimates’ 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 
 

- These values will be verified with baseline 
surveys and follow-up of the program’s impact 
evaluation. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced cost of titling rural 
properties. 
 
Indicator. Average cost of 

complete rural property titling 
process 

US$ per 
hectare 

8.31 2016 - - 7 2021 

INRA 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of regularization, cadastre, titling, 
and registration of rural land (Andrade, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in land regularization processes, 
operational infrastructure, and technology, which 
could reduce per hectare titling cost by 15%. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced average time to record 
property purchase/sale 
 
Indicator. Timed needed to 

record purchase/sale of property 
in Public Registries  
 

Number of 
working 
days 

39.7 2016 - - 25 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of the time spent by citizens and 
legal entities in procedures to record property in 
the Office of Real Property Rights (Medeiros, 
et al., 2016). 
 

- These values will be verified with the study of 
strategies for maintaining regularization planned 
for the first year of program execution. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduction of the area of 
intervention with disputes due to 
regularization and titling  
 
Indicator. Number of hectares 

with conflicts due to 
regularization and titling of rural 
property 

Millions of 
hectares 

5 2016 - - 3 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Evaluation (Carrasco, 
et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in dispute resolution instruments 
(Carrasco et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016) 

Intermediate outcome. 

Institutional strengthening of 
INRA and the DDRR 
 
Indicator. INRA and the DDRR 

offices sharing cadastre and 
registry information automatically 

% 0 2016 0 2019 100 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The value is based on the recommendations 
from Component 2 (Solíz, 2016). 



 Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs  
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measurement 

Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Component I: Rural land regularization, titling, and registration  

Output #1. Rural property titles delivered to agricultural producers and indigenous communities 

Indicator 1.1. Number of 

beneficiaries with titles 
registered at the DDRR 
offices 74,938,706 

Households 566,356 104,707 151,866 107,635 82,217 49,650 1,062,431 Program 

Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.2 Number of 

property titles registered at 
the DDRR offices 

Title 653,535 296,320 426,990 292,354 212,185 115,289 1,996,732 

Output #2. Intercultural conflict management   

Indicator 2.1. INRA staff 

training on social conflict 
resolution 

70,000 
Number of 

people trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System 

Indicator 2.2. Implementation 

of a specialized brigade on 
social conflicts 

150,000 
Number of 
brigades 

0 1 - - - - 1 

Indicator 2.3. Strengthening 

of Agri-environmental 
Tribunal for dispute resolution 

150,000  
Number of 
specialists 

trained  
0 30 30 50 20 30 160 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 

 
 
 

Output #3. Development and implementation of land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration customer service mechanisms 

Indicator 3.1. Development of 

customer service protocols 
and mechanisms  

50,000 
Number of 
protocols 

0 1 - - - - 1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #4. Strengthening of INRA Transparency Unit 

Indicator 4.1. Update of 

transparency manual  

108,000 

Number of 
manuals 

0       
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Indicator 4.2. Implementation 

of manual in all INRA offices 

Number of 
specialists 

trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

          
 

Component II: Land management 

Output #1. Update and implementation of SIMAT/SIC to complete regularization of rural properties 

Indicator 1.1.  Update of 

SIMAT/SIC  
824,802 

Software 
updated 

0 2 0 0 0 0 2 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System Indicator 1.2. Implementation 

of SIMAT/SIC  

Number of 
offices using 

software  
1 5 4 - - - 10 

Output #2. Development of the information technology (IT) platform for real property rights services 

Indicator 1.3. Implementation 

of the IT platform for real 
property rights services 

800,000 Platform 0 - 1 - - 
- 

1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #3. Design and implementation of the INRA services platform 

Indicator 1.4. Design of the 

platform 
3,868,430 

Number of 
platforms 
designed 

0 1    
 

 Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of the platform 
Platform 
launch 

0 - 1 - - - 1 



 Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of GeoBolivia nexus 
Nexus in 
operation 

0 - 1 - - - 1 

Output #4. Cadastral maintenance 

Indicator 1.6. Cadastral 

maintenance campaigns 
600,000 

Number of 
campaigns 

0 1 1 1 1 1 5 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #5. Digitization and indexation of INRA documentary collection 

Indicator 1.7. Digitization and 

indexation of files 
1,900,000 

Number of 
files digitized 
and indexed 

0 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 5000 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #6. Strengthening of INRA Operations Center 

Indicator 1.8. Permanent 

infrastructure for INRA 
6,044,172 

Number of 
offices 

improved or 
constructed 

2 - 3 4 1 - 10 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project number/ 
name: 

BO-L1113 – Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program II 

Executing agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This Annex III has been prepared on the basis of the following elements, used to 
determine the level of fiduciary risk associated with the program: (i) results of the 
most recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, 
2009; (ii) analysis of institutional capacity used during the design of the INRA 
operation. 

1.2 Program execution will be the responsibility of INRA, a decentralized entity of the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Lands (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be maintained in the Public 
Management System (SIGEP). The IDB’s Integrated Project Administration 
System (SIAP-IDB), developed by the Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO), will 
be used for the financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s standard 
bidding documents or other documents agreed upon with the Office of the 
Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External Financing (VIPFE) and made 
available through SICOES1 will be used for execution of this operation. Similarly, 
SICOES will be used for the publication of specific procurement notices. 

1.4 The Government of Bolivia and the Bank have drawn up an agreement for 
making partial use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services 
Management System (NB-SABS) in IDB-financed operations in Bolivia. This 
program may apply that agreement once it enters into force. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1 As a public agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 on 
Government Control and Administration. This law regulates the administration 
and control systems for government resources, and their relationship with 
country public investment and planning systems.  

2.2 INRA uses SIGEP for all of its financial records. SIGEP offers secure and reliable 
access to budget execution information. With Bank support, an Accounting 

                                                
1
  Government Contracting Subsystem, which has been approved for use in Bank operations. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 2 of 8 
 
 

Management Module has been developed in this system, which systematizes 
reporting based on the financing structures and the currency of loans from 
international development partners, which is expected to come on line in 2017. 
Until then, INRA will use SIAP-IDB as a supplementary accounting and reporting 
system for accountability and financial reporting purposes. As a State agency, 
INRA is supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit 
unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES 

3.1 The Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) assessment of INRA 
indicates an adequate level of institutional development and capacities and a 
LOW level of fiduciary risk. However, provision has been made to strengthen the 
team that will be responsible for program execution, by contracting staff working 
full-time in the areas of financial management and procurement, and by holding 
training update workshops on Bank policies on fiduciary matters.  

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. The Operating Regulations will include details of 
execution arrangements, procedures, and information flows, previously agreed 
upon between the Bank and the parties.  

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for rendering 
accounts. The exchange rate used will be the one in effect in the borrowing 
country on the effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the 
executing agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the 
program disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each of the executing 
agency’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by an independent auditing 
firm acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for the last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for contracting the independent auditing firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval and may include outputs under the 
International Standards on Auditing, related to the financial audit of the program, 
and related audit tasks. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MENTIONED IN THE SINGLE ANNEX, IN THE DESCRIPTION 
OF THE CORRESPONDING COMPONENT 

5.1 The program provides for the purchase of 41 4x4 light trucks totaling up to 
US$1,762,178 for INRA’s regularization and titling activities. The details on the 
purchase terms, procurement method, and estimated prices are set out in the 
procurement plan duly agreed upon with the Bank. In addition, the program 
Operating Regulations include the technical and legal analysis supporting the 
need to purchase vehicles as well as the technical specifications to be used in 
the bidding process. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

VI. PROCUREMENT EXECUTION AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

6.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with 
Bank policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services provided for in the program and 
subject to international competitive bidding (ICB) will be carried out using the 
Standard Bidding Documents issued by the Bank.  

6.3 Works for an estimated amount of less than US$3 million will be contracted via 
the shopping method, using the standard price comparison document for works 
procurement prepared by the Bank for operations in Bolivia; works for an 
estimated amount of less than US$250,000 will be contracted via the Shopping 
method, using the document for requesting quotes for small contracts agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES. 

6.4 Off-the-shelf goods (computer equipment, furniture, etc.) for an estimated 
amount of less than US$200,000 will be procured via the shopping method and 
using the document for requesting quotes for the purchase of goods agreed upon 
with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES.  

6.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consultants will be selected using 
the selection methods in the Bank’s procurement policies (GN-2350-9), taking 
the following into account: 

a.  Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms for the project will be 
selected using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals and Request 
for Proposals documents for amounts of less than US$200,000 agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which are available in SICOES.  

b.  Shortlist of consulting firms. The list may be comprised entirely (100%) 
of Bolivian firms, for contracts with a value of up to US$200,000. 

c.  Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be 
selected on the basis of a comparison of the candidates’ individual 
qualifications. When the call for proposals is made through SICOES, one 
qualified candidate will suffice; when the call is by invitation, the 
qualifications of at least three qualified candidates will be compared. 
When the tasks involve working with other people in providing 
administrative or operational assistance, the advisability of using 
individual consultants with supplementary services will be examined on a 
case-by-case basis. 

d. Services contractors. As explained in the Proposal for Operation 
Development, the program needs to retain temporary staff members who 
have received training and are currently working on the process of land 
regularization, titling, and registration, in order to ensure achievement of 
program targets in due time and manner. Accordingly, such staff will be 
financed with loan funds in an amount up to US$47,000,000 within the 
framework of provision 3.6 of Policy GN-2350-9. 

6.6 Procurement planning. INRA will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 4 of 8 
 
 

each year to reflect the project’s actual execution needs and the progress 
achieved.  

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may recognize and 
charge against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the estimated 
amount of the local contribution) in eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to 
the loan approval date, for operating and temporary personnel expenses, 
provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan 
contract have been met. Such expenses must have been incurred on or after 
6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in no case may they 
include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan approval date. 

6.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement processes envisaged for this operation.  

6.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The executing agency, in 
coordination with the program’s Project Team Leader, is responsible for 
reviewing the shortlist selection criteria, terms of reference, and/or technical 
specifications. In all cases these must be agreed upon ex ante. 

6.10 Table of threshold amounts (in US$000)  

Works Goods and Nonconsulting Services Consultancies 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 

National 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Publicity for 
Consulting 

Services 
(except when 
CQS is used) 

Shortlist 100% 
National 

(except when 
CQS is used)  

> US$3,000 
< 

US$3,000 
> US$200 ≤ US$200 

≤ US$50 
and 

≤ US$200 
for 

common 
goods and 
services 

> US$200 ≤ US$200 

 

6.11 Main procurement processes(*). The main procurements for this operation are 
detailed below:  

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting firms    

14 contracts for services related to verification of land use, 
conceptual framework of rural environmental cadastre, 
national environmental cadastre system, analysis of 
ecological easements, strengthening of national plant 
coverage monitoring system, et al.  

CQS  
 

According to 
data in the 

procurement 
plan 

US$1,160 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting for formulation of eight indigenous territorial 
management plans, according to prioritization 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$960 

Consulting to support strengthening of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal in the area of dispute resolution 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 1 – 2Q 

 

US$150 

External audit of the program QCBS Year 1 – 4Q US$300 

Development of program baseline QCBS Year 1 – 1Q US$275 

Final evaluation of the program QCBS Year 5 – 4Q US$275 

Individual consultants    

Service delivery contractors. Direct contracting of INRA’s 
temporary staff who have been trained in and are 
familiar with: 

- Regularization, titling, and registration processes 

- Tasks of coordination and planning, administrative 
and financial management, legal advice, 
departmental coordination and management, and 
social and environmental management of the 
program 

 

 

 

 

 

DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

 

 

 

 

US$47,594 

Various contracts to integrate technical teams 
responsible for: 

- Updating the SIMAT/SIC 

- Development of IT platform for real property rights 
services 

- Design and implementation of INRA services platform 

- Classification of small property 

- Support on interculturality topics 

- Design and development of protocols for customer 
services mechanisms, and 

- Strengthening of the INRA Transparency Unit 

IICQ 

or NICQ 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 
US$3,932 

Goods    

3 contracts (two of them in several lots) for purchase of 
IT equipment 

ICB Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$3,046 

Navigation (GPS) equipment ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,210 

41 4x4 light trucks ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,762 

2 contracts to purchase furniture for INRA’s 
decentralized offices  

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$96 

2 contracts to purchase software Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$155 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Works    

Various contracts for construction or improvement of 
existing infrastructure for INRA 

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$6,044 

Nonconsulting services    

Digitization and indexing of titling files ICB Year 2 – 4Q US $1,900 

Preparation and execution of communication and 
registration campaigns to update and maintain the 
cadastral database 

 

ICB 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$600 

Development of training manuals and activities for INRA 
staff on the institution’s new services platform 

 

Shopping 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$268 

Various contracts for various services related to training 
activities, etc. 

 

Shopping 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

US $441 

* To access the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click here. 

 

6.12 Procurement supervision. The project may be executed based on ex post 
review of procurement processes worth up to 100% of the threshold for NCB, as 
set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and procurement transactions not 
included in this table will be subject to ex ante review.) The external audit firm for 
the program will conduct the annual ex post review of procurement. Although the 
level of fiduciary risk is rated LOW, the Bank will offer ongoing training and 
advisory services during program execution. 

Threshold for Ex Post Review 

Works 
Goods and 

Nonconsulting 
Services 

Consulting firm 
services 

Shortlist may be 
100% national 

Consulting Services 
Individuals 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$3,000,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$200,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤US$200,000 

Not subject to any 
limit. 

 

6.13 Operating or recurring expenses. These are expenses (operational and 
maintenance, among others) necessary for the program to operate. They will be 
agreed upon with the Project Team Leader and included in the procurement plan. 
This type of expenses will be executed according to the executing agency’s 
administrative procedures, as referenced in the Operating Regulations.  

6.14 Direct contracting.2 Goods and nonconsulting services (for example 
workshops/meetings: rental of hall/site, audiovisual equipment, transport, 

                                                
2
  OP-272-2 establishes a threshold of up to US$750,000 for direct purchases or contracting of goods, 

works, and nonconsulting services and provision 3.6(a) of document GN-2359-9 refers to cases in which 
neither the savings nor the efficiency of competitive bidding is justified. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

facilitators, etc.) for individual amounts below US$500 and totaling no more than 
US$5,000, may be contracted directly in order to achieve economy and efficiency 
in execution. These contracts are to be approved by the Project Team Leader 
through the procurement plan. 

6.15 Files. INRA will be responsible for establishing the supporting documentation, 
procedures, and controls necessary for project execution, as well as for 
safeguarding them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract and local 
laws. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

7.1 Programming and budget. INRA will utilize an administrative division3 under 
which the project will be created. This will allow budget records to be based on 
individual identification of the sources of financing and funds used in project 
execution. Initial inclusion in the budget as well as future budget modifications 
will be based on the annual work plan and project execution plan agreed upon 
with the Bank. Budget modifications must also be approved through a Ministerial 
Resolution by the Ministry of Development Planning (MPD), through the MDRyT.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded 
in SIGEP. This system integrates the various accounting events at different 
points in time in a single registry and complies with budgetary requirements 
(budget execution), recording of financial position (assets, liabilities, equity, and 
earnings), and cash management (cash transfers), on an accrual basis. In 
addition, for purposes of project accounting, a chart of accounts will be prepared 
to allow for the identification of expenditures incurred in each period on a cash 
basis, aligning the program’s investment categories with the respective budget 
line items and accounts. Moreover, until such time as the SIGEP Accounting 
Management Module is in operation, INRA will use the SIAP-IDB as a 
supplement on an interim basis for financial reporting.  

7.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will primarily be disbursed in the form 
of advances of funds, based on the program’s financial programming, which will 
be updated periodically. The Bank may make a new advance of funds once at 
least 80% of previously disbursed fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency (both within the 
CUT).4 

7.4 Internal control and internal audit. INRA financial management is subject to 
annual reliability reviews by the internal audit unit and given the relative 
importance of the program it is expected to be included in this type of review. As 
a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank will arrange annual coordination 
meetings with the internal audit units, in order to identify monitoring activities for 
the program. 

                                                
3
  Under SIGEP’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative division may include several 

projects with independent records and controls.  
4
  Unified Treasury Account. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 8 of 8 
 
 

7.5 External control and reports. In order to comply with the annual submission of 
the program’s audited financial statements, INRA will hire an independent 
auditing firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies, the cost of which 
will be covered from program funds.  

7.6 Financial supervision plan. The planning and frequency of supervision will be 
based on identified fiduciary risks. The following activities are envisaged: (i) the 
annual external audit by the firm hired for the review of program financial 
statements; (ii) onsite visits to the program’s investment sites; and (iii) visits to 
verify compliance with the internal control recommendations issued by the 
program’s external auditor. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling 
program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$51,000,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __  ______ 2016) 
 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403194-16 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program  

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower for the purpose of granting 
it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling program. 
Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$9,000,000 from the resources of the Bank's 
Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of the 
multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the 
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary 
of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 2016) 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403179-16 
 

 
 


	o_proyectos_2016_bolivia_bo-l1113_lp_lp---paquete-para-directorio---bo-l1113.pdf
	LP - limpio - BO-L1113
	Documento del Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo
	Propuesta de Préstamo
	1.1 Derechos de Propiedad sobre la Tierra y la Competitividad Agropecuaria. El sector agropecuario es uno de los sectores más importantes de la economía boliviana. Entre 2002 y 2014, el sector tuvo un crecimiento anual promedio del 4,16%, contribuyend...
	1.2 A pesar de la importancia del sector agropecuario, un examen detallado muestra niveles bajos de productividad. Según la Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Alimentación y la Agricultura (FAO), el rendimiento agrícola de la producción de ce...
	1.3 La contribución potencial del sector agropecuario al crecimiento económico y reducción de la pobreza rural depende del incremento de productividad de los agricultores, especialmente los pequeños y medianos productores (Banco Mundial, 2008; Escobal...
	1.4 Para mejorar la productividad del sector agropecuario y por ende, la eficiencia y sostenibilidad en el uso de la tierra en Bolivia, se requiere inversiones en bienes públicos sectoriales para facilitar inversiones productivas privadas de los agric...
	1.5 Derechos de Propiedad, Sostenibilidad y Conflictos. Los derechos de propiedad por sí mismo no garantizan el uso sostenible de los recursos naturales. En Nicaragua, la asignación de derechos de propiedad mejoró la productividad agraria y también in...
	1.6 Estado de Avance del Saneamiento y Titulación. Los avances en materia de saneamiento de la propiedad rural por el Gobierno de Bolivia han sido significativos, el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales está llega...
	1.7 Los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades interculturales fueron los principales beneficiarios de las intervenciones del INRA, sumando aproximadamente 32 millones de hectáreas tituladas, lo cual representa el 78% del área total titulada en el país (...
	Cuadro 1. Estado de avance del proceso de saneamiento y titulación entre 1996 y 2014.
	1.8 Según los datos del INRA (Andrade, 2016), las áreas que aún no fueron atendidas por la política de titulación están distribuidas por todo el país. No obstante, la demanda por titulación de tierras rurales se concentra principalmente en La Paz, Pot...
	1.9 Marco Institucional de Derechos de Propiedad. La institucionalidad para el establecimiento de derechos de propiedad sobre las tierras rurales fue desarrollada con la Ley Agraria de 1953. Esta Ley creó el Servicio Nacional de Reforma Agraria (SNRA)...
	1.10 Las Leyes 1715/96 y 3545/06, mantuvieron al SRNA como organismo responsable de planificar, ejecutar y consolidar el proceso de reforma agraria. El SRNA está conformado por: (i) el Presidente, autoridad máxima encargada de firmar los títulos ejecu...
	1.11 La Ley 1715/96 mantuvo sin cambios los tipos de propiedad rural definidos anteriormente por la Ley Agraria de 1953. Los tipos de propiedad rural incluyen: solar campesino, pequeña propiedad, mediana propiedad y empresa agropecuaria. Sin embargo, ...
	1.12 El Registro de Derechos Reales (DDRR) complementa el marco institucional de derechos de propiedad mencionado arriba. El DDRR es el órgano del Consejo de Magistratura encargado de efectuar todas las inscripciones y anotaciones que recaigan sobre d...
	1.13 Acciones del Banco y otras fuentes de financiamiento. Las actividades de formalización de derechos de propiedades sobre tierra rural han sido apoyadas por varios financiadores. El Banco Mundial otorgó un crédito de US$24,7 millones; el Fondo Nórd...
	1.14 Los avances en saneamiento de tierras se enmarcan en el conjunto de reformas del marco legal del país. Después que el CNRA fue reemplazado por el INRA se desarrollaron un conjunto de normas para acelerar el proceso de saneamiento de tierras rural...
	1.15 Problemas en Saneamiento, Catastro, Titulación y Registro de Tierras. Los diagnósticos del proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierra rural indican que los siguientes temas ameritan atención:
	1.16 Limitaciones del marco normativo. Según el diagnóstico del marco legal vigente (Endo, 2016), el mismo permite iniciar la ejecución del programa. No obstante, los siguientes problemas deben ser superados durante la ejecución del programa: (i) los ...
	1.17 Limitaciones del proceso de saneamiento. El barrido catastral3F  es la metodología más eficiente para regularizar de forma masiva la tenencia de la tierra en áreas rurales donde exista un gran número de productores y bajos niveles de titulación. ...
	1.18 Deficiencias de la plataforma tecnológica. Según el diagnóstico de la plataforma tecnológica (Solíz, 2016), la tecnología vigente permite continuar el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales. Sin embargo, los si...
	1.19 Limitaciones de las herramientas de gestión ambiental y social. Según los resultados de la Evaluación Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) del programa (ver Carrasco, 2016), existen en la actualidad un marco legal suficientemente desarrollado pa...
	1.20 Lecciones aprendidas. El proyecto propuesto ha tomado en cuenta las lecciones de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO y otras operaciones similares financiadas por el Banco en la región (ver Cuadro 2).
	1.21 Conceptualización de la operación. El proyecto se conceptualiza como una operación que continua el proceso de formalización de la propiedad rural iniciado por el Gobierno de Bolivia a través de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO. El diseño del...
	1.22 Alineación estratégica con la Actualización de la Estrategia Institucional (UIS) 2010-2020, el Marco Corporativo de Resultados CRF 2016-2019 y la Estrategia del Banco con Bolivia 2016-2020. El programa es consistente con la Actualización de la Es...
	1.23 Población Objetivo. Los beneficiarios del programa son pequeños y medianos productores agropecuarios y comunidades indígenas. Los pequeños y medianos productores se caracterizan por tener explotaciones pequeñas de agricultura familiar, orientadas...
	1.24 Componente 1: Saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras (US$74,9 millones). Este componente apoyará el saneamiento, titulación y registro de las tierras rurales. En este sentido se requiere financiar las siguientes etapas del proceso: (i) pre...
	1.25 El Componente 1 financiará con recursos del préstamo los insumos claves para continuar con el saneamiento de tierra rural (1.17). Los insumos claves para llevar a cabo el trabajo saneamiento incluyen: (i) la manutención del personal eventual del...
	1.26 Componente 2: Administración de Tierras (US$14,04 millones). Este componente financiará: (i) la modernización de la plataforma tecnológica de catastro rural del INRA y la plataforma de registro de tierras rurales del DDRR para facilitar la admini...
	1.27 Para la modernización del sistema catastral del INRA, el componente financiará: la unificación del SIMAT y SIC como herramientas técnicas para la administración de tierras rurales, el desarrollo e implementación del nodo INRA-GeoBolivia, el diseñ...
	1.28 El programa cuenta con una matriz de Resultados (ver Anexo II) acordada con el INRA que presenta los indicadores de impacto, resultados, y productos con sus respectivas líneas de base, metas, y medios de verificación. Los principales resultados d...
	Cuadro 3. Principales Indicadores de la Matriz de Resultados
	2.1 El costo total del programa es de US$100 millones que serán financiados por el Banco de forma Blend de la siguiente forma: US$51 millones con cargo a los recursos del Capital Ordinario (CO) y US$9 con cargo al Fondo de Operaciones Especiales (FOE)...
	2.2 El programa se estructura bajo la modalidad de Operación de Inversión Especifica, a ser ejecutado en 5 años con el siguiente cronograma de desembolso y de acuerdo al plan financiero preliminar:
	2.3 El análisis económico ex ante del programa utiliza una metodología de costo-beneficio. El análisis se basa en los costos y beneficios incrementales esperados del programa utilizando un horizonte de análisis de 15 años y una tasa de descuento del 1...
	2.4 De acuerdo a la Política de Medio Ambiente y Cumplimiento de Salvaguardias (OP-703) este programa ha sido clasificado como Categoría “B”. Durante la preparación del programa se ha desarrollado una Estratégica Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) ...
	2.5 Los resultados de la evaluación institucional permiten concluir que el INRA cuenta con la capacidad institucional para asumir las responsabilidades de organismo ejecutor de la operación propuesta. Los resultados demuestran que la capacidad de prog...
	2.6 La EASE ha identificado el riesgo que la presencia de terceros con derechos legítimos dentro de los Territorios Indígena Originario Campesinos (TIOCs) de tierras bajas se vuelva un obstáculo para culminar la titulación del territorio pleno reivind...
	2.7 Como se identificó anteriormente, el Gobierno de Bolivia viene apoyando financieramente la formalización de la propiedad rural en los últimos 20 años. El programa propuesto con un costo total US$100 millones finalizará el trabajo de saneamiento de...
	3.1 El prestatario será el Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia y el INRA será el Organismo ejecutor, legalmente constituido a través de la Ley 1715/96 como entidad pública descentralizada del MDRyT con jurisdicción nacional y personalidad jurídica.
	3.2 Las responsabilidades del INRA como Organismo Ejecutor incluyen, entre otras, las siguientes: (i) mantener registros contables consolidados que permitan identificar las fuentes y usos de los recursos del programa por componente; (ii) preparar y pr...
	3.3 La ejecución del programa utilizará la estructura organizacional existente del INRA, tanto en materia técnica como fiduciaria (adquisiciones y finanzas) y jurídica. En este sentido, la Dirección General de Planificación (DGP) será designada como  ...
	3.4 El Director de la DGP del INRA actuará como Coordinador General del programa con autonomía suficiente para la toma de decisiones operativas, la preparación de toda la documentación, programación de acciones y la coordinación con las entidades part...
	3.5 Durante la preparación del programa se ha previsto la suscripción de convenios de colaboración interinstitucional entre el INRA y Oficina de DDRR, Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra (APMT), Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (INE), y la Au...
	3.6 Para facilitar la implementación del PGAS, el INRA, dentro del marco del programa, podrá brindar cooperación y coordinación técnica a las instituciones públicas pertinentes, que coadyuven a lograr el objetivo del programa.
	3.7 Reglamento Operativo del Programa. La ejecución del programa se regirá por un Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). El ROP establece directrices y procedimientos operativos relacionados con: (i) las responsabilidades de las entidades que partic...
	3.8 Adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones de obras, bienes y servicios de consultoría financiadas con recursos del programa se llevarán a cabo conforme a las políticas del Banco establecidas en el GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9 y conforme a los establecido en el Co...
	3.9 Reconocimiento de gastos retroactivos. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de aprobación del préstamo en gastos op...
	3.10 Auditoria. Durante el período de desembolsos del préstamo, dentro de los 120 días siguientes al cierre del ejercicio fiscal del INRA, se presentarán al Banco los estados financieros auditados anuales del programa. La auditoría será efectuada por ...
	3.11 Seguimiento. El programa cuenta con un plan de monitoreo y evaluación. El INRA elaborará y enviará al Banco, a más tardar 60 días después del fin de cada semestre durante la ejecución del proyecto, un informe de seguimiento. Estos informes se foc...
	3.12 Evaluación. Las estimaciones de impacto se basarán en el método de diferencias en diferencias de un panel de hogares con un grupo de tratamiento y dos grupos control. Para esto se han previsto dos encuestas, línea de base y evaluación final. Se p...


	IDBDOCS-#40384160-v1-BO-L1113_DEM_SPD_Validación_Resumen
	LP - Anexo II (limpio) - Matriz de Resultados - BO-L1113
	LP - Anexo III (limpio) - Acuerdos y Requisitos Fiduciarios - BO-L1113
	1.1 El presente Anexo III se elaboró considerando lo siguiente en la determinación del nivel de riesgo fiduciario asociado al Programa: (i) resultados del último informe de gasto público y rendición de cuentas PEFA 2009; y (ii) análisis de la capacida...
	1.2 La Ejecución del Programa estará a cargo del INRA, entidad descentralizad del Ministerio de Desarrollo Rural y Tierras (MDRyT).
	1.3 Los registros contables de la operación se llevarán dentro del Sistema de Gestión Pública (SIGEP). Para los reportes financieros requeridos por el Banco utilizarán el Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco (SIAP-BID), desarrollado por CA...
	1.4 El Gobierno de Bolivia y el Banco han elaborado un acuerdo a través del cual se adoptaría el uso parcial de las Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios (NB-SABS) en las operaciones financiadas por el BID en Bolivia. Este...
	2.1 El MDRyT, como entidad pública se rige por la Ley No.1178 de Administración y Control Gubernamentales del 20 de julio de 1990 (SAFCO), que regula los sistemas de administración y de control de los recursos del estado y su relación con los sistemas...
	2.2 El INRA utiliza para todos sus registros financieros el SIGEP que permite la disponibilidad de información sobre la ejecución presupuestaria, de forma segura y confiable. Con apoyo del Banco, se ha desarrollado en este sistema un Módulo de Gestión...
	3.1 La evaluación SECI practicada al INRA determinó un grado de desarrollo institucional y capacidades adecuadas y un nivel de Riesgo Fiduciario BAJO. Sin embargo, se prevé fortalecer el equipo que estará a cargo de la ejecución del Programa, con la c...
	4.1 Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). Deberá incluir el esquema de ejecución, procedimientos y los flujos de información, previamente acordado entre las partes y el Banco.
	4.2 Tipo de cambio acordado con el ejecutor para la rendición de cuentas. Se utilizar el tipo de cambio vigente en el país del prestatario en la fecha efectiva de la conversión de recursos en moneda extranjera a moneda local, en las cuentas de los eje...
	4.3 Estados financieros y otros informes auditados. Dentro del plazo de ciento veinte (120) días siguientes al cierre de cada ejercicio económico del Organismo Ejecutor y durante el plazo para desembolsos del financiamiento, se presentarán al Banco lo...
	4.4 Los términos de referencia para la contratación de la FAI deben contar con la aprobación previa del Banco, los cuales podrán incluir productos enmarcados en las NIA, relacionados con la auditoría financiera del Programa y trabajos relacionados de ...
	5.1 El Programa prevé la compra de 41 camionetas 4x4 por un monto de hasta US$1.762.178 para las actividades de saneamiento y titulación del INRA. Los detalles sobre los plazos para la compra, el método de adquisición y precio estimado se definen en e...
	6.1 Ejecución de las adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones se realizarán en el marco de las políticas GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9.
	6.2 Adquisiciones de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría. Los contratos de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría previstos en el Programa, y sujetos a Licitación Pública Internacional (LPI), se ejecutarán utilizando los D...
	6.3 La contratación de obras estimadas en montos por debajo de US$3.000.000 se ejecutarán aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios, utilizando el Documento Estándar de Comparación de Precios para la Contratación de Obras elaborado por el Banco pa...
	6.4 La adquisición de bienes comunes (equipo informático, mobiliario, etc.) estimados en montos por debajo de US$200.000, se realizará aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios y utilizando el Documento de Solicitud de Cotizaciones para Compra de ...
	6.5 Selección y Contratación de Consultores. La selección de consultores se realizará aplicando los métodos de selección de las Políticas GN-2350-9, teniendo en cuenta lo siguiente:
	a. Selección de Firmas Consultoras. La selección de firmas consultoras para el proyecto se hará utilizando la Solicitud Estándar de Propuesta (SEP) emitida por el Banco y Documentos de Solicitud de Propuestas para contratos por montos inferiores a US$...
	b. Lista Corta de Firmas Consultoras. La lista podría estar integrada en su totalidad (100%) por firmas bolivianas para contratos con valor de hasta US$200.000.
	c. Selección de Consultores Individuales. La selección de Consultores Individuales se realizará sobre la base de comparación de las calificaciones individuales de los candidatos. Cuando la convocatoria se realice por el SICOES bastará contar con un ca...
	d. Contratistas de Servicios. El Programa, según se explica en el POD, requiere mantener al personal eventual que ha recibido capacitación y está actualmente trabajando en el proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras, para asegurar el c...

	6.6 Planificación de las adquisiciones. El INRA publicará el Plan de Adquisiciones en el Sistema de Ejecución de Planes de Adquisiciones (SEPA), y lo actualizará por lo menos anualmente para reflejar las necesidades reales de ejecución del proyecto y ...
	6.7 Adquisiciones Anticipadas/Financiamiento Retroactivo. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del monto estimado del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de ap...
	6.8 Preferencia Nacional. Para la ejecución de esta operación, no se considera la inclusión de preferencia nacional en los procesos de adquisición.
	6.9 Términos de Referencia y Especificaciones Técnicas. La revisión de los criterios para la selección de listas cortas, los TdR y/o de las especificaciones técnicas son responsabilidad del Organismo Ejecutor en coordinación con el Jefe de Equipo de P...
	6.10 Tabla de montos límite (miles US$).
	6.11 Adquisiciones principales(*). Las adquisiciones principales previstas en esta operación se detallan a continuación:
	6.12 Supervisión de Adquisiciones. El proyecto puede ejecutarse aplicando la modalidad de revisión ex post a los procesos de hasta el 100% del Umbral de LPN, conforme la siguiente cuadrícula (las contrataciones directas y no enunciadas en la cuadrícul...
	6.13 Gastos Operativos o Recurrentes. Son aquellos gastos (operativos, de mantenimiento, entre otros), requeridos para poner en funcionamiento el Programa, y que serán acordados con el JEP e incluidos en el PA. Este tipo de gastos se ejecutarán siguie...
	6.14 Contrataciones Directas1F . Las contratación de bienes y servicios diferentes de consultoría (por ejemplo para talleres/reuniones: alquiler de salas/locales, equipo audiovisual, transporte, facilitadores, etc.) por montos individuales menores a U...
	6.15 Archivos. El INRA será responsable de establecer los documentos de soportes, procedimientos y controles necesarios para la ejecución del Programa, así como el resguardo de los mismos conforme a lo establecido en el contrato de préstamo y a las le...
	7.1 Programación y presupuesto. El INRA utilizará una Dirección Administrativa (DA)2F , bajo la cual se creará el Proyecto, permitiendo de este modo que presupuestariamente exista un registro e identificación individualizada de las fuentes de financia...
	7.2 Contabilidad y sistemas de información. Las transacciones del Programa se registrarán en el SIGEP. Este sistema integra en un único registro sus diferentes momentos contables y cumple con los requisitos presupuestarios (ejecución del presupuesto),...
	7.3 Desembolsos y flujo de caja. El préstamo se desembolsará bajo la modalidad de anticipos de fondos principalmente, en función de la programación financiera del Programa, a ser periódicamente actualizada. El Banco podrá efectuar un nuevo anticipo de...
	7.4 Control interno y auditoría interna. Anualmente, la gestión financiera del INRA es sujeta de revisiones de confiabilidad por parte de la Unidad de Auditoría Interna (UAI), y dada la importancia relativa del Programa se prevé que el Programa será i...
	7.5 Control externo e informes. A fin de cumplir con la presentación de los Estados Financieros del Programa Auditados anualmente, el INRA contratará una firma de auditoría independiente aceptable para el Banco siguiendo las políticas del BID, cuyo co...
	7.6 Plan de supervisión financiera. Los planes y periodicidad de la supervisión estarán diseñados en base a los riesgos fiduciarios identificados. Las acciones que se contemplan son: (i) la realización de la auditoría externa anual contratada para rev...

	Resoluciones legales español
	IDBDOCS-#40385375-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL-_OC
	IDBDOCS-#40385407-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL_-_FOE


	PR-4410-E.pdf
	resoluciones-legales-inglés.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40403179-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_FOE
	IDBDOCS-#40403194-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_OC






















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND) and Sybille 
Nuenninghoff (RND/CBL), Project Co-Team Leaders; Onil Banerjee (CSD/RND); Jamie Cotta (CSD/RND); 
Alan Mentis (CCB/CGY); Paula Louis–Grant (FMP/CGY); Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CGY); María Camila Padilla 
(FMP/CBA); Graham Watkins (CSD/CCS); Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Claudia Stevenson (IFD/CTI); 
Escarlata Baza (LEG/SGO); David Cotacachi (SCL/GDI); Maja Schling (SPD/SDV); and Lisa Restrepo 
(CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 
made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.

 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ I 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification .............................................. 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost .................................................................. 8 
C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ..................................................................11 

A. Financing Instruments...................................................................................11 
B. Economic viability .........................................................................................12 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks .................................................12 
D. Fiduciary Risk ...............................................................................................13 
E. Other Risks ...................................................................................................14 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ..............................................................14 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ..................................................14 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................17 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP) 

2. Annual Operational Plan (AOP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL 

1. Technical design Component 1 

2. Diagnostic of the Agricultural Information System 

3. Technical design Component 2 

4. Institutional Capacity Assessment (ICAS) 

5. Technical design Component 3 

6. Analysis of gender and diversity inclusion  

7. Review of infrastructure proposals and ToR for design and supervision 

8. Impact evaluation proposal 

9. Ex ante economic analysis 

10. Environmental and Social Analysis and Management Plan  

11. Agricultural household survey in Regions 5, 9 and 10 

12. Draft Program Operating Manual 

13. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40586954
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564750
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40647394
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588762
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663628
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663634
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588559
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40589854
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587422
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590131
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590454
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588248
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40280490


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AIS Agricultural Information System 

ASDU Agricultural Sector Development Unit 

EPA Environment and Protection Agency 

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

GBS Guyana Bureau of Statistics 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GMC Guyana Marketing Corporation 

GL&SC Guyana Land and Survey Commission 

GLDA Guyana Livestock Development Agency 

GoG Government of Guyana 

GRDB Guyana Rice Development Board 

GRIF Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 

GSA Guyana School of Agriculture 

GUYSUCO Guyana Sugar Corporation 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  

MIF Multilateral Investment Fund 

MoA Ministry of Agriculture 

MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 

NAREI National Agriculture Research and Extension Institute 

NDIA National Drainage and Irrigation Authority 

NSC National Steering Committee 

OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 

POM Program Operations Manual 

PS Permanent Secretary 

RLPA Rupununi Livestock Association  

RMC Regional Management Committee 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TFP Total Factor Productivity 

WBSGA West Berbice Sheep and Goat Association 

 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R


 Annex 1 - GY-L1060

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2690

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country 

program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.1 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.3

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 7.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 0.0

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 9.6 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.1

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector 

entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to 

approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector 

that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Poverty headcount ratio (US $4 per day PPP) (%)

-Global Innovation Index (LAC average)

-Research and development expenditure as a percentage of GDP (%)

-Greenhouse gas emissions (kg of CO2 e per $1 GDP (PPP))

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public 

service delivery (#)

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

Aligned

Support the development of productive use of the country's natural resources, 

while addressing the challenge of sustainable management of the natural 

resources at stake.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, External control.

 The objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural resources.  The Program will implement three components: Information for Policy making and 

natural resource management (including an agricultural census that has not been updated since 1952); Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension system; and Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards. 

  

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the problems faced by the sector in terms of major limitations in the Agricultural Information Systems, Research, Innovation & Technology Transfer System, the Animal Health 

and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Framework, and the effects of climate change, all of which contribute to low levels of productivity. 

The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified.  The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic for all components. The key outcome indicators have values 

that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the three components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact, outcomes (except for one) and outputs (except for two) with 

their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information. 

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a break-even and Cost-Benefit Analysis that uses data recently collected in the targeted areas.  The benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change and are derived from the 

expected gains in yields for two key crops and cattle and the expected rate of adoption by farmers.  The economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social perspective.  In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; 

however, the assumed absolute change in gains for yields is rather high and not supported by empirical evidence. The EA undertakes a sensitivity analysis based on key variables (gains in yields and adoption rates) under three scenarios: 

optimistic; average; and pessimistic.  The Internal Rate of Return is above 12% for the optimistic (31% IRR) and average (14% IRR) scenarios; however, the pessimistic scenario yields an IRR of -1%.  Importantly, the pessimistic scenario 

might not be that pessimistic in the sense that it assumes increases of 1,276% in yields for one of the crops evaluated, which is quite high. Importantly, given the lack of data, the EA was not able to include the potential benefits to the sector 

arising from a new agricultural census. In this sense, one might consider these results as conservative.   

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy based on a quasi-experimental design with random selection at the community level that aims to measure direct and indirect 

impacts of the program by measuring spill-over effects. Given the scant number of rigorous studies done in Guyana, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.    

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable, except for one that does not comply with DEM guidelines; five are classified as Medium and three are classified as Low. The risks include mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The Program will promote the participation of women in agricultural technical 

assistance and training, and the agricultural census will have a special focus on 

women for data collection.

An impact evaluation was prepareed during the design. A quasi - experimental 

analysis, based on the implementation strategy was agreed with the MoA. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 3 

 

Results Framework 

 

Objective:  To increase productivity of the agricultural sector and sustainable use of natural resources in Guyana. 

 

Expected Impact 

Indicators Units 
Baseline Target EOP* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
agricultural 
production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$582.39/farm  2016 US$848.20/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle

1
. 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
livestock production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$223.85/farm  2016 US$654.28/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle.

 1
 

Reduction on the 
pressure on fragile 
ecosystems by 
inefficient livestock 
production 
(inefficient use of 
pastures) 

Hectares 
removed 
from 
livestock 
production 

0 ha 2016 570 ha  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Suitable buffer zones 
around pasture areas 
established. 
Technology transfer will 
reduce use of pasture 
areas. Intensity 
(animals / ha) will 
increase.   

* EOP, End of Project 

 

Expected outcomes 

Indicator Unit 
Baseline Intermediate  EOP Target Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Private investment in 
agriculture (increase 
expected) 

USD per 
year 

5.72 million 2008 
 

2019 7 million 2022 
Go-Invest 
reports 

Related to the 
census. At the 
national level 

Regional development 
plans prepared based on 
the agricultural census 

Plan 0 2016 
 

 3 2022 
Ministry of 
Communitie
s 

Assuming the 
agricultural census 
is available in 2019 

Productivity at the farm 
level of select crops 
(increase expected) 

MT/Ha 

Cassava: 
2,220 kg/ha 

 
Bora bean: 
215 kg/ha 

2016 

 

2019 

Cassava: 
3,883 
kg/ha 

 
Bora 
bean: 
4,143 
kg/ha 

2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Selected crops, 
Baseline value from 
survey, EOP Target 
computed as 35% 
of yields reported by 
NAREI and FAO 

Adoption of sustainable 
agriculture practices by 
farmers (disaggregated by 
gender) 

Number of 
technologie
s 

3 Male 
1 Female 

2016 

 

 
6 Male 

4 Female 
2022 

Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Baseline values 
based on 
agricultural 
household survey 

Average price of meat 
processed by pilot facilities 
(increase expected) 

USD / Kg 
USD / Lt 

3 2016 
 

2019 5 2022 
ASDU 
reports 

Return to the 
producers (value of 
the animal) 

Use of practices that 
reduce pressure on 
ecosystems (increase 
expected) 

Number of 
practices 
per 
household 

1.43 2016 

 

2019 3 2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Based on the 
survey 

 

                                                           
1
  Assumptions follow the ex-ante economic analysis: Increases in gross production value at end of project are based on increases in 

cassava, bean, and cattle yields: Cassava and bean yields increase to 35% of benchmark yields provided by NAREI with a 10% 
adoption rate among farmers. Cattle yields increase by 70% with a full adoption rate. Current market prices from survey used to 
compute gross production value. Based on the survey, livestock production contributes around 40% to total gross value of 
household production. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 3 

 

Outputs 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

Component 1: Generating Information for evidence – based policy making and natural resource management 

Agricultural census 
completed 

4,00
0 

Census 0   1    1 Results published 

MoA and GSB staff 
trained in data 
management 

70 
Number 
of people 

0 20 50 50 20 20 20 150 
Training for the survey 
and census 

M&E Unit 
strengthened 

100 Unit 0  1      
Consultants and 
equipment for the 
M&E Unit 

Component 2: Strengthening of the agricultural innovation and extension system 

Agriculture centers 
built and refurbished 
in Regions 9 and 10 

3,61
0 

Agricultur
e center 

  1 1   2 
 

ASDU reports 

Design and 
construction of a 
water reservoir in 
Region 9 completed 

500 
Water 

reservoir 
   1     ASDU reports 

Soil laboratories 
constructed and 
implemented 

350 
Laborator

y 
0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Research programs 
implemented 

225 Program 0  1 2 3 2 2 10 ASDU reports 

Extension programs 
implemented 

417 Program 0   1 2   3 ASDU reports 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
that do not receive 
incentives  

928 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 300 1200 1000 500 5,000  3,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 216 864 720    2,160 

Female 0 84 336 280    840 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
the use and benefits 
of technologies 
promoted by AC - 
incentives 

238 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 500 800 700    2,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 360 576 504    1440 

Female 0 140 224 196    560 

NAREI and GLDA 
staff trained 

65 

Number 
of people 

(total) 
0 10 10 10 10 10  50 

ASDU reports 
Male 0 8 8 8 8 8   

Female 0 2 2 2 2 2   

Environmental 
supervision visits for 
agriculture research 
and extension 

65 Reports   2 2 2 2 2 10 
EPA with support from 
the MoA 

Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards 

Pilot facility to 
process meat 
implemented 

1,75
0 

Facility 0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Number of producers 
associations 
strengthened 

685 
Producer 
associatio

n 
0  1 1    1 ASDU reports 

Annual review of 
compliance with 
hygienic and 
environmental 
standards 

25 Report 0   1 1 1  3 
Technical audit and 
EPA 

Number of people 
trained in SPS and 

30 
Number 
of people 

0 20 20 30 30   100 ASDU reports 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 3 

 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

food safety standards Male 0 15 15 22 22   74 

Female 0 5 5 8 8   26 

Development and 
implementation of a 
simplified grading 
system for beef 

120 
Regulatio

n 
0 1      1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Update of abattoir 
standards and 
preparation of legal 
framework completed 

60 
Regulatio

n 
0  1     1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Adaptation of the 
International Codex 
Alimentarius to the 
Guyana context 
completed 

55 
Regulatio

n 
0   1    1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Support to the GLDA 
to enforce standards 
completed 

25 
Annual 
report 

0 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 
Annual reports of 
compliance 

* Thousand dollars 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 8 

 

Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

COUNTRY: Guyana 

PROJECT Nº: GY-L1060 

NAME: Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objective of the program is to increase the productivity of the 
agricultural sector while maintaining sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The total estimated budget is US$15,000,000, all of which 
will be financed by the IDB from the OC/FSO resources. 

 
1.2 The Executing agency is the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). MoA executed two Bank 

financed Loans – Agricultural Support Services 1558/SF-GY and Agricultural 
Export Diversification Program 1929/BL-GY. The latter loan was executed by the 
Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU) of the MoA which was established in 
2007 to execute all foreign funded programs for the sector.  

 
1.3 An institutional capacity assessment of the ASDU of MoA was conducted in July 

2016 using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) methodology. 
The assessment combining previous experience and the findings from the ICAS 
conclude that the fiduciary risk is considered medium. A re-evaluation of the 
fiduciary risks will be conducted during execution as part of the regular fiduciary 
supervision to ensure efficient support to project execution. 

 
1.4 Fiduciary context of the country. An Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) was 

conducted in 2012/2013. It provided an update to the 2007 combined Public 
Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) performance measurement 
framework and OECD-DAC procurement assessment. The results of the 
2012/2013 IFA, like the 2007 PEFA, concluded that Guyana’s overall budget 
planning, accounting and reporting systems worked well; IFMAS (the financial and 
management accounting system used by the Government) operated consistently 
and reliably providing updated information about all elements of budget execution, 
and budget planning and reporting was being done in accordance with the cash 
basis of accounting and its standards. The Public Financial Management (PFM) 
indicator scores from the 2012/2013, indicate encouraging results with slight 
improvements in areas such as Strengthened External Audit Function, Budget 
Preparation Process, Revenue Administration etc. Notwithstanding, the IFA 
highlighted that attention needed to be paid to the internal control environment, 
Internal Audit, Payroll Control and Procurement Control among others. To date, 
confirmations from the Borrower on the results of the 2012/2013 IFA as well as 
2007 PEFA remain outstanding. The Bank’s Guide for the Use of Country Systems 
(GUS) Assessment was also conducted in 2013; this also has not been accepted 
by the Government. The Auditor General’s Office (AOG) is currently eligible to 
audit all Bank-financed TCs and loan operations deemed to be of low or medium 
complexity and risk. This was based on an assessment of the capacity of the AOG 
undertaken by the Bank in 2011 and the continued institutional strengthening 
support given by the Bank to the AOG. For this operation, the Bank is 
recommending: (i) the use of the national accounting system, Integrated Financial 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 8 

 

Management Accounting System – IFMAS, or any other system acceptable to the 
Bank, for the financial administration of the project; and (ii) for external control, a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank or the Auditor 
General of Guyana. 

 
1.5 With regards to procurement, assessments of the national system (MAPS) have 

been performed in 2007 and 2013. The results are not yet endorsed by the 
Government of Guyana (GoG). Guyana has a dedicated legislation that governs 
public procurement, namely the Procurement Act of 2003 and its associated 
regulations. The National Procurement and Tender Administration Board (NPTAB) 
was established in the same Procurement Act of 2003. It is responsible for 
exercising jurisdiction over the country’s tender processes, reporting to the Ministry 
of Finance with policy making, advisory oversight, and monitoring and information 
functions. In accordance with the existing legal framework, the NPTAB is a 
temporary entity while awaiting the creation of the Public Procurement Commission 
(PPC). The PPC is a Constitutional body with responsibility for overseeing that the 
purchasing of goods and services and the execution of works by public institutions 
is carried out in a fair, equitable, transparent, and competitive manner; its members 
are appointed by the President and approved by the National Assembly. 
The country is in the process of strengthening its centralized website for publication 
of opportunities for requests for proposals, but to date, it is not regularly used 
across procurement entities or by the independent public corporations. 
Additionally, efforts are being deployed to also strengthen capacity to retain 
records of procurement processes and related information, as well as a registry for 
protests, suspension and debarment and contractors’ performance. Statistics on 
public procurement awards is also an area of focus for GoG. Notwithstanding, to 
date, the Country Procurement System has not been approved and hence will not 
be used under the present Loan. Consequently, the Bank requires the use of its 
Procurement Policies GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for all projects approved starting 
April 19, 2011. In the meantime, the Bank will bring adequate support to the 
procurement function to ensure that procurement activities are carried out in a way 
that support the prompt execution of the operation and in accordance with the 
Bank’s rules and procedures. 

 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1. The ASDU of the MOA will be responsible for the execution of the Loan and for 
carrying out all related fiduciary activities.  In accordance with the existing structure 
at the MoA, the ASDU will discharge its duties coordinating with the Office of the 
Permanent Secretary. As per ICAS findings, the ASDU was established in 2007 as 
the sole “coordinating unit within MoA for the administration of international agency 
funded projects/programs. To strengthen the execution capacity of the ASDU Unit, 
a Financial Officer and a Procurement Officer will be recruited to discharge the 
expected fiduciary duties for the duration of the Loan.  

2.2. MoA, as a budget agency, uses the Integrated Financial Management Accounting 
System (IFMAS) of the country. ASDU uses IFMAS for the financial management 
and an off the shelf accounting system for detailed reporting. IFMAS was 
successfully piloted on previous IDB-financed loans. It is recommended that this 
program use IFMAS along with the off the shelf accounting package for the 
financial management and accounting of the program. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 8 

 

2.3. As far as the procurement function is concerned, findings of the ICAS indicate that 
the procurement activities that will be conducted by the ASDU under this Loan will 
be placed under the responsibility of a procurement officer who is presently 
discharging procurement duties under a Loan financed by the World Bank. The 
procurement officer is one constituent of what is referred to as the Procurement 
Department in the current ASDU’s organizational structure. The position for the 
procurement manager is presently vacant. However, in accordance with the 
findings of the ICAS, it appears that, for in as much as the Procurement 
Department is placed under the Project Coordinator (currently, a vacant position as 
per findings of the ICAS), the Procurement Officer reports directly to the 
Permanent Secretary while coordinating activities with the Director of the ASDU. 
Most importantly however, the ASDU is presently operating in accordance with 
approved internal control mechanisms guaranteeing “the presence of internal 
controls throughout the Ministry’s governance, planning, administration, 
procurement and financial management, including support documentation for all 
commitment and payment transactions, authorizing signatories following GoG 
procedures and segregation of authority for most of its internal processes, among 
others”. In addition, an operation’s manual will be tailored and implemented to 
increase the ASDU’s capacity to implement the present Loan. Given the above, it 
is expected that the Procurement Function as structured for the present Loan will 
have the expected capacities to perform its fiduciary duties.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1. The Project Team in consultation with the MoA and other stakeholders developed 
a preliminary Risk Mitigation Matrix included in the package of project documents 
to be approved for the present Loan Agreement. The Bank and the MoA will 
undertake joint reviews of the Matrix on a yearly basis, and introduce necessary 
additional mitigating actions as a result of such reviews and as deemed necessary. 

3.2. Taking into consideration the current ASDU organizational structure where a 
vacancy exists in the Accounting section, the capacity of the existing accounting 
staff to undertake the financial management for a new operation, the ICAS 
Assessment and the experience of the Bank with the previous loan, the financial 
management risk has been classified as medium. The recruitment of a financial 
officer to ensure adequate segregation of duties coupled with the provision of 
training on Bank policies and procedures should mitigate the existing risk and 
strengthen the control environment. 

3.3. With regards to the procurement activities, it is estimated that the overall level of 
risk is medium. The existing structure as described in Section 2.3 above is 
identified in the ICAS as presenting a low level of risk. In practice however, the 
current ASDU organizational structure indicates that the Procurement Department 
counts with 2 (two) positions and that only that of the Procurement Officer is filled 
to date. As indicated in the ICAS, the procurement officer is presently responsible 
for the procurement activities under a World Bank Loan. Given that the 
Procurement rules and procedures between the World Bank and the IDB are 
harmonized, it is expected that the experience acquired during the execution of the 
WB Loan will constitute a mitigation factor in itself. However, to avoid potential 
bottlenecks tied to an increased workload as indicated above, recruiting a 
procurement assistant appears to be a necessary additional mitigation measure to 
avoid potential bottlenecks in the execution of the procurement activities under the 
IDB financed Loan. Indeed, once the present Loan enters in execution, the 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 4 of 8 

 

Procurement Officer currently on duty would be responsible for several Loans 
above US$10M.This adapted structure should be reflected and catered for in the 
operation’s manual as approved under the conditions of Section 4.1 below. 

IV. SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT TO BE ADHERED TO 

4.1. Conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the presentation of evidence that the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a Program Coordinator, a Financial 
Specialist and a Procurement Specialist according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.1 of the POD); (ii) approval and entry into 
effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.4 of the POD), and (iii) presentation 
by the Borrower of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution 
Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.12 of the 
POD). 

4.2. Type of exchange rate to be used by EA. The type of funds to be used are 
established in the following manner: (i) Reimbursement of actual expenses: the 
effective rate of exchange on the date of payment of each expenditure, as 
published by the Central Bank of Guyana; (ii) Reporting on accounts (Advance of 
Funds): the effective rate of exchange used in the conversion of the currency of the 
operation to the local currency. In cases of reimbursement of a guarantee of letter 
of credit, the equivalent of the currency of the operation will be fixed in accordance 
with the amount effectively disbursed by the IDB. 

V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

5.1 Financial Statements and Reports, audited or unaudited. (i) semi-annual 
financial reports of the program are to be included in the semi-annual progress 
report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank; (ii) annual financial 
statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of Guyana are to be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal year, beginning 
with the fiscal year in which the first project expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a 
final financial audit report of the program is to be submitted by MoPH within 120 
days after the date of the last disbursement. 

5.2 Programming and Budget: The Borrower has committed to allocate, for each 
fiscal year of project execution, adequate fiscal space to guarantee the unfettered 
execution of the project; as determined by normal operative instruments such as 
the Annual Operating Plan and the PP. 

5.3 Accounting and Information Systems. It is expected that IFMAS accounting 
system will facilitate the recording and classification of all financial transactions, 
supported by an off-shelf accounting system. 

5.4 Disbursements and Cash Flow. The Bank will supervise the creation of an 
Advance of Funds, using the Advance of Funds methodology. Whenever resources 
from the financing are requested through an Advance of Funds, it will be deposited 
into a Special Account, denominated in US$, established exclusively for the Project 
at the Central Bank of Guyana. Required resources from this Special Account will 
be transferred to another bank account, denominated in Guyana Dollars to be 
utilized for payment of expenditures in local currency. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 5 of 8 

 

5.5 The project will provide adequate justification of the existing Advance of Funds 
balance, whenever 80% of said balance has been spent. Advances will normally 
cover a period not exceeding 180 days and no less than 90 days. In order to 
request disbursements from the Bank, the EA will present the following forms and 
supporting documents: 

Type of 
Disbursement 

Mandatory Forms 
Optional forms/ information that 

can be requested by the IDB 

Advance Disbursement Request/ Financial 
Plan 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Reimbursements of 
Payments Made 

Disbursement Request/ Project 
Execution Status/ Statement of 
Expenses 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Direct Payment to 
Supplier 

Disbursement Request/ Statement of 
Expenses/Acceptable Supporting 
Documentation 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

 

5.6 Generally, supporting documentation for Justification of Advances and 
Reimbursement of Payments Made will be kept at the office of the EA. 
Disbursements’ supporting documents may be reviewed by the Bank on an ex-post 
basis.  

5.7 Internal Control and Internal Audit: The management of the project will assume 
the responsibility for designing and implementing a sound system of internal 
controls for the project. 

5.8 External Control and Reports. For each fiscal year during project execution, MoA 
will be responsible to produce semi-annual financial reports for the project, annual 
Audited Financial Reports of the Program and one final Audited Financial Report at 
the end of the Program, audited either by the Auditor General of Guyana or by a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank. 

5.9 Financial Supervision Plan. Financial Supervision will be developed based on the 
initial and subsequent risk assessments carried out for the project. Inspection visits 
will be performed based on the risk assessed, covering the following: (i) review of 
the bank reconciliation and supporting documentation for Advances and 
Justifications; (ii) compliance with procedures; (iii) review of compliance with the 
lending criteria; and (iv) ex-post review of disbursements. 

5.10 Execution Mechanism. MoA will be the EA and will be responsible for the 
financial administration of the program. MoA’s responsibility will include:                
(i) preparation of required project reports; (ii) monitoring product, output and 
outcomes achievement using established indicators; (iii) preparation and 
submission of disbursement requests to the Bank and justification of expenses;   
(iv) preparation of financial reports; (v) ensure compliance with all aspects of the 
Operating Manual; and (vi) maintain adequate documentation filing system. 

VI. REQUIREMENTS AND AGREEMENTS FOR EXECUTION OF PROCUREMENT 

6.1 Procurement Execution. Procurement activities for the proposed project will be 
carried out in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and 
Goods Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9), of March 
2011, and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed 
by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9), of March 2011. They will 
also be subject to the provisions established in the Loan contract. In addition, for all 
projects, the Borrower is required to prepare and submit to the Bank, a draft 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 6 of 8 

 

General Procurement Notice as well as an initial procurement plan which will be 
updated in accordance with the applicable sections of the Policies and the Loan 
Agreement. 

6.2 Exception to Bank Procurement Policies. The operation does not foresee any 
exception to the Bank’s procurement policies. 

6.3 Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services. In accordance 
with Section 1.2 of GN-2349-9, “the responsibility for the implementation of the 
project, and therefore for the award and administration of contracts under the 
project, rests with the Borrower”. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for 
this Loan and given the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities 
will be carried out under ex-ante supervision.  

6.4 Procurement of Consulting Services. In accordance with Section 1.4 of         
GN-2350-9, “The Borrower is responsible for preparing and implementing the 
project, and therefore for selecting the consultant, and awarding and subsequently 
administering the contract.” As such, the Borrower is responsible for preparing and 
implementing the scheduled activities, and therefore for preparing the TORs, short 
lists, selecting the consultants, awarding the contract and subsequently 
administering it. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for this Loan and given 
the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities will be carried out 
under ex-ante supervision as described in the following section of the present 
Annex III.  

6.5 Sole Source Selection and/or Direct Contracting. The Program is currently 
looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of US$4 million. This Direct 
Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in carrying out Agricultural 
Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan and hence, the request 
for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of GN-2350-9 which foresees that 
“Single-source selection may be appropriate only if it presents a clear advantage 
over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is qualified or has experience of 
exceptional worth for the assignment”. The FAO would be recruited by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and it is expected that the request for no-objection for the said 
contract will be submitted to the Bank for no-objection prior in accordance with the 
applicable rules and procedures governing Direct Contracting of Consulting 
Services. This does not constitute a request for approval/no-objection to the Direct 
Contract in question which, as mentioned above, will be processed in accordance 
with the applicable rules during execution. 

6.6 Selection of Individual Consultants. Individual consultants will be selected and 
recruited in accordance with Section V of GN-2350-9. 

6.7 Recurring Expenses. Include payment of utilities and other office operating 
expenses of the Executing Unit, if any. 

6.8 Advance Contracting/Retroactive Financing. The Bank may finance 
retroactively under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the 
date of loan approval to: (i) design, environmental and impact evaluation, and 
supervision of the infrastructure included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract 
specialized personnel of the ASDU dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the 
travel, per diem expenses and office supplies, up to the amount US$350,000 
(2.33% of the proposed loan amount), provided that all the requirements 
substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement requirements are 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 7 of 8 

 

adhered to. These expenses must have been incurred on or after June 16
th
, 2016 

(PP approval date), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more 
than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included.  

6.9 Domestic Preference. Domestic Preference is not requested under this Loan. 

6.10 Country Threshold. Table (US$ thousands) www.iadb.org/procurement  

International Competitive 
Bidding Threshold* 

 

National Competitive Bidding Range 
** (complex works and non-common 

goods)  

Consulting Services 

Works Goods Works Goods International Short List 

>1,000,000 >100,000 <1,000,000 <100,000 > 100,000 

* When procuring simple works and common goods and their amount is under the International 
Competitive Bidding thresholds, Shopping may be used. 
** When procuring non-complex works or common goods with amounts under the NCB range, 
Shopping shall be used. 

 

6.11 Procurement Plan. The Procurement Plan for the operation covering the first 18 
months of project execution can be accessed through the following electronic link. 
The on-line Electronic Procurement Execution System (known by its Spanish 
acronym as SEPA) will be used for the publication and updates of the Procurement 
Plan during project execution. It is expected that the EA will use the SEPA program 
for management of its procurement activities. The Procurement Plan will be 
updated annually or whenever necessary, or as required by the Bank 
(www.iadb.org/procurement; http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index-
_ing.htm). The initial procurement plan for the operation lists all procurement 
activities foreseen under this operation. The table below includes the list of the 
main procurement activities for this Loan. 

Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Add’l Info. 
Procurement 

Method 
 

Estimated 
Amount 
 in US$: 

Estimated 
Amount  
BID %: 

Review 
Method 

 

Specific 
Procurement 

notice 

Contract 
Signature 

Buildings, 
Laboratories, 
Water Reservoir, 
and civil works in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 3,100,000 100 Ex-ante Q3 2017 Q4 2017 

Construction of 
abattoir and 
associated waste 
management 
facilities in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 1,200,000 100 Ex-ante Q4 2017 Q1 2018 

Laboratory 
equipment 
(autoclave; soil 
grinder; 
incubator; 
moisture content 
analyzer) 

Goods ICB 120,000 100 Ex-ante Q2 2018 Q2 2018 

Agricultural 
Census 

Consulting 
Services 

SSS 4,000,000 100 Ex-ante N/A Q1 2017 

Design & 
supervision Agri. 
Construction 
Infrastructure 

Consulting 
services 

QCBS 680,000 100 Ex-ante Q1 2017 Q2 2017 

http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/WSdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38332109
http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm


Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 8 of 8 

 

 

6.12 Supervision. Under the present Loan, procurement activities (i) are not expected 
to be complex in nature, nor will they involve the acquisition of medical of 
therapeutic equipment; (ii) will be subject to ex-ante review given the level of risk 
as identified above; (iii) will be explicitly listed in the approved and updated 
procurement plan in SEPA; (iv) will be launched once all technical specifications 
and/or terms of reference are validated by the Bank’s Sector Specialist; and (v) will 
be documented in accordance with the general filing guidelines that will be 
provided as part of the inception training of the fiduciary staff and in accordance 
with the applicable Bank Policies. 

6.13 All modifications to the present arrangement are subject to a prior written 
agreement between the EA and the Bank. The evaluation of capacity and the level 
of risk may vary during the project’s execution depending on the findings of the 
regular supervision activities that will be conducted during the project’s lifespan. As 
such, supervision modalities may vary as capacity increases. 

6.14 Records and Files. All records and files will be maintained by the EA, according to 
accepted best practices and to the general guidelines that will be provided by the 
Bank at the initial training of the fiduciary staff. All records must be kept for seven 
(7) years beyond the end of the operation’s execution period. It is also 
recommended that the Executing Agencies develop electronic filing to avoid losing 
all paper files. 



















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA 

 

 

 

PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 

 

THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)  

(AR-X1006) 

 

 

 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ricardo Quiroga (RND/CAR), 
Project Team Leader; Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR), Project Team Co-leader. Juan de Dios 
Mattos and Maria Claudia Perazza (CSD/RND); Juan Manuel Leaño and Carolina Benitez 
(TSP/CAR); Alonso Chaverri-Suarez (LEG/SGO); Teodoro Noel, Marisol Pinto, and Carlos 
Carpizo (PDP/CAR); Denis Corrales and María Elena Castro (VPS/ESG); Gabriela Szarfer 
(CAR/CAR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 





 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost .............................................................. 10 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 12 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 12 

A. Financing instruments and costs ................................................................ 12 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 13 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 15 
D. Other project risks and special issues ......................................................... 15 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 16 

 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan 

2. Annual work plan (AWP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Program Operating Regulations (Preliminary) 

2. Complete Results Matrix 

3. PROSAP I Completion Report (899/OC-AR) 

4. PROSAP II Completion Report (1956/OC-AR) 

5. PROSAP III midterm evaluation (2573/OC-AR)  

6. Economic evaluation of the program (PROSAP IV) 

7. Ex post economic evaluation of the PROSAP III projects 

8. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – major works 

9. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – minor works 

10. Information on the projects in Component 2  

11. Bibliography 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40678623
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677463
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679522
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AGN Office of the National Auditor General 
CCLIP Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects 
CDC Country Development Challenge 
CRF Corporate Results Framework 
DCIP Development and competitiveness improvement plans 
EIRR Economic internal rate of return 
ESM Environmental and Social Manual 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GHG Greenhouse gases 
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
MAGyP Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries  
NEA Northeastern region of Argentina 
NG Norte Grande 
NPV Net present value  
NRC Nonreimbursable contribution 
NWA Northwestern region of Argentina 
OC Ordinary Capital 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight  
PCR Project completion report 
PROSAP Programa de Servicios Agrícolas Provinciales [Provincial Agricultural 

Services Program] 
PSAS Provincial strategies for the agrifood sector  
SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises 
UIS Update to the Institutional Strategy  
URC Unit for Rural Change 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

ARGENTINA 
PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 
THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT 

PROJECTS – (AR-X1006)  
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Argentine Republic 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Original WAL: 15.25 years 

Disbursement period: 4 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Inspection and supervision fee: (b) 

IDB (OC): 100,000,000 76 Interest rate: LIBOR based 

Local 31,426,000 24 Credit fee: (b) 

Total 131,426,000 100 Approval currency: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

The objective of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of 
regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent with this purpose. Specifically, the third i ndividual 
operation proposed herein seeks improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change. 

Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: 

The executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC), will provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations 
have been approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank, including the Environmental and Social Manual (ESM) (paragraph 3.3). 

Special contractual conditions for environmental and social execution: 

Those established in the environmental and social management report (ESMR) will be included (paragraph 2.6).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as well as 

currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests. 
(b) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 

lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

  



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

 Recent context on the development of the agricultural sector in Argentina  

1.1 In Argentina, the agrifood sector accounts for around 10% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), and 20% of GDP including the agroindustry sector. The sector generates 
65% of total exports (US$35 billion) and 36% of employment. The country’s Pampa 
region1 generates 90% of agricultural production by value and 80% of the sector’s 
exports. The non-Pampa agriculture sector accounts for around 65% of agricultural 
exploitation, generates 20% of total production, and provides 54% of all rural jobs to 
220,000 rural families, the majority of them without their own capital (INDEC, 
Gallacher, and Lema, 2014).  

1.2 Over the last 10 years, Argentina’s agricultural sector passed through three distinct 
periods of sector and macroeconomic context that significantly affected its structure 
and performance. Between 2006 and 2012, the strong growth of the sector’s grain 
exports stood out, a result mainly of high demand from Asian countries and the 
agricultural capacity of the Pampa to meet growing international demand. Six 
products accounted for 65% of all exports, with a significant contribution from the 
soy chain and with export destinations highly concentrated: 82% of the soy was 
exported to China and 60% of the wheat to Brazil. For agricultural products, 30% is 
exported without any processing, and only 54% of agribusiness exports are products 
with basic processing (soy oil and flour). Although the expansion of soy was 
concentrated in the Pampa provinces, growing areas have also expanded to other 
regions, causing changes in land use and replacement of traditional crops (Anlló, 
Bisang, and Salvatierra, 2010).  

1.3 A second contextual period from 2012 to 2015 was characterized by the application 
of policies resulting in strong macroeconomic distortions: taxes and quantitative 
restrictions on agricultural exports (grains mainly), foreign-exchange controls and 
differentiated exchange rates, import controls, price controls, and targeted 
subsidies. Estimates from the IDB Agrimonitor (2014) show that from 2007 to 2012, 
producers generated net transfers to the public purse (via tax collection) and to 
consumers (through lower prices) that averaged US$11 billion annually, accounting 
for more than 30% of the value of the sector’s production. This policy framework 
caused productive and export activity in general to stall, but particularly impacted the 
non-Pampa regional economies, since as described in the following section, these 
regions face significant development gaps, forcing them to compete with greater 
disadvantages (Gallacher and Lema, 2014). 

1.4 A third period of context began with the change of government in December 2015, 
one of whose first measures was to eliminate the macroeconomic and sector policy 
distortions (Argentina, Country Development Challenge 2016 – CDC). Along these 
lines, restrictions on corn and wheat were eliminated and restrictions on soy were 
reduced; the exchange rate was free floated and foreign exchange restrictions were 
removed, as were administrative price and import controls. The new government 
seeks to reposition Argentine agriculture to make it competitive in external markets, 

                                                
1  Argentina’s provinces are grouped into the following five broad geographic regions: (i) Pampa region; 

(ii) Northeast region (NEA); (iii) Northwest region (NWA); (iv) Cuyo Region; and (v) Patagonia region. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
incentivize private investment in cutting-edge technology, and focus attention on 
structural shortcomings and development gaps that affect the sector, particularly in 
the more vulnerable regional economies that have fallen behind in terms of social 
and economic development (Belgrano Plan). 

 Gaps in regional development and priorities for competitiveness and 
developing rural regional economies  

1.5 Development gaps in regional economies, particularly the Norte Grande (NG) 
provinces, are notable. The per capita GDP in the NG is 47.5% of that of the nation 
as a whole. With 20.7% of the total population, the NG only generates 9.8% of the 
country’s GDP and exports around 10% of the national total. (Meloni, 2012; 
Argentina CDC). In a study on production and technology gaps for the agricultural 
sector, Cuervo (2016) tracks the Global Yield Gap in Agriculture. The index 
measures the production gap based on maximum achievable yield and actual yield 
(farm yield) for national-scale field crops. The production gap shows low relative 
levels of technical efficiency: 41.5% for corn, followed by wheat with 41% and soy 
with 31.7%. Measured as “yield” differences in the production of national field crops 
(cereals and oilseeds) for the 2011-2014 period, the productive gap figures show 
that the NG’s technical efficiency index in corn is 62% that of the humid Pampa area, 
while for soy it is 82%, for wheat it is only 53%, sorghum stands at 62%, and 
sunflower at 74%. 

1.6 A number of factors affect the regional gaps in technology and development for 
Argentina’s rural regional economies, with the following generally standing out: (i) a 
deficit in production infrastructure, particularly irrigation, connectivity, and rural 
logistics infrastructure, as well as dependable access to energy sources; (ii) climate 
change and its implications for water availability for high quality and high volume 
agricultural production; (iii) deficits in services for improving competitiveness and 
value added, restricting productivity and innovation; and (iv) institutional, 
governance, and social participation weaknesses, both public and within private 
organizations and associations of small and medium-sized rural producers. (Lema, 
2010; Lissi and Losi, 2010; Leyva, 2016; Bisang, Campi, and Aniló, 2013). These 
factors are described below. 

1.7 Productive infrastructure: Irrigation. According to the 2014 National Irrigation 
Plan and the study “Potencial de Ampliación del Riego en la Argentina,” [Potential 
for Expanding Irrigation in Argentina, United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), PROSAP, World Bank, 2015], Argentina has a little more than 
2 million hectares of irrigated land, with potential to expand that to around 6 million 
hectares.2 The non-Pampa regions are the most dependent on this infrastructure for 
agricultural development. Half of all irrigated land is in dry regions with annual 
precipitation of less than 500 mm (e.g. the Andean areas of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán, 
Catamarca, La Rioja, San Juan, and Mendoza), while 20% is in the semi-dry central 
and northern regions, with between 600 mm and 800 mm of rain during the summer. 
The water stress situation in these regions is worsening due to the effects of climate 
change and more intense drought periods. Irrigation accounts for 70% of total water 
consumption in Argentina, and 75% of the water used for this purpose comes from 

                                                
2  Including expansion over existing areas, new areas, and complementary irrigation.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
surface sources, generally reservoirs created by dams and river diversion, with the 
other 25% coming from aquifers through individual wells. 

1.8 The four irrigation systems identified by the program have low efficiency (60%) as a 
result of: (i) main canals that are not lined (75%); (ii) secondary canals that are not 
lined (80%); and (iii) little use of pressurized irrigation systems (25% of farmers). The 
records and technical evaluations of the systems rehabilitated by PROSAP show 
that it is possible to increase initial efficiency levels from 60% to over 90% in terms 
of water loss reduction. Also, in terms of technology, at the level of the individual 
farm, the use of inefficient irrigation technology is still prevalent (e.g. surface 
irrigation) partly due to limited management capacity and knowledge, but also 
because of the property investment costs. The improved gravity systems have an 
average cost of US$398/hectare, but with objective efficiency of 65%, while 
pressurized irrigation systems (micro spray, drip, pivot) that achieve efficiency of 
80% to 90%, cost between US$2,600/hectare and US$4,000/hectare 
(FAO-PROSAP).  

1.9 The PROSAP interventions address the investment niche needed to rehabilitate 
existing systems and expand irrigated areas in provinces with a high degree of water 
stress, while targeting the needs of small and medium-sized producers. In the NG, 
investments have been identified of around US$3.6 billion that would make it 
possible to increase arable land by between 22% and 50% (approximately 320,000 
hectares). In any case, the success of irrigation interventions requires ensuring 
proper coordination between three areas: (i) institutional and legal, including 
regulatory frameworks, land titling and registration, institution-strengthening, and 
development of financially-autonomous user organizations; (ii) economic, including 
accessible financing instruments, viable public-private partnership models, 
affordable water fees and prices, and tax incentives; and (iii) technical, for dealing 
with cutting-edge engineering and technology, modern water information systems, 
and environmental studies. Investments in irrigation infrastructure financed by 
PROSAP have included actions in these three areas and contributed to improving 
productivity in the intervention areas (see paragraphs 1.19, 1.20, and 1.21).  

1.10 Productive infrastructure: Rural roads and rural energy. Of the total volume of 
cargo transported, 95% is moved over the country’s road network. Annual average 
daily traffic has been increasing, but not evenly across all regions, with significant 
imbalances for cargo traffic (Agosta, R. 2010). For rural economies in the non-
Pampa provinces, the poor condition of secondary and tertiary roads results in: 
(i) high transportation and logistical costs; and (ii) poor accessibility to large 
expanses of territory. For example, the project for secondary route RT13 in 
Corrientes province shows that the route is closed on average more than 80 days 
out of the year. RT13 is 163 km, unpaved and without drainage. In the rainy season, 
70 km of it (43%) is impassable. This worsens the competitiveness of non-Pampa 
rural areas considering that for the main exportable grains and oilseeds, logistical 
costs of transportation to the ports or mill account for 30% of the price for NEA and 
NWA producers (IDEA. FIEL, 2009). Likewise, regarding the rural public energy 
infrastructure, significant gaps and coverage needs are evident. Nationally, more 
than 60% of rural homes do not have access to electricity, with the farms furthest 
from the grid’s main lines being the most affected (Mendoza, 2016).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.11 Climate change challenges. Given the fundamental role that Argentina plays in 

global food security, addressing extreme events resulting from climate change is of 
vital importance considering their impact on agricultural activity and the production 
and provision of food. Agricultural and livestock activity are estimated to contribute 
28% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, for which reason these 
sectors are a central focus for the government as it complies with its goal of reducing 
GHG emissions by 15% by 2030, as established in its intended nationally 
determined contribution (INDC) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  

1.12 According to Argentina’s Second National Message on Climate Change, there is 
evidence that the effects of climate change have contributed to glacier melt in the 
Andes Mountains, increasing desertification, and an increased recurrence in forest 
fires over the last 10 years. From the perspective of impact on agriculture, the most 
severe effects manifest themselves through water stress and water availability for 
production, particularly in the areas of Cuyo, NEA, and NWA where PROSAP is 
engaged (Argentina: Second National Message; ECLAC 2012; Ludeña, Wilk, and 
Quiroga).  

1.13 The Cuyo region has been under a water emergency during 7 of the last 10 years, 
and the trend toward declining availability of water directly impacts availability of the 
irrigation needed to maintain the current levels of irrigation-dependent wine and fruit 
production (Brown, 2015). According to a study entitled “The Economics of Climate 
Change in Argentina” (ECLAC, 2014), if adaptation measures are not taken, climate 
change-related productivity losses could reach 17% of the national agriculture 
sector’s value added, along with drops in yield of between 11% and 16% for wheat, 
15% and 24% for corn, and 14% and 25% for soy. In terms of its effect on irrigation, 
in a study of Argentina’s irrigation potential, the FAO reports potential climate 
change-related productivity losses in areas under irrigation equivalent to the loss of 
325,000 hectares, or production value of US$900 million. 

 
Table 1. Production losses due to climate change in areas under irrigation (in 1,000s of ha) 

 

*FAO-PROSAP World Bank (2015). 

51

74 78

58

18

62
29

9

1

8

22 24 22 19 7
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Central Cuyo NWA NEA Patagonia

Underground irrigation Surface irrigation

Losses (% of total surface area)

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
 

1.14 Competitiveness services gaps. Integration of agricultural producers into clusters 
and value chains is necessary for regional economies to take off. The diagnosis of 
Argentina’s CDC indicates that the lower competitiveness of the non-Pampa 
agricultural systems can be partly attributed to the lower degree of sophistication of 
scientific-technological-educational subsystems and of management in general, as 
well as their poor links to agricultural technology supply companies. Along these 
lines, Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris (2008) find that the benefits of increased sector 
clustering are positive and highly significant, although to be effective it requires 
strengthened institutions. Likewise, using company-level data, Long and Zhang 
(2011) show that China’s rapid industrialization is characterized by the growing 
formation of clusters. They find that the clusters help overcome the credit restrictions 
that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face. Scalice (2016) finds in an 
analysis of nine agrifood supply chains in Argentina’s NG that more than 80% of 
small producers of are not part of a value chain, nor do they have access to financial 
services. The author also identifies a number of limitations to developing competitive 
chains and clusters, including: (i) low product quality; (ii) limited access to capital; 
(iii) lack of economies of scale; (iv) weak organizational capacity; and (v) limited 
capacity to innovate. Regarding access to capital, Sanguinetti (2011) identifies 
access to financial services as one of the main restrictions faced by rural areas of 
regional economies, and Lapelle (2007) finds that more than 80% of SMEs in 
regional economies are self-financing. 

1.15 Weaknesses in institutions, governance, and social participation. The various 
provinces are distinctly heterogeneous in terms of their institutional capacities. The 
provinces in the NWA and NEA have institutional quality gaps averaging -2.3 
and -1.2, respectively This means that, compared to the national average, these 
regions are being left behind. (Villalobos, 2015, CDC Argentina). In terms of social 
participation, which is an integral part of governance, unequal access for and 
participation by women is a key weakness. The URC report entitled “Las nuevas 
generaciones de mujeres rurales como promotoras de cambio (2015)” [New 
generations of rural women as agents of change] conducts a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the needs of and opportunities for young rural women. This 
study provides evidence of the relatively low impact of participation among women 
in rural areas, although regional differences are noteworthy (between 5% and 20%), 
and for young women facing a series of disadvantages that intensify in remote rural 
areas, the differences are related to difficulties participating in the labor market while 
caring for members of the household. PROSAP project design has found that only 
5% of the beneficiaries of training or technical assistance are women, and only 
between 0.3% and 3% of land owners in irrigator organizations are women.  

 Progress and outcomes of PROSAP loans from the CLIPP 

1.16 The national government implemented PROSAP in the mid-1990s to support 
agricultural development in the rural economies of the non-Pampa provinces. The 
implementation of this program was mainly focused on the construction of rural 
public works. PROSAP’s first phase was financed by the Bank through operation 
899/OC-AR. Based on that program’s outcomes, in 2008, the Government of 
Argentina requested a CCLIP (AR-X1006) for US$600 million. The CCLIP began 
with operation 1956/OC-AR (PROSAP II), execution of which completed in 2014. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
The second operation, 2573/OC-AR (PROSAP III) was approved in 2011. Its level 
of execution is 90%, and it is set for closure in March 2017. Project completion 
reports (PCR) for loans 899/OC-AR and 1956/OC-AR, as well as the midterm 
evaluation for 2573/OC-AR, describe in detail the outputs and outcomes achieved, 
as well as the lessons learned in each operation. The following table summarizes 
the scope and main outputs of the PROSAP operations.  

 
Table 2. Outputs of PROSAP operations 

 
PROSAP I: 
899/OC-AR 

PROSAP II: 

1956/OC-AR 

First operation 
under the 

CCLIP 

PROSAP III: 
2573/OC-AR 

Second 
operation under 

the CCLIP 

Loan amounts (millions of US$) 322 200 230 

Irrigation and drainage systems built (km) 294 154 374 

Hectares irrigated 137,521 73,038 59,560 

Beneficiaries of irrigation systems 12,769 14,489 5,269 

Rural roads improved (km) 482 339 49  

Rural electrification (km of power lines) 5,251 1,020 45  

Producers receiving services, technical 
assistance, and training 

111,819 34,039 149,111 

Business plans financed—
Nonreimbursable contribution (NRC) 

133 85 229 

 

1.17 The types of outputs that have been generated from PROSAP I to PROSAP III 
reflect the evolution of the interventions from an approach predominately aimed at 
physical infrastructure to interventions that are more balanced with technical 
assistance and soft components on management and market development. The 
PCRs for the completed PROSAP projects show that they have achieved the direct 
outcomes and effects expected, including: (i) productive overhaul of irrigation 
projects, with increases in surface area irrigated, better water availability and quality 
throughout the year for irrigators, and improved irrigation efficiency; (ii) improved 
productivity at the level of individual farms for specific crops; (iii) irrigator 
organizations strengthened and taking over the operation, maintenance, and 
financial management of their systems; (iv) the rural roads that were financed are 
usable year-round; and (v) development and consolidation of clusters that have 
been able to diversify into and/or export processed products for the first time. An 
ex post economic assessment of the Canal del Norte and 25 de Mayo, San Juan 
rehabilitation projects and the project to improve rural roads in productive areas in 
Entre Ríos, Zone VII, based on surveys conducted upon project completion shows 
that both projects achieved economic benefits demonstrating their economic return, 
with economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of 21.1% and 19.4%, respectively.  

1.18 Other noteworthy outcomes of PROSAP are institutional and strategic. Among them, 
PROSAP has provided the Ministry of Agroindustry with a land management 
operating model that enables it to strengthen and leverage programs with greater 
scope and coverage in the provinces as part of its provincial strategies for the 
agrifood sector (PSAS) and its development and competitiveness improvement 
plans (DCIP). Among other outcomes, this has enabled the strengthening of an 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
environmental and social area that enables it to move forward on these issues 
proactively, incorporating the inclusion of the gender dimension in rural 
development, as well as addressing climate change, resulting in the Ministry 
qualifying as an executing agency for the Climate Change Adaptation Fund.  

1.19 PROSAP impact evaluations. During the design of PROSAP I and PROSAP II, 
impact evaluations were not performed for experimental designs. Recently, 
PROSAP III has incorporated a methodology for evaluating the impact of quasi-
experimental designs that will enable analysis of how outcomes are attributed to the 
program’s investments. These evaluations will be conducted once PROSAP III ends 
in 2017. However, some partial and complimentary impact evaluations have been 
conducted using data generated by PROSAP projects, as described below. 

1.20 Using quasi-experimental methodologies, Gibbons, Maffioli, and Rossi (2016) and 
Rossi (2016) evaluated the impact of the PROSAP component providing improved 
irrigation channels in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. These studies 
conclude that PROSAP had positive impacts on both production and per-hectare 
productivity, showing that producers who participate in the program produce 9.4% 
more than nonparticipants, with per-hectare yields higher by 7%. 

1.21 Lastly, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture conducted a study 
entitled The Territorial Impact of Public Policies: The case of PROSAP (2016), which 
evaluated the outcomes of PROSAP I projects from 1998 to 2010. The study applied 
a synthetic methodology by comparing administrative data from departments that 
had PROSAP interventions with data from departments that did not. The study finds 
that out of all the departments, those with PROSAP projects had better development 
results in each of the dimensions analyzed and in the total synthetic index. The 
degree of overall development of the departments without PROSAP was almost 
37%, while for those benefiting from PROSAP it was almost 50%. 

 Lessons learned for PROSAP IV design and compliance with CCLIP 
requirements 

1.22 The main lessons learned from the execution of PROSAP II and III were taken into 
account when preparing this operation and formed the basis for the inclusion of 
certain adjustments. The following table provides a summary of these lessons. 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Institutional consolidation. The creation of a 

comprehensive strategic coordination 
structure, with the same functions as the URC, 
has been the basis for better PROSAP project 
performance  

The Ministry of Agroindustry has decided to 
maintain the URC’s functional structure and 
has launched a process to consolidate it 
internally as a specialized agency for 
coordinating investment with external funding. 

Coordination of public interventions in the 
field. Prioritizing projects in the framework of 

the PSASs, which were introduced starting 
with PROSAP II, has enabled participatory 
processes that offer better coordination and 
strategic synergy with a variety of initiatives, 
expanding the area of impact.  

The proposal is to strengthen and consolidate 
these processes for territory and microregion 
management in the framework of the PSAS so 
as to achieve synergies among PROSAP 
projects and other URC projects, in addition to 
better coordinating the intervention of other 
public policy instruments in the same areas. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Priority on investment in public goods, 
complemented by direct support that is 
intelligent and well targeted on producers. 

The initial focus of the first PROSAP on 
building public works demonstrated the need 
for supporting small and medium-sized 
producers with technical assistance and NRC 
for in-field improvements and development of 
new products. The evaluations conducted, 
including those of the Office of Evaluation and 
Oversight (OVE), found that the instrument 
had positive outcomes, but that it was 
necessary to ensure that the NRCs were 
applied with stricter diagnostic, eligibility, real 
market failure justification, measurement, and 
variability criteria.  

The Technology Modernization Fund, which 
includes NRC, has been redesigned based on 
the standards established in the recent 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document: 
(i) focus on technological support for mitigation 
of and adaptation to climate change and 
environmental sustainability; (ii) eligibility of 
small producers lacking access to credit and 
associations organized to establish new local 
networks and value added in new markets; 
(iii) technical assistance to promote the 
participation of the banking sector in financing 
the sector’s technological modernization, in 
coordination with private sector operations; 
and (iv) transient nature of the support and 
transparent, flexible, and evaluable 
mechanisms for granting it.  

Minor infrastructure works for rural 
development. During PROSAP III, a pilot 

program of minor works intended to meet the 
local production needs of small producers was 
piloted successfully. These works, which are 
prioritized in the PSAS, saw high ownership 
and participation levels among producers. 

The minor works component is continued in a 
reinforced context of PSAS interventions in 
priority microregions, along with technical 
assistance for local organizations to ensure 
the works’ sustainability. 

 

1.23 Eligibility of the operation under the CCLIP. Compliance with the eligibility 
conditions for a new individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006 of 17 April 2008 
has been verified: (i) the program is framed within the sectors and components 
defined under the CCLIP; (ii) its objectives are related to the Bank’s country strategy, 
and it is included in the country program; (iii) the aforementioned agreement 
stipulated that the executing agency would be the same for all the individual loans 
under the line, which is the case given that the URC will continue to be in charge of 
execution; (iv) the outcomes obtained by the URC in these two individual operations 
are satisfactory and have been supported by the corresponding performance 
evaluations for PROSAP II and PROSAP III, meaning the project team and national 
authorities can expect the new proposed program will perform satisfactorily; 
(v) regarding the financial execution of PROSAP III, under execution, 84% of the 
loan proceeds have been committed, while 94% of the proceeds have been 
disbursed; and (vi) the borrower and executing agency have fulfilled the conditions 
of the loan contract and the Bank’s policies on disbursements and procurement of 
goods and services, including updated financial statements.3 

 Design of PROSAP IV  

1.24 As the third individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006, PROSAP IV has the same 
design as the first two operations. Specifically, PROSAP IV is designed to bolster 

                                                
3  The most recent report including audited financial statements includes a minor qualification that does not 

affect the reasonableness thereof. This minor qualification refers to a debt observed by the Office of the 
National Auditor General between contractors and the provinces of Mendoza, Entre Ríos, and Catamarca, 
set forth in a note to the financial statements, representing an integral part thereof. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
local production systems via the strengthening of critical local assets (public goods: 
the economic infrastructure—irrigation, transportation, energy, social capital—
business culture; quality of regional associations and business networks) and 
improve the effectiveness of the intergovernmental framework. These actions 
contribute to improving the efficiency of local production systems by creating positive 
externalities through clustering and by resolving market and coordination failures. 

1.25 In particular, PROSAP IV will strengthen local development mechanisms, bolstering 
public-private partnerships in order to increase the competitiveness of producers 
and their associations. Also, the following specific objectives will be consolidated 
and strengthened: (i) internalization of measures for adapting to climate change with 
special emphasis on managing water resources and implementing climate-smart 
irrigation systems; (ii) the comprehensive incorporation of the gender dimension in 
the program through implementation of specific gender action plans for each 
provincial public investment project that include gender diagnostics, training, 
technical assistance, access to available funds, and monitoring of indicators; and 
(iii) consolidation of mechanisms for measuring outcomes and impacts.  

1.26 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 
2010-2020, and the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019. The 
program is consistent with UIS 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and strategically 
aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation through 
investments in productive public infrastructure and technical assistance that will 
enable increases in the productivity of rural producers in the program’s work areas. 
The program is also in line with the crosscutting issue of climate change and 
environmental sustainability through improved use of water and land via investments 
in irrigation technology. A full 100% of the proceeds of the operation are invested in 
climate change adaptation activities, according to the as climate financing for 
adaptation to climate change according to the multilateral development banks’ joint 
methodology for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB 
Group target of increasing financing for projects related to climate change to 30% of 
all operation approvals through 2020. The program provides additionality in terms of 
gender equality through specific activities for promoting the participation of women 
in the training provided by the program through gender action plans. In addition, the 
program will contribute to the goals of CRF 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) via 
the indicator of the number of beneficiaries that improve their management and use 
of natural resources. 

1.27 Alignment with the IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB 
Country Strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document GN-2687), in particular with 
the priority area “Alleviating Obstacles to Growth” in the area of rural and agricultural 
development, the objectives of which include supporting investment programs in 
basic rural infrastructure in regional economies. It is also aligned with the priorities 
of the new Country Strategy with Argentina (2016-2019), which is in the approval 
process as of the distribution date of this loan proposal, in particular with the 
following strategic areas: (i) business climate improvement by fostering 
environmentally sustainable solutions; and (ii) strengthening of private-sector 
integration and insertion into value chains by developing public goods for innovation 
and cluster development.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.28 The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development 
of regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent 
with this purpose. Specifically, the third individual operation proposed herein seeks 
improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small 
and medium-sized agricultural producers, with a focus on strengthening resilience 
to climate change. The program is structured in two main components. 

1.29 Component 1: Investment to support competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$80.2 million). This component includes: (i) a subcomponent for strengthening 
public infrastructure of major works aimed at increasing the coverage and quality of 
rural infrastructure in the provinces by executing the public investment projects 
prioritized in the PSAS. Investments include the rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage systems, forest fire prevention, and tertiary roads in climactically vulnerable 
areas with a focus on adaptation and resilience, and (ii) a subcomponent for minor 
infrastructure works for building, overhauling, or expanding public works and 
community improvements. All investments include financing for the technical 
assistance and training necessary for execution, use, and maintenance of the works 
and for strengthening local governance and the provincial and municipal agencies 
that manage water resources for irrigation while managing the promotion of 
participation by women. The objective of all the works and activities under this 
component is to support adaptation of the agricultural productive activity to scenarios 
and conditions of climactic vulnerability, with technical designs that take those 
scenarios into account in the long-term.  

1.30 The major infrastructure works to be financed whose final technical, economic, 
social, climactic, and environmental designs are in place are the following:  

 

Table 4. Major Works Projects 

Project 

Total 
amount 

(US$ 
millions) 

Lining of the of the upper section of the Cacique Guaymallén irrigation channel. 
First section. Mendoza 

21.5 

Improvements to the Colorado River irrigation system. Second stage. Colonia 
Santa Rosa. Salta 

13.9 

Improvements to the Benavidez Gral. 9 de Julio Canal system. Departments of 
Rivadavia, Chimbas, Santa Lucía, and 9 de Julio. San Juan 

17.7 

Development of the Tala River system irrigation area. Department of Trancas. 
Tucumán 

19.4 

Improvement of rural roads in productive areas of the province of Corrientes. 
Provincial Route 13 

10.4 

Improvement of provincial fire management services for preventing and 
controlling fires in the Northwest of Chubut 

6.1 

Total 89.1 

 

1.31 For their part, the minor works being prioritized and whose technical, economic, and 
environmental designs are in place are: (i) overhaul of systems for surface irrigation 
and increasing production yields, located in Anjullon, La Rioja; (ii) irrigation 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677496
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677507
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677534
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677541
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677483
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
improvement project in Colalao del Valle, Tucumán; (iii) water system improvement 
project in Angulos, La Rioja; (iv) improvements to the irrigation infrastructure of the 
water system in Figueroa, Santiago del Estero; and (v) micro reservoirs in the Cano 
River basin, Córdoba.  

1.32 Component 2: Support services for competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$14.4 million). This component finances technical assistance and business 
plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness and value-added of agricultural 
products in regional economies, with a priority on complementing the major and 
minor works projects of Component 1. The criteria for prioritizing and selecting 
business plans and technical assistance activities is detailed in the program 
Operating Regulations and the technical annexes for each of the three instruments, 
with technical, economic, financial, institutional, social, and environmental feasibility 
being a priority prerequisite: (i) Technology modernization fund, which uses NRCs 
to cofinance in-field  and partnership-building projects that contribute to closing 
technological gaps, bolstering value added at origin; and promoting environmentally 
sustainable practices and climate smart agriculture (CSA) to address the challenges 
of climate change. The focus of the fund is generating positive externalities and 
seeking synergies with private initiatives that promote producer access to formal 
banking and its financial product lines, including access to green financing;4 
(ii) Territorial development initiatives for financing development projects and 
consolidating agrifood clusters that are formulated and prioritized in the participatory 
framework of the DCIPs, which bring together public/private actors with 
scientific/technology actors and producers in the provinces. These projects finance 
technical assistance activities, generating knowledge and cutting edge technology 
that benefit the cluster and the regions where they are developed; (iii) Institutional 
strengthening and preinvestment, providing underlying and crosscutting support for 
technical assistance and training activities to improve management in provincial 
institutions, including raising awareness on climate change and improving capacities 
to identify, prepare, and monitor public investment projects. 

1.33 The program’s beneficiary provinces are the non-Pampa provinces, which will be 
prioritized based on the criteria set forth in the program’s Operating Regulations, 
including: (i) relative degree to which they lag behind; (ii) vulnerability to climate 
change; (iii) provincial sector strategies with a time horizon of at least 10 years; 
(iv) provincial association in place with adequate human and technical resources; 
and (v) due authorizations in place for the province to take on debt in order to accept 
PROSAP resources. The projects are chosen through a planning process consistent 
with the priorities of Argentina’s CDCs and the diagnostics performed. The program 
Operating Regulations defines project eligibility criteria, considering the different 
decision levels, type of project, criteria for analysis, and the project cycle from 
identification and preparation through to approval and execution.  

1.34 Program coordination, monitoring, and evaluation will also be financed. 
Under this item, support will be provided for the strengthening, operation, and 
maintenance of the project monitoring and evaluation system; the URC’s 
incremental operating expenses; the preparation of studies, including impact 

                                                
4  MIF project AR-T1170 includes financing technology packages for small producers and their cooperatives 

through a new line of credit between the Fund and Banco Credicoop. As part of the actions to integrate the 
IDB Group, once the MIF operation is approved, the proposal is to offer PROSAP producers this line of credit.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677611
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
evaluations, progress reports, and audit reports; and environmental and social 
monitoring. 

C. Key results indicators  

1.35 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the executing agency 
(Annex II). It includes indicators for impact, as well as outcomes and outputs, with 
their corresponding baseline values, targets, and means of verification. The main 
outputs include 31,638 hectares under irrigation, 71 km of main irrigation channels; 
and 44 km of rural roads. The main outcomes expected from the sample projects 
are described in Table 5. The program is expected to directly benefit 18,200 rural 
producers in six provinces. Over the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected 
in higher gross value of the production of rural producers and lower losses from 
drought associated with climate change. 

 

Table 5. Key Results Matrix Indicators 

Outcomes 
Time of 

measurement 
Proposed indicators 

Improved productivity for producers 
served by financed irrigation systems. 

Year 4  Average increase in land productivity 
(including both agriculture and livestock). 

Greater irrigation water use efficiency by 
rehabilitated systems. 

Year 4  Volume of water delivered to the farms / 
Volume of water that enters the system. 

Improved rural accessibility on Route 13 in 
the province of Corrientes. 

Year 4  Lower number of impassable days. 

Reduction of the average area affected 
annually by fire. 

Year 4  Average area affected by fire in the 
province of Chubut. 

Diversification of markets and/or products 
in regions served by the program. 

Annual  Number of business initiatives that 
increase sales by at least 20%. 

Users who adopt technologies for 
adaptation to climate change. 

Annual  Number of agricultural and livestock 
producers adopting pressurized irrigation 
technologies. 

1.36 Economic viability of the program. Overall analysis of the program yields an 
average weighted EIRR of 20.6% for a time horizon of 20 years. The benefits include 
marginal changes to productivity and increases in the area under irrigation. The 
costs include the total investment in the program, opportunity costs for training the 
farmers; operation and maintenance; and additional investment on the plot (see 
Annex). At a discount rate of 12%, overall net present value (NPV) is 
US$77.7 million. The sensitivity analysis considered: (i) modification of investment 
costs; (ii) changes in crop yields; (iii) changes in the costs of investment 
sustainability; (iv) delays in benefit realization; and (v) technology adoption rates. 
For a 30% increase in costs, the NPV is US$52.3 million, and the EIRR is 16.9%. 
For a three-year delay in benefit realization, the NPV is US$77.7 million and EIRR 
is 17.1%. For an adoption rate of 70%, the EIRR is 15.5%, with NPV of 
US$28.3 million.  

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments and costs  

2.1 The program’s cost is US$131,426,000, of which the Bank will finance 
US$100 million, chargeable to the Ordinary Capital in United States dollars under 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
CCLIP AR-X1006.5 The needed for the works and interventions analyzed accounts 
for 100% of the available financing. It will be structured as an investment loan, with 
an execution period of four years, taking into consideration that the major works to 
be financed are all at the stage of executable projects ready for public tender, and 
that the annual disbursements under PROSAP III over the last four years have 
demonstrated execution levels in keeping with the proposed planning.  

 

Table 6. Program cost and financing (in US$) 

Investment categories* IDB 
Local 

contribution 
Total % 

1. Component 1: Support investments 80,200,000 26,476,000 106,676,000 81 

1.1  Strengthening public infrastructure 73,000,000 26,476,000 99,476,000 76 

1.2 Minor works 7,200,000 0 7,200,000 5 

2. Component 2: Support Services  14,400,000 3,600,000 18,000,000 14 

2.1  Technology modernization fund 5,600,000 1,400,000 7,000,000 5 

2.2  Territorial development initiatives 6,400,000 1,600,000 8,000,000 6 

2.3  Provincial institutional strengthening 2,400,000 600,000 3,000,000 2 

3.  Management, monitoring, and evaluation 5,400,000 1,350,000 6,750,000 5 

3.1  Management 5,013,900 1,253,475 6,267,375 5 

3.1  Monitoring and evaluation (includes 
environmental and social) 

378,000 94,500 472,500 0 

3.2  Audits 8,100 2,025 10,125 0 

Total 100,000,000 31,426,000 131,426,000 100 

Percentage 76 24 100   

 

2.2 Bank financing will be disbursed according to the timetable provided in Table 7 and 
detailed in the Multiyear Execution Plan. 

 

Table 7. Estimated disbursement timetable (in thousands of US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total % 

IDB 23,626.00 33,530.00 34,194.00 8,650.00 100,000.00 76% 

Local 7,513.00 10,631.60 10,797.60 2,483.80 31,426.00 24% 

Total 31,139.00 44,161.60 44,991.60 11,133.80 131,426.00 100% 

% 24% 34% 34% 8% 100%  

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), and pursuant to the applied safeguards forms, this 
program has been classified as a category “B” operation. This program is designed 
to promote better management of natural resources related to agricultural production 
and improve producers’ climate resilience and adaptation. Irrigation projects 

                                                
5  Total financing of the CCLIP (AR-X1006) was set at US$600 million, of which US$200 million were executed 

under the first operation (1956/OC-AR) and US$230 million were allocated to the second operation 
(2573/OC-AR), leaving US$170 million available. In the context of programming loans with the Bank for 2016, 
the government has decided to allocate US$100 million to the financing of this third operation, leaving a 
remainder of US$70 million. No additional operations are expected. 



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
internalize measures for adapting to hydrometeorological and climate change risks 
(e.g., expanding drainage for rural roads, reviewing hydrological series for irrigation 
works), as well as elements of sustainability and water use efficiency. Another 
benefit is climate change mitigation through the project to improve rural roads in 
Corrientes by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 69.9 tons of CO2 equivalent 
thanks to reductions in fuel consumption, or an emissions cut of 43.2% from the 
scenario without the project. 

2.4 The execution of the PROSAP program is governed by the program Operating 
Regulations and the respective Environmental and Social Manual (ESM), with 
updated guides for environmental and social evaluation, including involuntary 
resettlement and mitigation and control procedures, as well as public consultation 
and monitoring and evaluation. In line with directive B.14 of Operational Policy 
OP-703, during preparation, an independent socioenvironmental review of the 
execution of PROSAP III was conducted. It found that the executing agencies had 
improved their socioenvironmental management capacity, and no 
socioenvironmental liabilities were identified. 

2.5 All of the infrastructure projects have socioenvironmental impact studies and 
environmental and social management plans that comply with IDB policies. The 
program Operating Regulations and ESM were reviewed mainly to incorporate 
gender equality opportunities and actions to prevent and adapt to the risks from 
disasters and climate change. Also, monitoring measures were strengthened by 
defining evaluation and monitoring indicators. Where applicable, projects include 
plans to ensure that indigenous peoples share in the projects’ benefits, in keeping 
with Operational Policy OP-765. Plans are also in place to address effects on assets, 
in keeping with Operational Policy OP-710. Likewise, all the projects include plans 
for pest management in their training and assistance programs, as well as plans for 
taking action on gender with a view toward increasing the participation of women in 
training programs, technical assistance, and other services, consistent with 
Operational Policy OP-761 of the Bank. 

2.6 Participatory consultative meetings were held in the areas to benefit from the 
projects as part of the design process. Prior to the Bank’s no objection for contracting 
the works, where necessary, the provinces will submit the pertinent environmental 
permits granted by the corresponding authorities. As established in the program 
Operating Regulations, prior to issuing the public tender for the works, the URC will 
present evidence to the Bank that it has obtained those permits. The environmental 
and social studies are available for consultation at the URC/PROSAP and Bank 
websites. The environmental and social management report (ESMR) summarizes 
the outcomes of and recommendations for environmental and social management 
to ensure the operation’s environmental and social sustainability. The borrower 
agrees to carry out—through the executing agency—the program activities in 
accordance with the environmental and social standards and recommendations 
included in the program Operating Regulations, including its ESM and the program’s 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The special contractual 
conditions on environmental and social management are detailed in paragraph 6.4 
of the ESMR. 

http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746


 - 15 - 
 
 

 
C. Fiduciary risks  

2.7 The main fiduciary risks identified are associated with processes of interaction 
between the national and provincial levels, which are often complex. These risks 
include: (i) delays in procurement processes; (ii) delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by the provinces and deficient quality thereof; and 
(iii) delays in providing accounting information to the Bank. Experience with 
execution has demonstrated that these risks are medium, that the executing agency 
has adequate execution capacity, and that the executing agency has been able to 
manage the aforementioned risks effectively in previous operations. The following 
were agreed upon as the main mitigation measures: (i) quarterly update and 
management of the procurement plan; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 2.3: 
Provincial Institution Strengthening; and (iii) permanent 65% flexibility for justification 
of expenses for disbursement of advances of funds (see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks and special issues  

2.8 An inherent risk involved in rural infrastructure works is weak commitment by 
beneficiaries to operating and maintaining the infrastructure works. The main 
mitigation measure for this comes in the framework of participatory processes for 
local empowerment, as well as the implementation of training and technical 
assistance programs. Also, the risks associated with changes to the national and 
provincial government are: weak interagency coordination between the program’s 
executing agencies, as well as scattered and uncoordinated implementation of 
external financing for agricultural projects The main mitigation measure is thus the 
implementation of targeted training plans for the provincial execution units. 

2.9 Regarding the program’s overall sustainability, at the level of the provincial 
governments and producer organizations, PROSAP has been able to build 
management mechanisms and secure commitments to ensure the operation and 
maintenance of the works. It has also been able to consolidate the capacities and 
processes developed in Component 2 (See program Operating Regulations).  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower is the Argentine Republic, and the Ministry of Agroindustry will be the 
executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC). The URC will be 
responsible for the execution, administration, and supervision of the program. Within 
it, the Program and Project Management Area will be in charge of executing the 
activities of the projects financed under the program. It will also have support from 
the crosscutting support areas and units that are part of the URC. 

3.2 The Ministry of Agroindustry is responsible for the local counterpart of the national 
projects. The URC’s main responsibilities include: preparing the budget and 
controlling and supervising fulfillment of the local contribution by the provinces and 
other participating agencies; supervising and coordinating the preparation of the 
AWPs, procurement plans, and financial plans; preparing and verifying 
disbursement requests; supervising work and providing legal and administrative 
support to the subexecuting agencies in procurement processes; paying contractors 
and suppliers; coordinating all program activities with the provinces and other 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
beneficiaries; monitoring and evaluating project and program activities; and 
commissioning and serving as counterpart for the external audit. 

3.3 The program’s execution is governed by the program Operating Regulations, which 
contain the details required to guide and regulate program operations, including the 
requirements for transferring resources to the provincial projects. The program 
Operating Regulations and their annexes also describe the specific execution 
mechanism for each component. As a special condition precedent to the first 
disbursement of loan proceeds, the executing agency, through the URC, will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the ESM. The review 
will include updating the description of the program’s components and excluding 
investment projects with Category “A” socioenvironmental impacts under the 
environmental and social safeguard policies from eligibility. 

3.4 Component 1 of the program is executed through the URC’s Program and Project 
Management area and its Infrastructure and Services unit, which coordinates the 
relationships with the liaison entities and the units executing the projects at the 
provincial level, as established in the program Operating Regulations. For each 
case, specific planning, execution, monitoring, and evaluation functions are 
established for the projects. Component 2 of the program is executed by the 
Program and Project Management area through its Competitiveness unit and 
through NRC. The process for executing this component includes the following 
phases: identification and eligibility of clusters and territorial initiatives based on 
prioritization criteria; preparation and evaluation of specific plans for improving 
competitiveness; and implementation, monitoring, and technical evaluation of the 
projects. The execution of both components is supported by the following 
crosscutting areas of the URC: institutional development, environmental 
management, legal issues, internal control, finance and accounting, procurement, 
and management oversight and outcomes. 

3.5 Furthermore, the main fiduciary measures to be applied to the proposed operation 
were agreed upon during preparation. These measures are described in Annex III 
and include aspects of disbursements and audits, as well as thresholds for 
procurement processes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies and procedures as 
set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.6 Monitoring. The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. During project 
execution, the executing agency will prepare and send the Bank a monitoring report 
no later than 60 days from the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus 
on fulfillment of the output indicators and progress on outcomes, identifying 
problems encountered, and corrective measures taken. No later than during the last 
quarter of each year during project execution, the executing agency will submit the 
AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction. 

3.7 Evaluation. The executing agency will conduct two independent evaluations funded 
by the loan proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no 
later than 90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed or two years 
have passed from the date of the Bank’s first disbursement of the loan proceeds, 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756


 - 17 - 
 
 

 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% 
of the loan proceeds have been disbursed by the Bank. These reports will include: 
(i) an evaluation of the quality of the data provided by the monitoring system; (ii) the 
level of fulfillment of the expected outputs, outcomes, and progress on the expected 
impacts as established in the Results Matrix; and (iii) the level of compliance with 
the ESMPs for the program and the investment projects, including a summary of the 
socioenvironmental audits and the progress in the social and environmental 
indicators. 

3.8 Impact evaluation. Evaluation of the program’s impact will have two parts. The 
proposed impact evaluation for public infrastructure will be conducted for two 
irrigation systems and a rural road. Impact estimates will be based on the difference 
in differences method applied to a panel of homes divided into a treatment group 
and a control group. For this, two surveys—a baseline and a final evaluation—are 
planned. The sample size for the treatment group will be 465, as well as 465 for the 
control group (total for the three projects). For the beneficiaries of the public 
investment projects, the control group will be comprised of farmers with no access 
to irrigation systems and/or improved roads. Farmers will be selected at random 
from the lists available in the executing agency’s archives.  

3.9 To evaluate the impact of the NRCs and clusters, the phase-in and difference in 
differences methods will be used. The implementation strategy will identify a 
treatment/control group based on the year in which producers enter the program. 
NRC not involving pressurized irrigation will be included in the evaluation (as they 
are included in the evaluation of public works investment). Thus, 220 NRCs will be 
evaluated. The sample will be 155 producers, selected at random from among the 
NRC. The control group will be defined based on farms that requested NRC but did 
not receive funding. 



Annex I - AR-L1198

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2687

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following 

dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to approval to increase the 

likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the 

project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Accounting and Reporting, External control.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of the rural economies through the implementation of individual programs. This third individual operation seeks to improve productivity levels, increase sales and value added of small and medium-scale 

farmers, with a focus on building resilience to climate change. The program will implement two components: (i) competitiveness support, which includes the strengthening of public infrastructure via major works (rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage, fire prevention in forests, and tertiary rural 

roads), and a sub-component for minor works (public works and community improvement); and (ii) support services for competitiveness comprising: a technological modernization fund, territorial development initiatives and institutional strengthening and pre-investment.

The documentation is well structured, with a solid diagnosis of the problems faced by the prioritized areas and small- and medium-scale producers.

The proposed solution is related to the magnitude of the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the program objectives and shows a clear vertical logic for each component. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis. The lower-

level indicators reflect the design of the two components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact, outcome and output levels with their respective reference values, targets and means for collecting the information. The documentation alludes to rigorous empirical evidence on the 

effectiveness of similar interventions in other countries and Argentina, specifically on the PROSAP.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-benefit analysis for the major works for irrigation and rural roads and for the small works for fire control, and support to the private sector. The study provides results for each intervention, as well as a weighted average which yields a 20.6% IRR, and a 

NPV of US$77.7 million. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on key variables that can affect the benefits and major cost. The conservative scenario finds an IRR of 15.5% with an NPV of US$28.3 million.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes quasi-experimental evaluations to measure the impact of the irrigation systems, rural roads, and the non-reimbursable funds. The strategy is to measure the impact of these interventions, also the incremental impact of receiving two types of 

treatment (irrigation + non-reimbursable funds). Importantly, no rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, country and 

Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and are classified as medium risks.  All of them include mitigation actions and performance indicators.

Gender action plans will be prepared for each major public work in order to facilitate the 

participation of women in training and technical assistance.

No rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for 

multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge 

base of the sector, country and Bank.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and Evaluation National System.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises financed (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)

-Roads built or upgraded  (km)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public service 

delivery (#)

Aligned

Improvement of rural infrastructure in regional economies, principally irrigation and drainage, that 

contribute to improving productivity and access to markets

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

SUMMARY RESULTS MATRIX 

(SEE COMPLETE RESULTS MATRIX) 

 

General objective: To contribute to the competitiveness and development of regional rural economies. 

 

Specific objective: To improve productivity and increase sales and value-added for small and medium-sized producers, with a focus on 
strengthening resilience to climate change. 

 

Impact Units 
Baseline Target* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Impact 1: Higher per-farmer annual 
gross production value in the area 
of influence of the selected projects 

US$/farm 50,032 2016 75,561 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Reports on major and 
minor works design; NRC; 
target reflects the target 
group 

Impact 2: Decreased production 
losses associated with drought  

% of total 
production/ 
farm/year 

20.5% 2016 15% 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Irrigation systems selected 
for impact evaluation (San 
Juan and Salta). Climate 
change is the main cause 
of increased drought in the 
program’s intervention 
area 

*  Target by program end. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929


Annex II 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

1. Improved productivity for 
producers served by financed 
irrigation systems  

       

Indicator: 

Average increase in land 
productivity (including both 
agriculture and livestock 
producers) 

US$/Ha 5,408 2016 6,866 2020 

Program monitoring and 
evaluation reports; 
baseline survey and 
ex post evaluations 

The assessment of 
physical productivity per 
hectare using the baseline 
product price for each 
project 

2. Greater irrigation water use 
efficiency by rehabilitated 
systems 

      
 

Indicator: 

Volume of water delivered to the 
farms / Volume of water that 
enters the system. 

% 66 2016 90 2020 

Individual project 
completion reports; final 
evaluation; impact 
assessment 

Includes all four irrigation 
systems 

3. Improved rural accessibility on 
Route 13 in the province of 
Corrientes 

       

Indicator: 

Lower number of impassable 
days 

Days 80 2016 30 2020 
Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline and 
final program surveys 

 

4. Reduction of the average area 
affected annually by fire 

      
 

Indicator:  

Average area affected by fire in 
the province of Chubut 

Ha 1,439.03 2016 719.5 2020 
Provincial firefighting 
service 

 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

5. Diversification of markets 
and/or products in regions 
served by the program. 

       

Indicator: 

Number of business initiatives 
that increase sales by at least 
20%. 

Initiatives 0 2016 22 2020 

Cluster diagnostic 
reports; design of 
productive initiatives; 
baseline and end-of-
program surveys 

Includes initiatives 
financed by: (i) the 
technology modernization 
fund; and (ii) territorial 
development initiatives 

6. Users who adopt technologies 
for adapting to climate change. 

      
Beneficiaries of major 
irrigation projects with 
support from Component 2 
or another source of 
financing for in-field 
investments. Pressurized 
irrigation includes drip 
irrigation, micro spray, 
spray, and hose 

Indicator: 

Number of agricultural and 
livestock producers adopting 
pressurized irrigation 
technologies 

People 0 2016 1,600 2020 
Project design reports; 
final evaluation report; 
URC reports 

 
 
 
 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: Argentina 

Project number: AR-1198 

Name: Provincial Agricultural Services Program – PROSAP IV 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Prepared by: Marisol Pinto Bernal (FMP/CAR), Teodoro Noel (FMP/CAR), 
and Carlos Carpizo (FMP/CAR) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The Provincial Agricultural Services Program (PROSAP IV) will be executed by the 
Ministry of Agroindustry through the PROSAP Execution Unit, supervised by the Unit 
for Rural Change (URC) created by MAGyP Resolution 45 of 9 December 2009, 
which have the experience and installed capacity to execute projects partially 
financed with Bank resources. 

1.2 PROSAP IV is the third PROSAP operation to be executed by the URC under CLIPP 
AR-X1006. The plan is to simultaneously execute two programs—PROSAP III 
(2573/OC-AR) and PROSAP IV—for several months until the first operation 
concludes in mid-2017.  

1.3 The risk assessment for this operation was performed in the framework of a Project 
Risk Management (PRM) workshop with the executing agency. The results of the 
methodology returned a medium level of financial management risk and a medium 
level of procurement risk. 

1.4 There were no plans to conduct a new institutional capacity assessment because 
the URC maintains the same internal structure and technical and management 
team, ensuring the adequate capacity it has demonstrated during execution of 
PROSAP III (2573/OC-AR) and three other IDB operations currently being executed 
(2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, and 3255/OC-AR). The URC’s adequate institutional 
capacity has also been verified continually through oversight visits by the Bank’s 
fiduciary team.  

1.5 The program does not include financing from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. A number of different actors are involved in 
execution and are coordinated by the URC/PROSAP.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 As noted, the URC has a long track record of executing IDB-financed programs. 
Starting in 2009, the URC satisfactorily completed execution of two IDB operations 
(1956/OC-AR PROSAP II and 2086/OC-AR PROVIAR). Counting completed 
programs and programs currently being executed, the URC has managed a total of 
six Bank-financed projects.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

2.2 The fiduciary systems used for program execution are the budgetary system via the 
Integrated Financial Information System (IFIS) and the Information and Accounting 
System (UEPEX). 

2.3 As far as procurement of goods and services, the URC/PROSAP uses Bank policies 
for centralized purchases and verifies the application of those policies for the 
purchasing conducted at the provincial level. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 For analysis of the project’s fiduciary risks, the Bank’s PRM methodology was used 
to identify and rate fiduciary risks, and the project RMM was developed. The project’s 
fiduciary risk (financial and procurement) was determined to be medium and is 
related to the processes of interaction between the national and provincial levels, 
which are often complex. Nevertheless, experience has demonstrated that the 
executing agency has adequate execution capacity and has been able to manage 
the risks effectively.  

3.2 The supervision modality applicable to financial management and procurement has 
been determined based on the risks identified, although it could change during 
project execution pursuant to the evaluations conducted.  

 

Institutional Capacity and Fiduciary Risk 

Institutional Capacity N/A Tool: N/A 

Fiduciary risks Medium Tool: PRM 

Type 
of risk1 

Risk Rating Mitigation Actions 

FM 
Delays in submitting 
accounting information 

Medium 

Prepare and execute a plan for financial 
management staff to conduct annual visits 
to the execution unit to proactively identify 
delays in execution by coexecuting 
agencies. 

Apply the permanent 65% flexibility for 
justification of expenses for disbursement 
of advances of funds. 

P 

Delays in procurement 
processes due to weak 
planning that prevents early 
identification of appropriate 
procurement strategy 

Medium 

Comprehensive planning of the operation 
to coordinate the AWP with the 
procurement plan. 

Updating and management of the 
procurement plan as set forth in Article 
6.01(c) of the General Conditions. 

 

Delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by 
the provinces and deficient 
quality thereof 

Medium 
Implementation of the Provincial 
Institutional Strengthening subcomponent. 

 

                                                
1  Financial Management (FM); Procurement (P). 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 To expedite negotiation of the contract by the project team, and the Legal 
Department in particular, the following is a list of agreements and requirements that, 
where applicable, will be taken into consideration in the Special Provisions or the 
Annex. They may be updated or changed during program execution, if necessary, 
with the corresponding documentation and authorization from the Bank. 

a. Conditions precedent to the first disbursement: The executing agency will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the Environmental 
and Social Manual (ESM).  

b. Disbursement management: The executing agency will submit the program’s 
financial planning in keeping with the guidelines agreed upon by the Bank and 
the country. The minimum percentage required for replenishment of an 
advance of funds will be 65%, as this is a decentralized program with complex 
execution (permanent flexibility). 

c. Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, 
the parties agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the one indicated in 
paragraph (b)(i) of that Article. For the purposes of determining the equivalent 
of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the local contribution or 
reimbursement of expenses charged to the loan, the agreed-upon exchange 
rate will be the rate established by the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic 
on the first working day of the month in which the borrower, the executing 
agency, or any other individual or legal entity delegated the authority to incur 
expenditures makes the corresponding payment to the contractor, supplier, or 
beneficiary. In addition, the exchange rate indicated in paragraph (b)(i) of 
Article 4.10 of the General Conditions will be used to determine the 
equivalence of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the 
proceeds of the loan and the local contribution.  

d. Financial oversight: For the purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the 
loan portfolio to the capacity of the Office of the National Auditor General (AGN) 
to conduct audits in a timely manner, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct audits of the program. 

e. Other specific requirements for the financial management of projects that 
will be established in the contract or agreement to be signed with the Bank: 
Disbursements will be made in accordance with the provisions of Articles 4.03, 
4.04, 4.05, 4.06, and 4.07 of the General Conditions of the loan contract. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 Procurement execution 

5.1 The March 2011 Policy for the procurement of works and goods financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the March 2011 
Policy for selection and contracting of consultants financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9) will be applied. It has also been agreed 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

with the executing agency that the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) will 
be used for the program’s procurement planning administration and management. 

5.2 Management of the proceeds from the transfers to be made under the program2 will 
be decentralized and under the supervision of the URC/PROSEP, in accordance 
with the program Operating Regulations. The URC/PROSAP will be responsible for 
following the guidelines established in the loan contract for all procurement under 
the program, both centralized and decentralized. 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Works, goods, 
and nonconsulting services contracts3 arising under the project and subject to 
international competitive bidding (ICB) will be executed using the Bank’s 
standard bidding documents (SBDs). Bidding processes subject to national 
competitive bidding (NCB) will be executed using national bidding documents 
acceptable to the Bank. The program’s sector specialist is responsible for 
reviewing the technical specifications for procurement when selection 
processes are being prepared. No direct contracting is provided for in these 
categories, but any direct contracting provided for during the course of the 
program will be identified in the procurement plans along with the 
corresponding justification. Selection processes requiring prequalification of 
bidders will also be identified.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Consulting services contracted 
under the project will be included in the procurement plan and executed using 
the standard request for proposals (SRP) issued by the Bank. 

 Selection of individual consultants: In cases identified in the procurement 
plans, individual consultants will be contracted pursuant to the provisions of 
document GN-2350-9, Section V, paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4. For URC/PROSAP 
operations, consultants may be hired by direct selection if, at that time, they 
are performing work under contracts financed by other programs being 
executed by the unit.  

 Training: The procurement plan details the processes that are applied and 
contracted as consulting or nonconsulting services on a case-by-case basis. 

c. Incremental URC expenses: Incremental expenses required during the 
program will include: leasing and services; maintenance; common expenses; 
office supplies, courier and postage, cleaning services, computer supplies, 
insurance, telephone, and minor expenses required for operation of the 
URC/PROSAP that will be financed by the program counterpart and incurred 
in compliance with the administrative procedures of the executing agency. 
These operating expenses do not include salaries for civil servants. Fees, 
travel expenses, per diem, and health insurance expenses required for the 
regular performance of activities and consulting assignments contracted by the 
program will be charged to the loan proceeds under the corresponding 
component.  

                                                
2  Transfers refer to nonreimbursable contributions (NRCs) that are granted to different types of beneficiaries 

selected via the mechanisms described in the program Operating Regulations. 
3  Policies for the procurement of works and goods financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

d. Advance procurement/Retroactive financing: No advance procurement or 
retroactive financing are anticipated. 

e. National preference: For contracts subject to international competitive 
bidding, bids offering goods originating in Argentina will be subject to a price 
preference—pending Bank approval—equivalent to 15%. 

f. Appropriateness of expenditures: The appropriateness of an expenditure—
that is, its terms of reference, technical specifications, and the program 
procurement budget—will be the responsibility of the Project Team Leader and 
will always require no objection prior to the start of the procurement and 
pursuant to the Project Team Leader’s operational discretion. 

g. Other: There are no special provisions regarding grants, land acquisitions, 
rights, or rights-of-way needed for project execution. 

 

Thresholds for International Competitive Bidding and International Shortlists (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist for 

consulting services 

Threshold ≥5,000,000 ≥500,000 ≥500,000 

Note: (1) In addition, contracts worth more than US$200,000 will be listed on the UNDB and Bank websites. 
(2) Goods worth less than US$100,000 can be procured through shopping, as can works for less than 
US$350,000. 

 

 Main procurement items: 

5.3 The following table provides a list of the main procurement items identified for the 
program thus far. 

 

Main Procurement Items 

Activity 
Selection 
method 

Estimated 
tender/announcement 

date 

Estimated 
amount 

Works       

Irrigation works – Tala River, Tucumán 
province. 

ICB 1 May 2017 16,242,821.00 

Irrigation works – Cacique Guaymallen – 
Jocoli system – Mendoza Province. 

ICB 1 February 2017 19,691,407.00 

Road work RP 13 – Corrientes Province ICB 30 October 2016 9,436,386.00 

* To view the 18-month procurement plan, click here. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

5.4 Procurement will be subject to ex post supervision for processes below the NCB 
thresholds for works, goods, and non-consulting services, as well as for consulting 
services of less than US$200,000 All ICB processes, direct contracting, and 

file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313


Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

consulting services of greater than or equal to US$200,000 will be subject to ex ante 
review, as will processes whose complexity or risk justify ex ante supervision. 

5.5 For individual consultants, all contracting for amounts over US$50,000 will be 
subject to ex ante review. Contracting for less than that amount will be subject to 
ex post review. 

5.6 For contracting in the framework of the transfers, the URC/PROSAP will supervise 
to ensure they meet the provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating 
Regulations.  

5.7 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan by reviewing a sample extracted from all the processes carried out 
during the review period. The ex post review reports will include at least one physical 
inspection visit,4 selected from the procurement processes subject to ex post review.  

 

Ex Post Review Threshold 

Works 
Goods and nonconsulting 

services 
Consulting services 

<5,000,000 <500,000 <200,000 

Note: (1) The thresholds established for ex post review are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary 
execution capacity and may be modified by the Bank to the extent that this capacity changes. (2) Goods of less 
than US$100,000 may be procured through shopping, as can works for less than US$350,000. In both cases, 
review will be conducted on an ex post basis. 

 

 Special provisions 

a. Measures to reduce the likelihood of corruption: The provisions set forth in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 on prohibited practices will be followed. 
The executing agency is also responsible for checking the list of firms and 
individuals prohibited from participating in processes financed by multilateral 
development banks. 

b. Other special procedures: Keep the procurement plan updated in 
accordance with project needs and coordinated with project planning. The 
processes carried out under the program will be included in the procurement 
plan approved by the Bank before the public tender is announced. 

 Records and files 

5.8 The contracting area will be in charge of maintaining files on the project procurement 
conducted in the URC/PROSAP, while for procurement in the provinces, the original 
files will be maintained. 

                                                
4  The inspection verifies the existence of the acquisitions, leaving verification of quality and compliance with 

specifications to the sector specialist. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

 Programming and budget  

6.1 The budget of the executing agency includes programmatic categories and other 
classifications by expenditure purpose (line items), including: personnel expenses; 
consumer goods; nonpersonnel services; fixed assets; transfers; financial assets; 
debt service and reduction in other liabilities; and other expenses.  

6.2 The URC is responsible for annual budget preparation and programming. It is in 
charge of carrying out all the procedures involved in preparing the annual budget for 
approval. As the need arises for expanding or reallocated budget items, the URC 
requests the changes and is in charge of securing their approval. The budgeted 
funds are executed via quarterly and monthly accrual quotas assigned by the 
National Budget Office (Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance). 

6.3 No problems are expected in terms of budget management, timeliness of local 
counterpart contributions, or system delays affecting execution.  

 Treasury and disbursement management 

6.4 The National Treasury transfers the local counterpart funds to the URC, into an 
account opened for the program for the exclusive use of this loan, as it is a program 
cofinanced with Bank resources. 

6.5 Disbursements will be made based on a detailed financial plan. Its model has been 
agreed upon with officials from the Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance and 
the Cabinet Leadership. 

 Accounting, information systems, and reporting 

6.6 The URC will use UEPEX as its financial management system. Cash-basis 
accounting will be used and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) will 
be followed when applicable in accordance with established national criteria. The 
following financial reports will be required: (i) financial execution plan for up to 
180 days following a request for an advance of funds; (ii) audited annual financial 
statements as stipulated in Article 7.03 paragraph (a) of the General Conditions of 
the loan contract; and (iii) other reports required by the fiduciary specialists.  

 Internal control and internal audit 

6.7 The national internal control body is the Sindicatura General de la Nación [Office of 
the Comptroller General] (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is 
performed through the Internal Audit Unit. The unit, which reports directly to the 
minister, is in charge of conducting audits and making recommendations pursuant 
to the powers granted under Law 24,156 (Financial Administration Act).  

 External control: External financial audit and project reports 

6.8 In 2011, the Bank concluded a diagnostic on the government auditing practices of 
the AGN, the result of which was to validate the AGN as auditor of Bank projects. 

6.9 However, based on the track record of the promptness of audit submissions, in 
October 2014, it was agreed with Argentina to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to match 
its real compliance capacity. Programs 2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, 3255/OC-AR, 
and 2573/OC-AR are being audited by the AGN. 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

6.10 For purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the loan portfolio to the capacity 
of the AGN to conduct timely audits, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct program audits. 

6.11 Audits will be conducted based on the new terms of reference prepared by the Bank 
in 2014. 

 Financial supervision of the project5 

6.12 The initial financial supervision plan is based on risk and fiduciary capacity 
evaluations conducted on the basis of onsite and desk reviews of the program, and 
includes the scope of operational, financial, and accounting actions; compliance and 
legal considerations; frequency; and identification of responsible parties.  

6.13 In addition to the reports required for processing disbursements and the annual 
audit, another report that will be required for conducting financial supervision will be 
the financial plan.  

 Execution arrangements 

6.14 The details of program execution can be found in the draft Operating Regulations 
and the Proposal for Operation Development. 

 Other financial management agreements and requirements 

6.15 N/A. 

 

                                                
5  See Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Project (OP-273-6) Annex I on application of the 

financial management principles and requirements, requirement 4 on financial oversight.  



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/16 
 
 
 

Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Provincial Agricultural Services 
Program - PROSAP IV. Third Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line 

for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Argentine Republic, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a 
financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Provincial Agricultural Services Program -
PROSAP IV, which constitutes the third individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line 
for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 approved on 16 January 2008 by Resolution 
DE-6/08. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$100,000,000, from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2016) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CSC/IDBDOCS: 40712797 
Pipeline No.: AR-L1198 





