




























































49026-002: Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3633-VlE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in .the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 42. AoriZ Z.OA2

VIE 49026



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated A2. Ap«^ 70^ between SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, 
Ha Giang, and Lang Son (“Project Provinces”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make 
available to the Project Provinces the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ARVC” means agriculture and rural value chain;

(b) “Candidate Subproject” means a candidate subproject for financing 
under the Project, a list of which has been agreed upon between the 
Project Provinces and ADB and provided in the PAM;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);



2

(d) ' “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan to help in carrying out activities as described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the 
Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(f) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and'requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable.) of 
the SPS;

( (h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any
x update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces and

cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(k) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces pursuant to 
the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

( (I) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Onlending Agreement” means, the agreement or agreements entered 
into between the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and each of the 
Project Provinces for the purposes of relending a portion of the 
proceeds of this Loan as specified in Section 3.01 of this Loan 
Agreement;



3

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) . “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project facilities” means facilities developed, constructed, updated 
and/or maintained under the Project;

(t) “Project Province” means each of the Borrower’s provinces of Bac 
Kan, Cao Bang, Ha Giang, and Lang Son where the Project is carried 
out;

(u) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Framework” or 
“REMDF” means the resettlement and ethnic minority development 
framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(v) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Plan” or “REMDP” 
means each resettlement and ethnic minority development plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Project Provinces pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
REMDF and cleared by ADB;

(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces to ADB that describes progress 
with implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the 
REMDPs (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;

(y) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement 
and the relevant provisions of the PAM; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule.set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall (i) make a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Project Provinces through budget allocation, and (ii) 
relend the balance of the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Provinces under the respective 
Onlending Agreements, all upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



5

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 
Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2023 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4. 02. The Borrower, through the Project Provinces, shall 
enable ADB's representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant 
records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project Provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Onlending Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under any Onlending Agreements shall be 
assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates the Project Provinces 
as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or 
permitted under Section 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02 and 
5.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 
Project Provinces pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan 
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as 
if taken by the Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on the Project Provinces under
Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 
of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

State Bank of Vietnam
47-49 LyThai To 
Hanoi, Viet Nam



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(84-4) 38250-612 
(84-4) 38258-385

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2331.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

LEMINH HUNG 
Governor 

State Bank of Viet Nam

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase production, and movement of goods
and passengers within the Project Provinces and to major domestic and international 
markets.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs.

Output 1: Road network connectivity among the Project Provinces 
improved. Carrying out Subprojects to upgrade provincial and district roads, 
including road safety measures and training.

Output 2: Rural water supply improved. Carrying out Subprojects to 
develop water supply schemes.

Output 3: ARVC infrastructure in Lang Son province improved. Carrying 
out Subprojects to support the development of shared horticultural trade and 
marketing services for horticultural commodities, through provision of viability 
gap grants to the selected enterprises and producers groups.

Output 4: Decentralized public asset management processes 
established. Supporting the implementation of the Borrower’s decentralized 
public asset management program.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2023.



10

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.



11

SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed put of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for:

(a) Category 1A, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Bac Kan Province, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and executed and 
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government 
entity) and the Bac Kan Province, and is legally binding upon the 
parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(b) Category 1B, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Cao Bang Province,. in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Cao Bang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(c) Categories 1C and 2, until the Onlending Agreement between the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and the Ha Giang Province, in form 
and substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Ha Giang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms; and

(d) Category 1D, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Lang Son Province, in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Lang Son Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated for 

ADB Financing 
(Dollar)

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account**

Category Subcategory
1 Project Costs 144,686,400

1A. forBac Kan Province* 32,884,373 100% of total expenditure claimed***

1B for Cao Bang Province* ' 33,039,415
100% of total expenditure 
claimed***

1C for Ha Giang Province* 31,418,624
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

1D for Lang Son Province* 47,343,988
100% of total expenditure 
claimed****

2 Consulting Services for Ha Giang Province* 1,587,004
66 percent of total expenditure 
claimed***

3 Interest Charge 3,726,596 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 150,000,000
Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.

** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
*** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services.
**** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services and detailed engineering design consulting services.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) National Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for the respective
Subprojects which involves environmental impacts until it has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s competent 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

7. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject
involving involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous peoples impacts until the relevant 
Project Province has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP for the Subproject 
based on the Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of the REMDP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Fixed Budget Selection for Project audit

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB,
unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement 
Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social, 
Financial and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. 
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Project Provinces and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM 
and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) 
the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the ADB’s Category A environmental criteria as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for each Subproject and all Project facilities are made 
available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related 
Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in 
compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective REMDP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Involuntary Resettlement Category A as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards,
the REMDF or the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to 
ensure , that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the 
Subprojects until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and



17
Schedule 5

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

7. ' The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) the REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the respective REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Indigenous Peoples Category A as defined under the Safeguard 
Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower shall make available and cause the Project Provinces to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and the REMDP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the relevant Project Provinces with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation 
of the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the 
REMDP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project Provinces to do
the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;



18
Schedule 5

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts' 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the REMDP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

f 12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources are allocated 
for implementation of the GAP; and (c) progress on implementation of the GAP, including 
progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced 
labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from using a legally permissible means of expressing 
their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of 
employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, 
information. on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular, reports.

Selection and Implementation of Subprojects

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
only Candidate Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project; (b) Candidate 
Subprojects in each Project Province are taken up in the order of priority as indicated in the 
PAM; (c) feasibility studies and detailed design for such Candidate Subprojects are carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions under the PAM; and (d) only Candidate 



19
Schedule 5

Subproject which meets feasibility criteria as provided in the PAM is financed as a Subproject 
under the Project.

Community Awareness and Beneficiary Participation

16. The Borrower shall ensure that Project Provinces promote active community
awareness and stakeholder participation in the design, implementation and performance 
monitoring of Subprojects, through (a) disseminating the nature of the proposed Works in 
open public forums, and (b) establishing a mechanism for public consultation during Project 
physical implementation activities.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the counterpart
funding required for successful Project implementation is timely allocated and provided. The 
Borrower shall further cause the Project Provinces to adequately staff and equip their 
respective Project management offices.

18. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project
Provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Consulting Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

19. The Borrower shall ensure that each of the Project Provinces shall (a) prepare
a maintenance management plan that includes estimates of the physical works and 
associated costs required for routine and periodic maintenance, as well as provisions for 
emergency repairs for the whole life of the Project facilities; (b) include the maintenance 
management plans in its annual budgets and provide adequate funds in a timely manner 
from provincial budgets to implement the maintenance management plan; and (c) establish 
mechanisms for the safe and proper use for each of the Project facilities in accordance with 
national regulations and practice, including, but not limited to, posting signs on roads and 
bridges of maximum weight limits, and as necessary alerting users of hazards or establishing 
physical barriers that prohibit vehicles above a certain size to pass.

Financial Management

20. The Borrower shall ensure that the financial management action plan as
agreed between the Project Provinces and ADB and included in the PAM is implemented in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe as indicated in the PAM, but in any case within one 
year of the Effective Date.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower (a) acknowledges ADB's right to investigate, directly or through
its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practices relating to the 
Project; and (b) agrees to cooperate, and shall cause the Project Provinces, and all other 
offices of the Borrower, organizations and entities involved in implementing the Project to 
cooperate, fully with any such investigation and to extend all necessary assistance, including 
providing access to all relevant books and records, as may be necessary for the satisfactory 



20
Schedule 5

completion of any such investigation. In particular, the Borrower shall ensure that (a) periodic 
audits of the Project contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are 
carried out; (b) relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) are included in all bidding documents for the Project; and (c) contracts financed under 
the Project include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of Project Provinces, contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.


































































47381-005: Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2


LOAN NUMBER 3625-SRI

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2)

between

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 18 MAY 2018

SRI 47381



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 18 May 2018 between DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the 
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the 
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program;

(B) by a periodic financing request dated 2 October 2017, the Borrower 
has applied to ADB for (i) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on concessional 
terms (“Concessional Loan”); and (ii) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on regular 
terms (“Ordinary Operations Loan”); each for the purposes of the Project described in 
Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement (as defined 
hereafter);

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Ordinary Operations 
[Concessional] Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from its ordinary 
operations resources an amount of thirty-one million Dollars ($31,000,000) for the purpose of 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the 
context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II



The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventy-nine million Dollars 
($179,000,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR; and

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0,10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 



outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in 
Section 2.01(6) of the Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan Regulations 
and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary 
Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where 
any such item has hot been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with 
those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the 
contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 



terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) 
shall have been fulfilled.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, 
the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with its terms, subject 
only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations.



ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Each of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and 
Mass Media, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and Director General of the Department of 
External Resources of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Secretary
Ministry of Finance and Mass Media
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka

cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources

Facsimile Numbers:

+94 11 243-3349
+9411 244-7633

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 
OF SRI LANKA

By__________________________
R.H.S. SAMARATUNGA 

Secretary
Ministry of Finance & Mass Media

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SRI WIDOWATI
Country Director 

Sri Lanka Resident Mission



SCHEDULE 1

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)


2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount 
of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be 
the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as 
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category 6 is for interest and commitment charges
on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works, Consulting 
Services, and PMU and PIU operational costs, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 
20% of the Loan amount.



TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account
Category Subcategory

1 Civil Works 140,470,000

1A UEC-ICB-2A 114,890,000 85% of total expenditure 
claimed

1B NWPC-ICB-1

•‘ili;:’ ;z
1
 y? 

I:« 

_■ 
51^!^;:

25,580,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

2 Environment Mitigation 820,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

3

Consulting Services 
(Project Management, 
Design and 
Supervision 
Consultant)

5,970,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

4 PMU and PIU Operation Costs 7,000,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Equipment Operation Maintenance 5,660,000
81% of total expenditure 
claimed

6 Interest andCommitment Charges 17,240,000 100% of amounts due

7 Unallocated 1,840,000 feiiwS
TOTAL 179,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3570-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development Project - Additional Financing)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 9 JANUARY 2018

CAM 41435



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 9 January 2018 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a financing agreement dated 27 December 2009 between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADB Financing Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional 
loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in various currencies equivalent to two million one 
hundred thirty-two thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR2,132,000) and a grant in an amount 
of twenty-seven million three hundred thousand Dollars ($27,300,000), for the purpose of the 
project described in Schedule 1 to the ADB Financing Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a concessional loan from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement (“Project”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied for a grant from ADB’s special funds 
resources in an amount equivalent to four million two hundred seventy-five thousand Dollars 
($4,275,000) (“ADF Grant”) and ADB has agreed to make the ADF Grant to the Borrower for 
the purposes of the Project pursuant to a grant agreement of even date herewith between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”);

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (“IFAD”) for a loan (“IFAD Loan”), to be partially administered by ADB in an 
amount of ten million Dollars equivalent ($16,000,000) to assist in financing a part of the 
Project, pursuant to an agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and IFAD (the 
“IFAD Financing Agreement”);

(E) the Project shall be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (“MAFF”) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic 
Development Secretariat (“NCDDS”), and for this purpose the Borrower shall make available 
to MAFF and NCDDS the proceeds of the loan provided herein and the ADF Grant upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



2

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following.meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “DRM” means disaster risk management;

(d) “DRR” means disaster risk reduction;

(e) "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB; „

(f) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means an environmental 
management plan for a Subproject,' including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project in 
consultation with the Borrower and approved by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or ADF Grant, including related services 
such as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, 
and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services; •

(j) “ICT” means information and communication technology;



3

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP” means the indigenous people plan 
for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the IPPF and cleared 
byADB;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared 
byADB;

(m) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3 and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means an initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(o) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(p) “LIG” means a livelihood improvement group;

(q) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 4 
August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “Participating Commune” means a participating commune located in 
one of the Participating Provinces included in the Project;

(u) “Participating Province” means a participating province included under 
the Projeqt;

(v) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and 
endorsed by ADB, which sets forth procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(x) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
4 August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



4

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(y) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means each of MAFF and NCDDS, or any 
successors thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying 
out the Project;

(z) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 
modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be 
installed and maintained under the Project;

(aa) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 
for the Project, including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means the resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the RF and cleared by 
ADB;

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB, that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(ee) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 
procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time 
to time) providing procedures applicable to all externally-financed 
projects and programs;

(ff) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject selection criteria set forth in herein and detailed in the PAM; 
and

(gg) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



5

ARTICLE I!

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty-five million seven hundred twenty-five thousand 
Dollars ($45,725,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for.the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 July 2023 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agencies to (i) maintain separate accounts, and records for the Project; (ii) prepare 
consolidated annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such 
audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds and the ADF Grant proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to enable 
ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the 
Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the. Project with the auditors appointed 
pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative 
of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that 
such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the 
Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and 
any relevant records and documents.



7

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and

(b) the IFAD Loan shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation 
or shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: .

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement shall have been duly authorized, 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness shall have been fulfilled..

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as .additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) th© ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding up'on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms, to the extent applicable.



8

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Sec tion 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Sec tion 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Ministry of Economy and Finance
Street 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855-23) 427 798
(855-23) 428 424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaiuyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2231.



9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister, Ministry of Economy and 

Finance

PMENT BANKASIAN DEVE

By
SAMIUELA TUKUAFU 

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



10

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen
climate and disaster resilience and improve access to markets in the Participating Communes 
in the Participating Provinces in the Tonle Sap Basin.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Output 1: Rural productive infrastructure and livelihood improved with
capacity in disaster risk management enhanced by:

(a) rehabilitating roads and upgrading irrigation infrastructure for at least 
two crops per year;

(b) strengthening existing LIGs and establishing additional LIGs in the 
Participating Communes and establishing aq LIG association to improve 
their sustainability; and

(c) strengthening of DRM in Participating Communes through training on 
identifying, planning and implementing DRR measures, including 
incorporation of DRR considerations in infrastructure Subprojects.

Out put 2: Enabling environment for increased agricultural productivity,
diversification and climate resilience created by:

(a) providing training on climate-smart agricultural practices through paddy 
selling groups, LIGs and market improvement groups;

(b) promoting the production of climate-resilient rice seed varieties upon 
confirmation of market demand; and

(c) improving value addition for rice, vegetables and chicken value chain 
through (i) establishing multi-stakeholder value chain platforms, (ii) 
establishing market improvement groups, (iii) strengthening existing 
small-scale agribusinesses; and (iv) establishing additional 
agribusinesses.

Out put 3: Project management strengthened by continuing support for-
Project staff at national, provincial, district and commune levels on Project 
management.

3. Consulting Services will be provided to support the above-stated activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 January 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Financial charges during implementation -
Interest during construction” is for financing the interest charge on the Loan during the 
implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account 
and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when 
due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Percentage and Basis for 

Withdrawal from the Loan 
Accounti

Category Subcategory

1 Works 30,243,000 ■

1A Works-ADB 30,243,000 93% of total expenditure claimed

2 Livelihood inputs 2,118,000

2A Revolving fund J 225,000 5% of total expenditure claimed*

2B
Other livelihood inputs - 
ADB

1,893,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Goods and services 2,660,000

3B
Goods and services - 
ADB

2,660,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

4
Capacity development 
and training

2,111,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

5 Consulting Services 5,445,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

6 Recurrent costs 2,238,000

6B Operations and 
maintenance

/ 2,238,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

7

Financial charges 
during implementation -
Interest during 
construction

910,000 100% of amount due

TOTAL 45,725,000

*Exclustve of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



15

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
Other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works  procured on the basis of the procurement methodsshall.be
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids under
international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of the 
Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) and 
2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. -

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



16

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement ' ,

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for operation
and maintenance for infrastructure in accordance with agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject:

(a) involving environmental impacts, until (i) each Project Executing Agency 
has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IEE for an 
applicable Subproject pursuant to the EARF and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such IEE; (ii) the Ministry of Environment has granted the 
final approval of each relevant IEE, if it is required by Sub-decree 72 
ANRK.BK on Environment Impact Assessment Process; and (iii) each 
Project Executing Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
each relevant EMP into the Works contract for Category "B" Subprojects 
and the Project Environmental Code of Conduct for Category "C" 
Subprojects;

(b) involving involuntary resettlement impacts, until the Borrower has 
prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final RP based on the RF 
and Subproject's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
RP; and

(c) involving indigenous peoples impacts, until each Project Executing 
Agency has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IPP 
based on the IPPF and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower may apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Single Source Selection for Project implementation consultants.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants in accordance with
procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe, any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



17

Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. All draft contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
first draft contract procured under national competitive bidding procedures, first contracts 
procured under community participation for operations and maintenance and first draft contract 
procured under shopping and all draft contracts for‘Consulting Services shall be subject to 
prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in 
the Procurement Plan.



18

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Counterpart Support and Q&M

2. The Borrower shall ensure that adequate counterpart funds for the Project are
provided on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
Project Executing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any 
Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

3. The Borrower shall ensure the release of adequate funds to support the O&M
of irrigation schemes underThe Project and ensure that the irrigation is registered on the 
Borrower’s Information System on Irrigation Schemes to ensure eligibility for any government 
O&M funding. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure that the roads are included in the 
Ministry of Rural Development inventory to ensure eligibility for any government O&M funding.

Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria

4. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to
ensure that all Subprojects are selected and implemented in accordance with the screening 
and eligibility criteria as agreed with ADB and set forth in Appendix 3 to the PAM.

Safeguards - Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable 
Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the respective IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for environment as defined in the SPS is financed under 
the Project.

Safeguards - Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project 
facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 



19

Schedule 5

under the related Works contract and that all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of Borrower relating to 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure 
that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or a 
Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for involuntary resettlement as defined in the SPS is 
financed under the Project.

Safeguards - Ethnic Minorities

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project, each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; (c) the IPPF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective 
IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for indigenous people or ethnic minorities under the SPS 
is financed under the Project

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agencies to
make available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, the 
RF, the IPPF, each EMP, each RP and each IPP (if any).

Safeguards-related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents arid contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP, the RP and the IPP, if any (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 



20

Schedule 5

preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agencies with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the 
IPP (if any);

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall do, or cause the Project Executing Agencies to do the
following:

(a) submit social safeguards monitoring reports to ADB as part of the 
quarterly and annual progress reports, and environmental safeguards 
monitoring reports semiannually in January and July each year and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any), promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any) 
promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable, to ADB is established in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant EARF, EMP, RF, RP (if any), IPPF or IPP (if 
any), within the timeframes specified in the relevant documents, to consider safeguards 
complaints.



21

Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan and ADF Grant are used to finance any activity included in the 
list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the'Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall or cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB-under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

18, The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 17 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as part of the quarterly and annual progress reports.

Gender and Development

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least one women to be elected to join each 
management committee of the new LIGs and service teams, (ii) at least 25% of unskilled 
workers employed are women, (iii) at least 60% of rural loans are taken by women, (iv) 
commune councilors from selected target communes have received training on gehder- 
responsive DRM, (v) at least 200 agribusiness enterprises (30% owned by women) such as 
chick production and feed production are operational, and (vi) at least 40% of market 
improvement group and paddy selling group members are women.

Governance and Anticorruption

20. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall (a) comply with ADB's
Anti corrupt ion Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



22

Schedule 5

21. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and'accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. ,

22. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall disclose, through the
Project website, accessible by general public, information about various matters concerning 
the Project, including general project information, procurement, project progress, and contact 
details in the English and Cambodian languages, as applicable. The Project website shall also 
provide a link to ADB’s integrity office for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations of 
corrupt practices arising out of the Project and its activities. With regard to procurement, the 
website shall include: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning bidder; 
(c) the amount of the contracts awarded; (d) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; and 
(e) the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.




































































51081-002: Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3746-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

KGZ 51081



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated //^^^^Z f̂eetween KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 

(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the purposes 
of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources ("Grant”) in the amount of sixteen million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($16,800,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(b) “Disaster Risk Management Component” means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(c) "DWR” means the Department of Water Resources and Melioration 
under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;



2

(d) “EARF" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “Hydrometeorology Installation Works" means Works to install any 
hydrological and/or meteorological equipment under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project, including any Works to install 
the hydrological posts referred to in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(k) "Irrigation Infrastructure Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “KyrgyzHydromet” means the Agency for Hydrometeorology under the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto;

(m) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MOES" means the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(p) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;



3

(q) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) “PIU” means the Project implementation unit to be established within 
DWR to assist with the execution of the Project;

(s) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time In accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(t) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(u) "Procurement Regulations" means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(v) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreement) means DWR and MOES, both 
individually and collectively, or any successor to either of them 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(w) "Project facilities" means the irrigation infrastructure to be protected, 
modernized and provided, and the equipment to be installed, piloted and 
provided, under the project;

(x) “RF" means the resettlement framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(y) “RP” means the resettlement plan for a Subproject, or, as may be 
required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);



4

(cc) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Irrigation Infrastructure 
Component of the Project that meets the subproject eligibility criteria set 
forth in the PAM;

(dd) “Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract; and

(ee) “WUA" means a water user association or union of water user 
associations established and operating under the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on “Unions (Associations) of Water Users and Unions of Water 
User Associations" adopted by the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 8 February 2002 and signed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 15 March 2002, as such law may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-one million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($21,800,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the Items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4. 02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 



6

were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, the Works and the Services, and any relevant records and 
documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Grant Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the execution and delivery of the Grant Agreement on behalf of the Borrower 
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary governmental action.

Section 6. 02, The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 



7

to be furnished to ADB: that the Grant Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with Its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement,

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erklndik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Authorized Representative

CountryJOirector
Kyrgyz Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved climate change and disaster resilience
of infrastructure and water security.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) the protection and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to improve 
the productivity of approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigated land, 
including by upgrading and constructing main (primary and secondary) 
canals, lower-level (Intra-farm and on-farm) canals, and associated 
infrastructure such as protective mudflow crossing structures, cross­
regulators and offtakes;

(b) the enhancement of (i) irrigation system management, including by 
developing and Implementing joint DWR-WUA irrigation system 
management plans with, among others, water delivery scheduling and 
O&M financing and planning; and (ii) agricultural land management, 
including by developing WUA on-farm water management and 
agricultural management plans with, among others, irrigation 
scheduling, cropping patterns, and cultural methods, and providing 
capacity building for farmers and community members; and

(c) the improvement of national disaster risk management capacity, 
including by providing heavy machinery and special equipment for 
preventative and rehabilitation works at the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES; enhancing the asset 
management of such centers; providing capacity building for disaster 
risk management, including project planning; installing hydrological 
posts for KyrgyzHydromet in approximately 20 sites; and piloting an 
information system for enhanced data collection, processing and flood 
warning.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2025,

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”), (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
Insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1
DWR - Civil Works (Off-farm 
Canal and Ancillary); Equipment & 
Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,390,973
76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2
MOES - Civil Works; Equipment 
& Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,559,541 76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

3 Interest during Implementation 849,486 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 21,800,000

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM and its 
appendices. Any subsequent change to the PAM or its appendices shall become effective only 
after the approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy 
between the PAM or its appendices on the one hand, and this Loan Agreement or the Grant 
Agreement on the other, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement shall 
prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements; the Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (I) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower, through DWR, shall not award any Works contract for a
Subproject which involves environmental impacts until DWR has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the State Agency of 
Environmental Protection and Forestry of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

This paragraph 3 shall apply similarly to MOES for all Hydrometeorology Installation Works 
that are covered by an IEE and EMP.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. This paragraph 4 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology 
Installation Works that are covered by an RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each 
Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and all Project facilities comply with (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; 
(b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the respective IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project, each Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and 
all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule 
agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities 
are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

7. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP for the Subproject.

This paragraph 7 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology Installation Works that are 
covered by an RP.

Indigenous Peoples

8. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, through DWR and/or MOES (as the case 
may be), shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.



16
Schedule 4

Human and Financial Resources to Implemerit Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the RPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant IEE, EMP and RP (to the extent they concern 
impacts on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works (as the case may be) that were 
not considered In the relevant IEE, EMP or RP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of any Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works that were not considered in the 
relevant IEE, EMP or RP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and



17
Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or RP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan or Grant are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall Include specific provisions in 
the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall strictly monitor compliance with
the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

15. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower shall make available all counterpart funds required for the timely
and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of funds or cost overrun, 
through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable funds In a timely manner. 
In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to DWR and MOES and ensure 
that DWR and MOES have sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from any Works, 
Goods and/or Services contract under the Project.

Operational Covenants - DWR

17. The Borrower, through DWR, shall appraise and select all Subprojects in
accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the PAM. The Borrower, through DWR, 



18
Schedule 4

shall ensure that the selection of sites for the feasibility study of potential Subprojects, and the 
selection of sites for the implementation of selected Subprojects, are undertaken in accordance 
with criteria and procedures agreed upon between DWR and ADB as set out in the PAM and 
its appendices.

18. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each Subproject is implemented
in accordance with applicable design and technical specifications and construction norms 
satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, quality control and contract management 
are performed in accordance with best international industry practice, The Borrower, through 
DWR, shall ensure that the detailed design of each Subproject incorporates the findings of the 
climate risk assessment that was undertaken as part of the feasibility study of the Subproject.

19. (a) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that all Project facilities are
operated and maintained, in an effective and sustainable manner, in accordance with the 
applicable laws, regulations and standards of the Borrower and, in other respects not covered 
by such laws, regulations and standards, in accordance with best international industry 
practice.

(b) The Borrower, through DWR, shall timely develop, approve, adopt and 
implement a joint WUA-DWR sustainable O&M plan for each irrigation infrastructure to be 
protected and modernized under the Project. As set out in the PAM and its appendices, each 
such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (i) a water delivery schedule and (ii) an asset 
management plan including an O&M budget and cost sharing. The Borrower, through DWR, 
shall ensure that budgetary and other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as 
necessary for the O&M of each irrigation infrastructure to be protected and modernized under 
the Project, and, at any given time, the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall 
not be less than the total sum required, at that time, to cover the O&M expenditures indicated 
in the O&M budget referred to in this sub-paragraph (b).

(c) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure the timely development and 
implementation of agriculture and on-farm water management plans under the Project. As set 
out in the PAM and its appendices, each such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (I) 
cropping patterns including introduction and diversification of crops and (ii) irrigation methods 
and scheduling. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each such plan shall be 
endorsed by the Council (established and operating under the applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower on WUAs) managing the WUA that will be implementing the plan.

Operational Covenants - MOES

20. (a) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all equipment and
information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk Management 
Component of the Project are operated and maintained appropriately and In accordance with 
the standards and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, and adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. 
The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that adequate, appropriate and timely 
arrangements and resources are in place for the preventive and standard maintenance of the 
said equipment and information systems after their warranty periods expire. The Borrower, 
through MOES, shall timely develop and implement sustainable asset management and 
maintenance plans for the heavy equipment to be provided to the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES.



19
Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all MOES divisions, 
offices and units, including MOES associated entities and centers, that receive and operate 
the equipment and information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are adequately staffed with personnel who have been 
fully trained, in accordance with the requirements of and as otherwise contemplated by the 
PAM, to operate and maintain them.

(c) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all heavy machinery 
and associated equipment provided under the Disaster Risk Management Component of the 
Project is used only by MOES, or a government agency duly authorized by MOES, and only 
for the purpose of preventative and recovery works related to disaster risk management, 
including the maintenance of structures provided under the Project to protect irrigation 
infrastructure from flood and mudflow. The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that such 
equipment is not leased or otherwise permitted to be used by any third party for any 
construction or other commercial activity.

(d) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all hydrological and/or 
meteorological equipment and information systems provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are, in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower, transferred and/or made available for use by KyrgyzHydromet 
promptly after their provision.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

23. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall provide updated Information on
the Project on their websites, including information on performance, business opportunities, 
bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3745-VIE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and 

J . i 4

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED Zf

VIE 49404



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated MW between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (“MARD”) and the following provincial peoples’ committees: Binh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh Thuan 
Provincial People’s Committee (“Participating PPCs”), and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to the Participating PPCs the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon 
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“CCF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a grant from its Climate Change 
Fund ("CCF Grant’’) in an amount of three hundred thousand Dollars ($300,000) for the 
Project;

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("NTF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant provided by the 
Netherlands Trust Fund (“NTF Grant’’, and collectively with the CCF Grant, the “Grants”) 
under the Water Financing Partnership Facility in an amount of seven hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($750,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement dated 2? December 2018 between ADB and the Participating 
PPCs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB, and the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s 
Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s 
Committee and Ninh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall include the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak 
Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong Provincial People’s 
Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as context requires.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “EA" (or “Project Executing Agency”) for the purposes of, and within 
the meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MARD, and the 
Participating PPCs or any successors thereto acceptable to ADB, 
which are responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(d) “EMP" means each environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards’’ means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(f) “Ethnic Minorities Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;



3

(h) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MARD” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, or any successor thereto;

(n) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) “Participating PPCs” means all and any of the provincial peoples’ 
committees of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan, or any successor thereto, which are responsible for the 
carrying out of their respective Subprojects under the Project;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “REMDP” means the resettlement and ethnic minorities development 
plan, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by each 
Participating PPC for relevant Subprojects (if required) under the 
Project and cleared by ADB;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower, through MARD, to ADB that describes 
progress with implementation of and compliance with the EMP, the RP 
and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;



4

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Subproject" means a part or component under the Project that is
carried out by the corresponding Participating PPC and described in 
greater detail in the PAM;

(v) “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement(s) between the 
Borrower and the Participating PPCs, as described in Section 3.01 of 
this Loan Agreement; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall provide the proceeds of the
Loan to the Participating PPCs through (i) budgetary grant transfers; and (ii) relending to the 
Participating PPCs under Subsidiary Loan Agreements upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Participating PPCs to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.



6

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall 
be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the CCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled; and

(b) the NTF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
No. 28 Tran Hung Dao Street
Hoan Kiem District
Ha Noi, Viet Nam

Facsimile Number:

(84-4) 2220-8020



7

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2231.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DINH TIEN DUNG
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to establish climate-resilient and modernized
irrigation systems in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Strengthening of irrigation management services, which includes 
support to:

(i) irrigation water allocation and delivery services; and

(ii) maintenance of irrigation systems;

(b) Modernizing 8 irrigation Subprojects to provide water on-demand to 
farmers cultivating high value crops;

(c) Adopting efficient "on-farm" water management practices, which 
includes:

(i) providing farmers with information and training on best 
irrigation practices to improve their water productivity; and

(ii) providing farmers with technical advice on identifying and 
developing appropriate micro irrigation systems that meet their 
individual requirements.

3. The Project includes provision of Consulting Services, as detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for project expenditures under a Subproject until the 
Borrower has furnished to ADB a written confirmation that the respective Participating PPC 
had executed a Subsidiary Loan Agreement(s) on terms and conditions consistent with this 
Loan Agreement. For avoidance of doubt, this withdrawal condition applies individually and 
severally to each Participating PPC.



11

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Binh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,826,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

2 Ninh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

29,495,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Khanh Hoa Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

15,113,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

4 Dak Nong Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,641,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

5 Dak Lak Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services, 
Project Administration)*

19,925,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

TOTAL 100,000,000

*Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
**Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



12

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

4. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the
Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) National Competitive Bidding.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) ADB has granted the final approval of the updated EMP, which is 
prepared based on the relevant Subproject’s detailed design; and



13

Schedule 4

(b) the Participating PPC has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
the updated EMP into the relevant Works contract

8. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts, and/or impacts on ethnic minorities, until the relevant Participating 
PPC has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP based on the relevant 
Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB’s clearance of such REMDP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Fixed Budget Selection;

(b) Consultants’ Qualifications Selection; and

(c) Single Source Selection.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



14

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that
their respective Subprojects are carried out in accordance with environmental assessment 
procedures provided in the lEEs as agreed between MARD and ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

5. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Ethnic Minorities

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project and all Project 



15

Schedule 5

facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to ethnic 
minorities; (b) the Ethnic Minorities Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Participating PPCs to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the 
REMDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

9. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Participating PPCs to do the
following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP, 



16

Schedule 5

promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with 
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; 
and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

10. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

12. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 11 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include: (i) 
equality of project benefits and opportunity-sharing between men and women; (ii) reduction in 
gender inequalities and social risks (HIV/AIDS transmission prevention, human trafficking 
prevention during construction of works); (Hi) training of women (including those from ethnic 
minorities) on micro irrigation and in overall system management and operations; (iv) 
increased representation of women in decision-making bodies; and (v) collection of sex- 
disaggregated data for benefit monitoring and evaluation.



17

Schedule 5

Operations and Maintenance

14. The Borrower shall cause each of the Participating PPCs to (a) adopt a tariff
structure in accordance with the Borrower’s appropriate regulations, whereby the tariffs are 
set at levels as to enable each Participating PPC, at a minimum, to fully recover Its respective 
operations and maintenance costs; and (b) launch its implementation in the Project financed 
irrigation schemes.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower, through the Participating PPCs, shall make available, promptly
as and when needed, the funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources as shall be 
necessary or required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB, promptly at its reasonable request, evidence satisfactory to ADB that such 
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources are available for purposes related to the 
Project. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Participating PPCs 
have followed applicable procedures to budget for, and have obtained sufficient funds to 
satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 12 months from the date of the Effective Date, each Participating PPC
shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism in accordance with the 
provisions of the lEEs and the Participating PPC’s corresponding REMDP, and acceptable to 
ADB, is established. The grievance redress mechanism shall be translated to the local 
dialect and disclose in a place that are accessible to the local communities to make them 
aware of the grievance mechanism and their potential involvement and responsibilities in the 
project activities. The grievance redress mechanism shall include the names of the focal 
persons in the provincial project management units and the procedures for submitting 
complaints.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.

19. The Borrower shall disclose, through the websites of the Participating PPCs,
information about various matters concerning the Project, including general project 
information, procurement, Project progress, and contact details in the English and 



18

Schedule 5

Vietnamese languages. The website will also provide a link to ADB’s Office of Anticorruption 
and Integrity (http://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main) for reporting to ADB any grievances or 
allegations of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. With regard to 
procurement, the website will include information on the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract 
awarded, and the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.























































LOAN NUMBER 3724-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

/■
I

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2018

MYA 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 November 2018 between THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to the Global Agriculture and Food 
Security Program (“GAFSP”) for a grant (“GAFSP Grant”) and GAFSP has agreed to provide 
the Borrower a grant in the amount of twenty-two million Dollars ($22,000,000) to assist in 
financing a part of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “CSA" means climate smart agriculture;



2

(d) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “GAFSP Grant Agreement” means the grant agreement between ADB 
and the Borrower in relation to the GAFSP Grant;

(h) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means (i) Department of Agriculture; (ii) 
Department of Planning; (iii) Department of Rural Development; (iv) 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; (v) 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics, each of 
MOALI; and (vi) Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) 
and Department of Consumer Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which are responsible for the 
implementation of the Project;

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP" means each indigenous peoples 
plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
IPPF;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 



thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

“Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

“Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework” or “LARF” means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

“Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

“MOALi” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

“PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

“Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

"Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

“Project Executing Agency" or “EA" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of the Loan Regulations means MOALi or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of 
the Project;

“Resettlement Plan" or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the LARF and 
cleared by ADB;

“Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS" means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

“Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;



4

(z) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set forth in the PAM; and

(aa) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million five hundred thousand Dollars 
($40,500,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (I) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors1 opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the GAFSP Grant Agreement has been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Union Minister of Planning and Finance of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of 
the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning and Finance
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410-198

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444
+632 636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

By______________________________
DAW SI SI PYONE 

Director General 
Treasury Department, Ministry of 

Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to develop productive and resource efficient
agribusiness value chains.

2. The Project shall comprise Subprojects to achieve the following outputs:

Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and 
made climate resilient - This includes (a) upgrading irrigation, farm roads, 
buildings, farm machinery, post-harvest equipment, seed testing equipment and 
agrometeorologicai stations, in seed farms; (b) rehabilitating tertiary canals and 
community reservoirs, and constructing shallow tube wells with some linked to 
drip and sprinkler technologies; (c) rehabilitating farm roads to climate resilient 
condition; and (d) upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment.

Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted - This 
includes (a) deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (b) strengthening capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and 
regional government staff on CSA technologies and production practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and agribusiness plan 
development, and manufacturing practices; and (c) facilitating access to inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off farm rural livelihood opportunities.

Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness 
enhanced - This includes (a) establishing an agribusiness policy cell within 
MOALl’s Department of Planning; (b) raising awareness and capacity of 
financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusiness; and (c) enhancing 
weather, market and credit information networks, and delivery of land 
administration services.

3. The Project will support Consulting Services to implement the above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1

Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and 
Design, and Project 
Implementation Support

34,490,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Training, Workshops and Studies 2,010,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 620,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consultants 2,020,000 36% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,360,000 100% total amount due

TOTAL 40,500,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement

3. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.

4. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower's national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE/EMP, as relevant, from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject’s detailed design and obtained ADB’s 
clearance of such RP.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on indigenous peoples until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final IPP, as relevant, and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

10. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

11. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Qualification Based Selection for monitoring and evaluation and land 
administration technical services; and

(b) Single Source Selection for variety development and dissemination 
services.

12. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants as needed in accordance
with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.



16
Schedule 4

14. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after 
approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between 
the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EARF, each IEE, EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject 
categorized as Category A under the SPS is financed under the Project.

involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the LARF, RP and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes 
place in connection with the Project until: (a) compensation and other entitlements, as relevant, 
have been provided to affected people in accordance with the RP; and (b) a comprehensive 
income and livelihood restoration program has been established in accordance with the RP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous people; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPPF 
and any IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement any EMP, RP and IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE, 
the EMP, the RP and any IPP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP, and the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan in 
accordance with the SPS; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti corruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Borrower 
becomes aware or has a reasonable suspicion that any member of the Borrower or executing 
agency has engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anticorruption 
Policy) under or in connection with the Project or the loan, the Borrower shall take such timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

12. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency shall make use of 
its existing website or create a Project website within 3 months from Effective Date, accessible 
by the public, to disclose various information concerning the Project including general 
information about the Project, public procurement related to the Project, Project progress and 
contact details in English and Myanmar language. The website shall also provide a link to 
ADB’s Integrity Unit for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations or corrupt practices 
arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the website shall include 
information on, among others, (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) name of the winning 
bidder; (c) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; (d) amount of contract awarded; and 
(e) list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services. The Project Executing Agency shall permit 
any bidder to request an explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project 
Executing Agency shall respond promptly. The website shall be updated regularly. In addition 
to the web-based disclosure, the stakeholders shall be provided by the Project Executing 
Agency with detailed information on procurement on public notice boards in their respective 
areas.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among others, (a) comply with all 
applicable labor laws and regulations of the Borrower; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation on the basis of age, gender, 



20
Schedule 5

ethnicity, religion or caste; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; (f) advertise labor requirements 
in a timely manner prior to recruitment, in a venue that can reasonably be expected to be seen 
by interested men and women; (g) provide workers with written contract, adequate on-the-job 
training and safety training; (h) not restrict freedom of association of workers; and 
(i) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
areas, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender Action Plan

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the (a) GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis, including personnel cost. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising 
from any Works, Goods and Consulting Services contract.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that all completed Subprojects have adequate
counterpart funds for operation and maintenance of infrastructure allocated to them on a yearly 
basis and made available on a timely basis. The Project Executing Agency shall further ensure 
that the farmer water user communities and water user groups collect adequate irrigation 
service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution canals in accordance with 
the Borrower's decree on farmer water user communities.

Subproject selection

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all Subprojects selected for financing under the Project meet the screening and eligibility 
criteria as agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in the PAM.























































LOAN NUMBER 8346-CAM(EF)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
acting as an accredited entity of the 

Green Climate Fund

DATED 6 JULY 2018

CAM 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB"), acting not in its individual capacity, 
but solely in its capacity as an accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (“GCF”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement 
(as defined herein);

(B) ADB has established the ADB Green Climate Fund to receive, hold in 
trust and administer GCF funds;

(C) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(the “Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a 
concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in the amount of 
ninety million Dollars ($90,000,000) for the purposes of the Project (“Ordinary Operations 
Loan”);

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB, ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance with the 
Accreditation Master Agreement dated 17 August 2017 (“AMA”) and the Funded Activity 
Agreement to be entered into between GCF and ADB (“FAA"), has agreed to provide from the 
ADB Green Climate Fund a grant in the amount of thirty million Dollars ($30,000,000) to assist 
in financing a part of the Project; and

(E) ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance 
with the AMA and the FAA, between GCF and ADB, has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower 
from the ADB Green Climate Fund upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1

Standard Terms; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Standard Terms (“Standard Terms") 
attached hereto in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement shall apply to this Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Standard Terms and Section 1.02 of the Ordinary Operations



2

[Concessional] Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from the ADB
Green Climate Fund an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower acknowledges that the Loan is funded out 
of resources made available by the GCF to ADB as an accredited entity of the GCF. In 
accordance with Section 2.02 of the Standard Terms, the Borrower may only withdraw Loan 
proceeds subject to the availability of such resources.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay to ADB a service charge at the 
rate of 0.25% per annum on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and 
outstanding from time to time,

Section 2,04. The service charge on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the service charge shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 



3

provisions of Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been procured 
under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and 
ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 7.02 
of the Standard Terms shall be 31 March 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and 
(v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, 
copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, ail in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower and its financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed by the Borrower pursuant to subsections (a)(iii) and 



4

(b) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to 
participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions 
shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the 
Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. ADB’s obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB’s receipt of a corresponding amount from GCF in accordance 
with the terms of the AMA and the FAA,

Section 4. 04. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 7.01(1) of the Standard Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation or shall have become 
repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have become liable for suspension or 
cancellation.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 7.07 (d) of the Standard Terms: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.01(c) of the Standard 
Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the condition 



5

requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement and GCF Grant 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than the condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 8.02 of the Standard Terms, to be included in the opinion or opinions to 
be furnished to ADB: the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the GCF 
Grant Agreement have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the exceptions referred to in Section 
6.01 (a) and (b) above) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.04 of the 
Standard Terms.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 10.02 of the Standard 
Terms.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 10.01 of the Standard Terms:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+855 23 427-798
+855 23 428-424



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444 
+632 636-2231.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister of Economy and Finance

i 
i

i

|

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Bv
HIDEAKI IWASAKI 

Acting Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Standard Terms

ARTICLE I

Definitions; Interpretation

Section 1.01, Definitions. Except where the context otherwise 
requires, the following terms have the following meanings wherever used in these Standard 
Terms:

(a) "ADB Green Climate Fund” means the trust fund established and 
administered by ADB to receive, hold in trust and administer the GCF 
funds transferred to ADB by GCF;

(b) “assets" includes property, revenues and claims of any kind;

(c) “convertible currency" means any currency so designated by ADB at any 
time;

(d) “currency" of a country or a territory means such currency as at the time 
referred to is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts in 
that country or territory;

(e) “Dollar” or the sign each means the lawful currency of the United 
States of America;

(f) “Effective Date” means the date on which the Loan Agreement shall 
have come into force and effect pursuant to Section 8,03 of this 
Schedule 1;

(g) “foreign currency” means any currency other than currency of the 
member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out;

(h) “Green Climate Fund” or “GCF” means the fund established within the 
framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in 2010, and governed under the Governing Instrument;

(i) "guarantee” includes, as the case requires, any counter-guarantee, 
indemnity or any other arrangement which has the effect of a guarantee, 
counter-guarantee or indemnity, given by a member in favor, or for the 
benefit of ADB;

Q) “lien” includes mortgages, pledges, charges, privileges and priorities of 
any kind;

(k) "Loan" means the loan provided for in this Loan Agreement;



9
Schedule 1

(I) “Loan Account” means the account opened or to be opened by ADB on 
its books in the name of the Borrower to which the amount of the Loan 
has been or will be credited;

(m) “Loan Closing Date" means the date specified by ADB that is not later 
than the first Principal Payment Date shown in the amortization 
schedule to the Loan Agreement, or such other date as may be agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower for such purpose;

(n) “Loan Currency” means the currency in which the principal amount of 
the Loan is denominated from time to time;

(o) “member" means a member of ADB;

(p) “Multilateral Development Bank Fee" means the management fee 
specified in this Loan Agreement;

(q) “Principal Payment Date" means each date specified in the Loan 
Agreement on which all or any portion of the principal amount of the 
Loan is payable;

(r) “Project Executing Agency" means the Borrower’s Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries or any successor thereto;

(s) “service charge" means a charge made on the Loan pursuant to Section 
2.04 to the Loan Agreement; and

(t) “taxes” includes imposts, levies, fees and duties of any nature, whether 
in effect at the date of the Loan Agreement or thereafter imposed.

Section 1.02. Interpretation. Except where the context 
otherwise requires, (a) a reference to the Incurring of debt includes the assumption and 
guarantee of debt; (b) references in these Standard Terms to Articles or Sections are to Articles 
or Sections of these Standard Terms; (c) the headings of the Articles and Sections are inserted 
for convenience of reference only and are not a part of these Standard Terms; (d) singular may 
include plural and vice versa; and (e) a reference to any gender includes any other gender.

ARTICLE II

Loan Account; Service Charge; Multilateral Development Bank Fee; 
Repayment; Place of Payment

Section 2.01. Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan 
shall be credited to the Loan Account in the Loan Currency and may be withdrawn therefrom 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.



10
Schedule 1

Section 2.02. Funding Shortfall. Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Section 2.01, no withdrawals shall be made if, as a result of such withdrawal, the total 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account would exceed the amount available to 
ADB from resources provided to it for purposes of the Loan. Only the resources made available 
to ADB for the purposes of the Loan shall be considered for the enforcement of any obligations, 
claims or liabilities under or in connection with the Loan.

Section 2.03. Service Charge. A service charge at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. The service charge shall 
accrue from the respective dates on which amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. 
ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the 
Borrower, the amounts required to meet service charge payments, when and if due.

Section 2.04. Multilateral Development Bank Fee. 
The Borrower shall pay ADB a Multilateral Development Bank Fee on the Loan at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement. If this Loan Agreement provides for the financing of the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee out of the proceeds of the Loan, ADB shall, on behalf of 
the Borrower, withdraw from the Loan Account on or after the Effective Date and pay to itself 
the amount of the Multilateral Development Bank Fee.

Section 2.05. Computation of Service Charge and Other Charges. 
The service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee, if the Borrower elects to pay 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee not as a lump sum but semiannually at a rate per 
annum calculated on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan from time to time, shall be computed 
on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

Section 2.06. Repayment and Prepayment (a) The Borrower 
shall repay ADB the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the provisions of, and the amortization schedule to, this Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days’ written notice to ADB, the Borrower 
shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a date acceptable to ADB (provided, 
that the Borrower shall have paid all amounts due under this Loan Agreement as of such date) 
(i) all of the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or (ii) all of the principal amount of 
any one or more maturities of the Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount which is 
(i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB under this Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
less than the full amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this Section, 
ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so received in any manner and for 
such purposes under this Loan Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.

Sec tion 2.07. Place of Payment. The principal of, and service 
charge and other charges (including the Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan shall 
be paid at such places as ADB shall reasonably request.



11
Schedule 1

ARTICLE III

Currency Provisions

Section 3.01. Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the 
Loan Account shall be made in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.02. Currency of Payment. The principal of the Loan 
shall be repaid in the Loan Currency and, the service charge on any portion of the Loan and 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee shall be paid in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.03. Purchase of Currencies. If the Borrower shall so 
request, ADB shall, acting as agent of the Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB 
shall determine, purchase the Loan Currency for the purpose of repayment of principal, and 
payment of service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee upon timely payment 
by the Borrower of sufficient funds for that purpose in a currency or currencies acceptable to 
ADB; provided, however, that the Borrower shall be deemed to have made any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement only when and to the extent that ADB has received such 
payment in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.04. Valuation of Currencies. Whenever it shall be 
necessary for the purposes of this Loan Agreement to determine the value of one currency in 
terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 3.05. Manner of Payment. (a) Any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement to be made to ADB in the currency of any country shall 
be made in such manner, and in currency acquired in such manner, as shall be permitted 
under the laws of such country for the purpose of making such payment and effecting the 
deposit of such currency to the account of ADB with a depository of ADB in such country.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the principal of, and the service charge 
and other charges on, the Loan are paid without restrictions of any kind imposed by, or in the 
territory of, the Borrower.

ARTICLE IV

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

Section 4.01. Withdrawal from the Loan Account. (a) Loan 
proceeds shall be used only for the purposes of the Project. Subject to any conditions or 
restrictions specified in this Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall be entitled to withdraw from 
the Loan Account such amounts as shall have been paid, or, if ADB shall so agree, such 
amounts as shall be required to meet payments to be made, for the reasonable cost of goods, 
services and any other expenditures required for the Project and to be financed under this 
Loan Agreement. If at any time ADB determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds 
withdrawn from the Loan Account has been used by the Borrower in a manner inconsistent 



12
Schedule 1

with the provisions of the Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall promptly refund such amount 
to ADB.

(b) Except as ADB and the Borrower shall otherwise agree, no withdrawals 
shall be made on account of expenditures incurred prior to the Effective Date. ADB may refuse 
to finance a contract where goods and services have not been procured in accordance with 
procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or 
where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB. If at any time ADB 
determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds withdrawn from the Loan Account has been 
used by the Borrower to finance such contracts, the Borrower shall promptly refund such 
amount to ADB.

(c) Withdrawals of the proceeds of the Loan from the Loan Account shall 
be made in the Loan Currency. ADB may, at the request and acting as an agent of the 
Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB shall determine, purchase with such 
currency withdrawn from the Loan Account such other currencies as the Borrower shall 
reasonably request to meet payments for items of expenditure to be financed from the Loan. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of this Loan Agreement to determine the value 
of one currency in terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 4.02. Commitment Letters by ADB. Upon the 
Borrower's request, ADB may issue commitment letters to pay amounts in respect of the cost 
of goods and services to be financed under the Loan, notwithstanding any subsequent 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 4.03. Application for Withdrawal. When the Borrower 
shall desire to withdraw any amount from the Loan Account or to request ADB to issue 
commitment letters pursuant to Section 4,02, the Borrower shall promptly deliver to ADB an 
application in such form and containing such statements, representations, warranties and 
agreements, as ADB shall reasonably request. Except as ADB and the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree, applications for withdrawal, with the necessary documentation as hereinafter 
in this Article provided, shall be made promptly in relation to the expenditures for the Project.

Section 4.04. Evidence of Authority to Sign Applications.
The Borrower shall furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person authorized 
to sign applications for withdrawal and the authenticated specimen signature of each person.

Section 4.05. Supporting Evidence. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB such documents and other evidence in support of the application for withdrawal 
as ADB shall reasonably request, whether before or after ADB shall have permitted any 
withdrawal requested in the application.

Section 4.06. Sufficiency of Applications and Documents. 
Each application for withdrawal and the accompanying documents and all other evidence must 
be sufficient in form and substance to satisfy ADB that the Borrower is entitled to withdraw 
from the Loan Account the amount applied for and that the amount to be withdrawn from the 
Loan Account is to be used only for the purposes specified in this Loan Agreement.



13
Schedule 1

Section 4.07. Payment by ADB. Payment by ADB of amounts 
which the Borrower is entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account shall be made to or on the 
order of the Borrower.

ARTICLE V

Particular Covenants

Section 5.01. Cooperation and Information. (a) ADB and 
the Borrower shall cooperate fully to ensure that the purposes of the Loan will be 
accomplished. To that end, ADB and the Borrower shall:

(i) from time to time, at the request of any one of them, exchange 
views with regard to any matters relating to the progress of the 
Project, the purposes of the Loan or the maintenance of the 
service thereof, the performance of their respective obligations 
under this Loan Agreement, [the performance by the Project 
Executing Agency of its obligations,] and furnish to the other 
party all such related information as it shall reasonably request; 
and

(ii) promptly inform each other of any condition which interferes 
with, or threatens to interfere with, the matters referred to in 
paragraph (a)(i) of this Section.

(b) The Borrower shall afford all reasonable opportunity for ADB's 
representatives to visit any part of its territory for purposes related to the Loan.

Section 5.02. Negative Pledge. (a) If the Borrower shall 
create or permit the creation of any lien on any of its assets as security for any foreign currency 
debt, the Borrower undertakes to expressly provide that such lien will ipso facto equally and 
ratably secure the payment of the principal of, and service charge on, the Loan. If any statutory 
lien shall be created on any assets of the Borrower (as hereinafter defined), as security for any 
foreign currency debt, the Borrower shall grant to ADB an equivalent lien satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this Section shall not apply to (i) any 
lien created on property, at the time of purchase thereof, solely as security for payment of the 
purchase price of such property; or (ii) any lien arising in the ordinary course of banking 
transactions and securing a debt maturing not more than one year after its date.

(c) The term “assets of the Borrower" as used in paragraph (a) of this 
Section includes assets of any political subdivision or any agency of the Borrower and assets 
of any agency of such political subdivision, and assets of any entity owned or controlled by, or 
operating for the account or benefit of, the Borrower or any such political subdivision or agency, 
including any other institution performing the functions of a central bank for the Borrower.



14
Schedule 1

Section 5.03. Insurance. (a) The Borrower shall take out 
and maintain with responsible insurers, or make other arrangements satisfactory to ADB for, 
insurance against such risks and in such amounts as shall be consistent with sound practice. 
The Borrower shall be deemed to have opted for self-insurance in the absence of any specific 
insurance for the Project.

(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower undertakes 
to insure, or cause to be insured, the goods to be imported for the Project and to be financed 
out of the proceeds of the Loan against hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and 
delivery thereof to the place of use or installation, and for such insurance any indemnity shall 
be payable in a currency freely usable to replace or repair such goods.

Sec tion 5.04. Records, Financial Statements and Audits.
The Borrower shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records and financial statements 
adequate to Identify the goods, services and other items of expenditure financed under the 
Project; to record the progress of the Project (including the cost thereof and); to reflect, in 
accordance with consistently maintained sound financial reporting principles, the operations 
and financial condition of the Project; and to have the financial statements audited. Related 
requirements shall be specified in the Loan Agreement.

Section 5.05. Reports. (a) The Borrower shall furnish, or 
cause to be furnished, to ADB all such reports as ADB shall reasonably request concerning (i) 
the Loan, and the expenditure of the proceeds and maintenance of the service thereof; (ii) the 
goods, services and other items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan; (iii) 
the Project and the Project Executing Agency; (iv) the administration, operations and financial 
condition of the Borrower; and (v) any other matters relating to the purposes of the Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall promptly inform ADB of any condition which 
interferes with, or threatens to interfere with, the progress of the Project, the performance of 
their respective obligations under the Loan Agreement, the accomplishment of the purposes 
of the Loan, or the maintenance of the service thereof; and the Borrower shall promptly inform 
ADB in advance of any proposed changes in the ownership or control of the Borrower or its 
assets, or any transaction or arrangement which will have or is likely to have such effect.

(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB periodic reports on the execution of the Project, on the accomplishment of the 
targets and actions agreed between ADB and the Borrower, and on the operation and 
management of the Project facilities. Such reports shall be submitted in such form and in such 
detail and within such a period as ADB shall reasonably request, and shall indicate, among 
other things, progress made and problems encountered during the period under review, steps 
taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems, and proposed program of activities 
and expected progress during the following period.

(d) Promptly after completion of the Project, but in any event not later than 
three months thereafter or such later date as may be agreed for this purpose between the 
Borrower and ADB, the Borrower shall prepare and furnish to ADB a report, in such form and 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request, on the execution and initial operation of the 
Project, including its cost, the performance by the Borrower of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement and the accomplishment of the purposes of the Loan.



15
Schedule 1

Section 5.06. Counterpart Obligations and Land Acquisition.
The Borrower shall make available, promptly as and when needed, the funds, facilities, 
services, land, and other resources as shall be necessary or required, in addition to the 
proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project and for the operation and maintenance 
of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall furnish to ADB, promptly at its request, evidence 
satisfactory to ADB that such funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources are available 
for purposes related to the Project.

Section 5.07, Work Schedules, Plans and Design Standards. 
The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance with plans, design 
standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods acceptable to the 
Borrower and ADB, as applicable. When required by ADB, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause 
to be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made therein, 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

Section 5.08. General Undertakings. (a) The Borrower 
shall cause the Project to be carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity 
with sound financial, business and development practices. The Borrower shall in collaboration 
with ADB ensure that the Project adheres to ADB policies on anticorruption, core labor 
standards, environmental and social safeguards, gender, procurement and consulting 
services, disbursement and such other policy specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its departments and 
agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities 
are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative policies and 
procedures.

Section 5. 09. Contractors and Consultants. In the carrying 
out of the Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and 
contractors, acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, to be employed to an extent and upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

Section 5.10. Maintenance. The Borrower shall ensure that 
any facilities relevant to the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with 
sound operational and maintenance practices. The Borrower shall promptly as needed, make 
or cause to be made all necessary repairs and renewals thereof.

ARTICLE VI

Exemption from Taxation

Section 6. 01. Exemption from Taxation. The Borrower shall 
ensure that:

(a) the principal of, and service charge and other charges (including the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan are exempt from, and 



16
Schedule 1

are paid without deduction for, any taxes levied by, or in the territory of, 
the Borrower; and

(b) this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement are exempt from any 
taxes levied by, or in the territory of, the Borrower on or in connection 
with the execution, delivery or registration thereof.

ARTICLE VII

Suspension; Cancellation; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 7.01. Suspension by ADB. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred at any time after the date of this Loan Agreement and be continuing, 
ADB may by notice to the Borrower suspend in whole or in part the right of the Borrower to 
make withdrawals from the Loan Account:

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to make payment (notwithstanding the 
fact that such payment may have been made by any third party) of 
principal, service charge or any other charge (including the Multilateral 
Development Bank Fee) required (i) under the Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB; or 
(iii) in consequence of any guarantee or other financial obligation of any 
kind extended by ADB to any third party with the agreement of the 
Borrower.

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any other of its obligations 
under this Loan Agreement

(c) The Project Executing Agency shall have failed to perform any of its 
obligations under the Project Agreement.

(d) ADB shall have suspended in whole or in part the right of the Borrower 
to make withdrawals under any other loan agreement with ADB because 
of a failure by the Borrower to perform any of its obligations under such 
loan agreement or any related guarantee agreement with ADB.

(e) A situation shall have arisen or developed which in the reasonable 
opinion of ADB will or may make it improbable that (i) the Project can be 
successfully carried out; or (ii) the Borrower or the Project Executing 
Agency will be able to perform any of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement.

(f) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out shall have 
been suspended from membership in, or ceased to be a member of, 
ADB, or shall have delivered a notice to withdraw from ADB.



17
Schedule 1

(g) A representation made by the Borrower in or pursuant to this Loan 
Agreement, or any statement furnished in connection therewith and 
intended to be relied upon by ADB in making the Loan, shall have been 
incorrect in any material respect

(h) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Project Executing Agency, the 
alienation or transfer of any of its aspects other than in the normal 
course of business, or for the suspension of its operations.

(i) The Borrower shall have been unable to pay its debts as they mature or 
any action or proceeding shall have been taken by the Borrower or by 
others whereby any of the assets of the Borrower shall or may be 
distributed among its creditors.

(j) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out or any 
other authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(k) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(I) ADB shall have determined, with respect to any contract to be financed 
in full or in part out of the proceeds of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, 
coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, were engaged in 
by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during 
the procurement of goods and services, consultants’ selection or the 
execution of a contract, without the Borrower having taken timely and 
appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy the situation; or ADB 
shall have determined that the procurement of any goods or services to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the 
relevant procedure set out in this Loan Agreement.

(m) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred.

The right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall 
continue to be suspended in whole or in part, as the case may be, until the event which gave 
rise to such suspension shall have, in the reasonable opinion of ADB, ceased to exist or until 
ADB shall have notified the Borrower that the right to make withdrawals has been restored in 
whole or in part, whichever is the earlier.

Section 7.02. Cancellation by ADB. If (a) the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall have been suspended with respect 
to any amount of the Loan for a continuous period of 30 days; (b) at any time ADB determines, 
after consultation with the Borrower, that any amount of the Loan will not be required for the 



18
Schedule 1

purposes of the Project; (c) by the date specified in this Loan Agreement as the Loan Closing 
Date, an amount of the Loan shall remain unwithdrawn from the Loan Account; (d) at any time 
ADB determines, with respect to any contract to be financed in full or in partout of the proceeds 
of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, 
were engaged in by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during the 
procurement of goods, works, services, consultants’ selection or the execution of a contract, 
without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy 
the situation; or (e) at any time, ADB determines that the procurement of any goods or services 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the relevant procedure set 
out in this Loan Agreement, ADB may by notice to the Borrower terminate the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals with respect to such amount Upon the giving of such notice, 
such amount of the Loan shall be cancelled.

Section 7.03. Cancellation by the Borrower. After consultation 
with ADB, the Borrower may by notice to ADB cancel any amount of the Loan which the 
Borrower shall not have withdrawn prior to the giving of such notice.

Section 7.04. Amounts Subject to Commitment Letters.
No suspension or cancellation shall apply to amounts subject to any commitment letter issued 
by ADB pursuant to Section 4.02 except as expressly provided in such commitment letter.

Section 7.05. Application of Cancellation. Except as ADB and 
the Borrower shall otherwise agree, any cancellation shall be applied pro rata to the remaining 
maturities of the principal amount of the Loan which shall mature after the date of such 
cancellation.

Section 7.06, Effectiveness of Provisions After Suspension or 
Cancellation. Notwithstanding any cancellation or suspension, all the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect except as specifically provided in this 
Article.

Section 7.07. Acceleration of Maturity. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, specified below, then at any 
subsequent time during the continuance thereof ADB may by notice to the Borrower declare 
the principal of the Loan then outstanding, together with all accrued service charge thereon, to 
be due and payable immediately, and upon any such declaration such principal and service 
charge shall become due and payable immediately:

(a) Any event specified in Section 7.01(a) shall have occurred and 
continued for a period of 30 days.

(b) Any event specified in Section 7.01(b) and Section 7.01(c) shall have 
occurred and continued for a period of 60 days after notice thereof shall 
have been given by ADB to the Borrower.

(c) Any event specified in Section 7.01(g), Section 7.01(h), Section 7.01 (i), 
and Section 7.01 (j) shall have occurred.



19
Schedule 1

(d) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, 
specified in this Loan Agreement

ARTICLE VIII

Effectiveness; Termination

Section 8.01. Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness.
The Loan Agreement shall not become effective until evidence satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been furnished to ADB that:

(a) the execution and delivery of this Loan Agreement on behalf of the 
Borrower have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary 
corporate and governmental action;

(b) the execution and delivery of the Project Agreement on behalf of the 
Project Executing Agency have been duly authorized or ratified by all 
necessary corporate and governmental action;

(c) the condition of the Borrower, as represented to ADB at the date of the 
Loan Agreement, has undergone no material adverse change between 
such date and the date agreed upon between the Borrower and ADB for 
the purposes of this Section, provided that ADB shall have requested 
such evidence; and

(d) all other events specified in this Loan Agreement as additional 
conditions to its effectiveness have occurred.

Sec tion 8.02. Legal Opinions. As part of the evidence to be 
furnished pursuant to Section 8.01, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB an opinion or opinions satisfactory to ADB of counsel acceptable to ADB showing:

(a) on behalf of the Borrower, that this Loan Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with 
its terms;

(b) on behalf of the Project Executing Agency, that the Project Agreement 
has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on 
behalf of, the Project Executing Agency and is legally binding upon the 
Project Executing Agency in accordance with its terms; and

(c) such other matters as shall be specified in this Loan Agreement.

Section 8.03. Effective Date. (a) Except as ADB and the
Borrower shall otherwise agree, this Loan Agreement shall come into force and effect on the 



20
Schedule 1

date of ADB’s notice to the Borrower notice of its acceptance of the evidence required by 
Section 8.01.

(b) If, before the Effective Date, any event shall have occurred which would 
have entitled ADB to suspend the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan 
Account if this Loan Agreement had been effective, ADB may postpone the dispatch of the 
notice referred to in paragraph (a) of this Section until such event shall have ceased to exist.

Section 8.04. Termination for Failure to Become Effective.
If this Loan Agreement shall not have come into force and effect by the date specified in this 
Loan Agreement for the purposes of this Section, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of 
the parties thereunder shall terminate, unless ADB, after consideration of the reasons for the 
delay, shall establish a later date for the purposes of this Section. ADB shall promptly notify 
the Borrower of such later date.

Section 8.05. Termination on Full Payment. If and when the 
entire principal amount of this Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and all service charges 
which shall have accrued on the Loan and all other charges (including the Management Fee) 
on the Loan shall have been paid, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of the parties 
thereunder shall forthwith terminate.

ARTICLE IX

Enforceability; Failure to Exercise Rights; Arbitration

Section 9.01. Enforceability. (a) The rights and obligations 
of ADB and the Borrower under this Loan Agreement shall be valid and enforceable in 
accordance with their terms and, where either the Borrower is a member, notwithstanding the 
law of any state or political or administrative subdivision thereof, to the contrary.

(b) Neither ADB nor the Borrower shall be entitled in any proceeding under 
this Article to assert any claim that any provision of this Loan Agreement is invalid or 
unenforceable because of any provision of the Articles of Agreement Establishing the Asian 
Development Bank or for any other reason.

Section 9.02. Failure to Exercise Rights. No delay in 
exercising, or omission to exercise, any right, power or remedy accruing to either party under 
this Loan Agreement upon any default shall impair any such right, power or remedy, or be 
construed to be a waiver thereof or an acquiescence in any such default; nor shall the action 
of such party in respect of any default, or any acquiescence in any default, affect or impair any 
right, power or remedy of such party in respect of any other or subsequent default.

Section 9.03. Arbitration. (a) Any controversy between the 
parties to this Loan Agreement and any claim by any such party against any other such party 
arising under this Loan Agreement which shall not be settled by agreement of the parties shall 
be submitted to arbitration by an Arbitral Tribunal as hereinafter provided.



21
Schedule 1

(b) The parties to such arbitration shall be ADB, on the one side, and the 
Borrower on the other side.

(c) The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators appointed as 
follows: one arbitrator shall be appointed by ADB; a second arbitrator shall be appointed by 
the Borrower; and the third arbitrator (hereinafter sometimes called the Presiding Arbitrator) 
shall be appointed by agreement of the parties or, if they shall not agree, by the President of 
the International Court of Justice or, failing appointment by him, by the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. If either side shall fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Presiding Arbitrator shall 
appoint such arbitrator. In case any arbitrator appointed in accordance with this Section shall 
resign, die or become unable to act, a successor arbitrator shall be appointed in the same 
manner as herein prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and such successor 
shall have all the powers and duties of such original arbitrator.

(d) An arbitration proceeding may be instituted under this Section upon 
notice by the party instituting such proceeding to the other party or parties. Such notice shall 
contain a statement setting forth the nature of the controversy or claim to be submitted to 
arbitration, the nature of the relief sought and the name of the arbitrator appointed by the party 
instituting such proceeding. Within 30 days after the giving of such notice, the other party or 
parties shall notify the party instituting the proceeding of the name of the arbitrator appointed 
by such other party or parties.

(e) If within 60 days after the giving of the notice instituting the arbitration 
proceeding the parties shall not have agreed upon a Presiding Arbitrator, any party may 
request the appointment of a Presiding Arbitrator as provided in paragraph (c) of this Section.

(f) The Arbitral Tribunal shall convene at such time and place as shall be 
fixed by the Presiding Arbitrator. Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal shall determine where and 
when it shall sit

(g) The law to be applied by the Arbitral Tribunal shall be public international 
law, the sources of which shall be taken for these purposes to include:

(i) any relevant treaty obligations that are binding reciprocally on 
the parties;

(ii) the provisions of any international conventions and treaties 
(whether or not binding directly as such on the parties) generally 
recognized as having codified or ripened into binding rules of 
customary law applicable to states and international institutions, 
as appropriate;

(iii) other forms of international custom, including the practice of 
states and international institutions of such generality, 
consistency and duration as to create legal obligations; and

(iv) applicable general principles of law.



22
Schedule 1

(h) Subject to the provisions of this Section and except as the parties shall
otherwise agree, the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide all questions relating to its competence and 
shall determine its procedure. All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be by majority vote.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal shall afford to all parties a fair hearing and shall
render its award in writing. Such award may be rendered by default. An award signed by a 
majority of the Arbitral Tribunal shall constitute the award of such Arbitral Tribunal. A signed 
counterpart of the award shall be transmitted to each party. Any such award rendered in 
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be final and binding upon the parties to 
this Loan Agreement. Each party shall abide by and comply with any such award rendered by 
the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

0) The parties shall fix the amount of the remuneration of the arbitrators
and such other persons as shall be required for the conduct of the arbitration proceedings. If 
the parties shall not agree on such amount before the Arbitral Tribunal shall convene, the 
Arbitral Tribunal shall fix such amount as shall be reasonable under the circumstances. Each 
party shall defray its own expenses in the arbitration proceedings. The costs of the Arbitral 
Tribunal shall be divided between and borne equally by ADB on the one side, and the Borrower 
on the other side. The Arbitral Tribunal shall determine any question concerning the division 
of the costs of the Arbitral Tribunal or the procedure for payment of such costs.

(k) The provisions for arbitration set forth in this Section shall be in lieu of
any other procedure for the settlement of controversies between the parties to this Loan 
Agreement any claim by either party against the other such party arising thereunder.

(I) If within 30 days after the counterparts of the award have been delivered
to the parties the award shall not be complied with, any party may enter judgment upon, or 
institute a proceeding to enforce, the award in any court of competent jurisdiction against any 
other party, and may enforce such judgment by execution or may pursue any other appropriate 
remedy against such other party for the enforcement of the award and the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section shall not authorize any entry of 
judgment or enforcement of the award against any party that is a member except as such 
procedure may be available otherwise than by reason of the provisions of this Section.

(m) Service of any notice or process in connection with any proceeding
under this Section or (to the extent that such remedy shall be available) in connection with any 
proceeding to enforce any award rendered pursuant to this Section may be made in the 
manner provided in Section 9.01. The parties to this Loan Agreement waive any and all other 
requirements for the service of any such notice or process.

ARTICLE X

Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 10.01. Notices and Requests. Any notice or request 
required or permitted to be given or made under this Loan Agreement; and any other 
agreement between any of the parties contemplated by this Loan Agreement shall be in writing.



23
Schedule 1

Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.03, such notice or request shall be deemed to have 
been duly given or made when it shall be delivered by hand or by mail, facsimile or electronic 
mail to the party to which it is required or permitted to be given or made at such party's address 
specified in this Loan Agreement or at such other address as such party shall have designated 
by notice to the party giving such notice or making such request.

Section 10.02. Authority to Take Action. Any action required or 
permitted to be taken, and any documents required or permitted to be executed, under this 
Loan Agreement, on behalf of the Borrower, as the case may be, may be taken or executed 
by the representative of the Borrower designated in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section or any person thereunto authorized in writing by such representative. Any 
modification of the provisions of this Loan may be agreed to on behalf of the Borrower, by 
written instrument executed on behalf of the Borrower by the representative so designated or 
any person authorized in writing by such representative; provided that, in the opinion of such 
representative or other person, such modification is reasonable in the circumstances and will 
not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement. ADB 
may accept the execution by such representative or other person of any such instrument as 
conclusive evidence that in the opinion of such representative or other person any modification 
of the provisions of this Loan Agreement effected by such instrument is reasonable in the 
circumstances and will not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower thereunder.

Section 10.03. Evidence of Authority. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person or persons who will, on behalf 
of the Borrower, take any action or execute any documents required or permitted to be taken 
or executed by the Borrower under this Loan Agreement, and the authenticated specimen 
signature of each such person.

Section 10.04. Withholding of Payments to Member on Shares, 
(a) If the member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out ceases to be a member 
of ADB, any amount due to the member for its shares repurchased by ADB shall be withheld 
so long as the member, its centra! bank or any of its agencies, or political or administrative 
subdivision remain liable to ADB under the Loan Agreement, or under any other loan 
agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB, and such amount may, at the option of ADB, 
be applied on any such liability as its matures.

(b) In the event of a distribution of the assets of ADB, the member in whose
territory the Project is to be carried out shall not be entitled to receive its share in such 
distribution until it has settled all of its obligations to ADB including its obligations under the 
Loan Agreement, or under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB.

Section 10.05. Execution in Counterparts. The Loan
Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original.


26

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table").

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Service Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Service Charge” is for financing the service
charge on the Loan, during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such service charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook and detailed arrangements agreed upon 
between ADB and the Borrower.



27
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. The Loan proceeds shall not be used to finance any commitments or costs
incurred prior to the Effective Date unless approved by GCF in advance in writing.



28
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for GCF Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works - Irrigation and Roads 9,963,900 12.7% of total expenditure claimed

2 Service Charge 36,100 100% of amount due

TOTAL 10,000,000



29

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

1. The Borrower acknowledges and agrees that the Borrower has no right of
action, whether in contract, tort or under statute to the extent permitted by law, against GCF in 
respect of the ADB Green Climate Fund, the Project or any loss or damage arising out of ADB’s 
acts or omissions, or the acts of omissions of its officers, employees, agents or consultants 
under, or in connection with, this Loan Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall fully cooperate with ADB regarding any reviews, ad hoc
checks, verifications or evaluations by GCF.

3. In addition to the audit requirement under Section 4.02 of this Loan Agreement,
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that ADB has the right to conduct financial audits of 
the Project, by an external auditor selected by ADB, if GCF has a concern as to the manner in 
which the Grant proceeds have been used; and shall fully cooperate with such audit. The 
Borrower shall bear the reasonable cost of such audit, if the audit finds that the Loan proceeds 
have not been used according to this Loan Agreement

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all necessary and applicable licenses, approvals
and consents, including those relating to intellectual property, to implement and carry out the 
Project and operate the Project facilities are valid for the duration of the Project.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities related to the Project are
implemented in compliance with the laws of the Borrower and other laws applicable to it, 
including but not limited to intellectual property law, if and to the extent any such laws may be 
applicable to it.

6, The Borrower shall endeavor to acknowledge the visual identity of GCF in
funding the Project (e.g., through use of the GCF logo, in accordance with GCF’s branding 
guidelines, and appropriate references in reports, publications, information given to 
beneficiaries and news media, related publicity materials and any other forms of public 
information and the displaying of the GCF logo on the site of any infrastructure works). Any 
branding activities in support of GCF shall comply with GCF’s branding guidelines and be 
reviewed by the GCF Secretariat.























































LOAN NUMBER 3668-BHU(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Phuentsholing Township Development Project)

between

KINGDOM OF BHUTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 3 JULY 2018

BHU 50165



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 3 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by Druk Holdings and Investments
Limited (“DHI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to DHI the proceeds of 
the loan provided for herein and the grant provided for the Grant Agreement (as hereinafter 
defined) (together, the “Financings") upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith (“Grant Agreement”), ADB
has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred 
sixty thousand Dollars ($24,260,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreements of even date herewith between ADB and each of DHI and Construction 
Development Corporation Limited ("CDCL”);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement" means the project agreements of even date 
herewith between ADB and each of DHI and CDCL, as each such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the terms "DHI” and “CDCL”.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) "Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings aS described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 
to this Loan Agreement;

(c) "Environmental Impact Assessment” or “EIA” means the environmental 
impact assessment for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
theSPS;

(f) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Ngultrum” means the Borrower’s currency;

(h) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(i) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
24 July 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to. time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(j) “Project Administration Manual” or “PAM" means the Project’s 
administration manual for the Project dated 24 July 2017 and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the 
Borrower and ADB;

(k) “Project Advisory Committee” or "PAC” means the Project's advisory 
committee chaired by DHI’s Chief Executive Officer and comprising 
representatives as stated in the PAM;

(I) “Project Implementation Unit" or “PIU" means the Project 
implementation unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;



3

(m) “Project Management Unit” or “PMU” means the Project management 
unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;

(n) "Safeguard Policy Statement" or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(o) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventive actions;

(p) “Strategic Action Plan” or “SAP" means the strategic action plan for 
sustainable township management in form and substance acceptable 
to ADB referred to in paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(q) “Subsidiary Financing Agreement” means the agreement referred to in 
Section 3.01 of this Loan Agreement and Section 3.01 of the Grant 
Agreement;

(r) “Subsidiary Loan" means the loan from the Borrower to CDCL under 
the Subsidiary Financing Agreement; and

. (s) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings, including services such as drilling or 
mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 
single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-eight million seven hundred forty thousand 
Dollars ($28,740,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24. years, and 
additionally, a grace period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.



4

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 1 February and 1 August in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan in Ngultrum to DHI under a Subsidiary Financing Agreement upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB (and DHI shall provide same to CDCL). Except as ADB shall otherwise 
agree, the terms for relending the proceeds of the Loan shall include interest at the rate of 
1% per annum during the grace period and 2.55% per annum thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time, and a term of 
32 years including a grace period of 8 years. The Borrower shall bear the risk associated 
with exchange mismatch between the Loan and the Subsidiary Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Works 
and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Works and Consulting Services which are supplied from such member 
countries of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to 
time as eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable DHI and CDCL to perform their respective obligations under 
the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with 
the performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Financing Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement 
shall be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under 
the Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower or DHI shall have failed to perform any of their respective 
obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following are specified as additional events for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement shall have been fulfilled; and .

(b) the Subsidiary Financing Agreement, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and DHI and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Subsidiary Financing Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of each of the Borrower and 
DHI and is legally binding upon each of them in accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Royal Government of Bhutan
Thimphu, Bhutan



7

Facsimile Number:

+975 2 330-113

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2293.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

LYONPO NAMGAY DORJI 
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

KANOKPAN LAO-ARAYA 
Country Director 

Bhutan Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to sustainably increase the urban area of
Phuentsholing.

2. The Project shall comprise (i) development of climate and flood resilient land;
(ii) construction of municipal infrastructure; and (iii) installation of sustainable township 
management systems.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided in connection with the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2025.



Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to. “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(USD) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 10,360,000 57% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 7,420,000 98% of total expenditure claimed

3 Unallocated 10,960,000

TOTAL 28,740,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to and
governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. , All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Works

4. Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods set forth
below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) Force Account; and

(c) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. CDCL shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) The Borrower’s National Environment Commission has granted the 
final approval of the EIA; and

(b) CDCL has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contract.

Consulting Services

6. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

7. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for independent
environmental monitoring expert, urban management advisor and investment promotion 



15
Schedule 4

advisor in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Works procured (including without
limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or 
incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in subparagraph (a) of this 
paragraph.

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL employ sufficient staff for the
PMU and PIU for the duration of the Project, with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, and 
environmental and social safeguards implementation. The PMU Project Director and PIU 
Project Director shall hold the position not less than the rank of Class 1 engineer, or 
equivalent, Officers, unless otherwise acceptable to.ADB.

3. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) ensure that the majority of counterpart
staff assigned to the PMU and PIU are assigned to the Project on a full-time basis; and (b) 
undertake best efforts to ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of 
time, and that staff replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The 
Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall provide ADB reasonable opportunity to comment on any 
proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMU and PIU, including the Project 
Director for the PMU and the Project Directors for PIU.

4. The Borrower shall remain fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that
all its ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project give 
their full cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project. Specifically, the 
Borrower shall cause DHI and CDCL to give full, timely and efficient cooperation in obtaining 
any licenses, permits or approvals required in connection with infrastructure work. The 
Borrower shall also ensure that Bhutan Power Corporation and Bhutan Telecom will provide 
the necessary connections in the developed areas.

Strategic Action Plan

5. Within 36 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower though DHI shall
develop and finalize, and ensure approval by the relevant government agency and 
implementation of, the SAP, which shall include, among other matters, (i) the required legal, 
policy and operational frameworks for operation of the new township that will establish 
institutional arrangements for sustainable township management, including the required 
approval process, and the allocation of roles and responsibilities between the municipality 
and CDCL; (ii) the allocation of sufficient municipal and CDCL human resources; (iii) a plan 
on the development of the surrounding area adjacent to the newly developed township, 
including plans for raising grounds level for the protection for surface flooding; and (tv) a time 
bound plan for the operation and maintenance of the newly developed township.



17
Schedule 5

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Recipient relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EIA and the EMP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract.

8. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any involuntary
resettlement impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any indigenous
peoples’ impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any such 
impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with 
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set 
forth above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the principles of gender equality aimed at
increasing Project benefits, and impact on women in the Project area are followed during 
implementation of the Project. These include (a) equal pay to men and women for work of 
equal value; (b) enabling working conditions for women workers; and (c) taking necessary 



18
Schedule 5

actions to encourage women living in the Project area to participate in the design and 
implementation of Project activities.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available, or cause DHI and CDCL to make
available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure, that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts or affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that arise during construction, 
implementation or operation of the Project that were not considered in 
the EIA and the EMP;

(d) ■ adequately record the condition, of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall to do the following:

(a) submit bi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the EIA and the EMP, promptly inform ADB 
of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of 
the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than six months of the Effective Date, engage qualified and 
experienced external experts or qualified NGO[sj under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 



19
Schedule 5

information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Financings are used to
finance any activity included in the list of' prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower through DHI will provide all counterpart funds, land and facilities
required for timely and effective implementation of the Project, including without limitation, 
any funds required to (a) to meet any shortfall between cost and revenues for the operation 
and maintenance of the facilities developed under the Project, (b) to mitigate any unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts, and (c) to meet additional costs arising from design 
changes, price escalation in construction costs and/or unforeseen circumstances. The 
Borrower will make the resources thus required available on an annual basis for each fiscal 
year. In addition to the foregoing, the. Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL have 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Corruption

17. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to 
investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

Operation and Maintenance

19. The Borrower shall develop and implement a program for regular and periodic
maintenance of the facilities to be financed by the Project in accordance with international 
best practices acceptable to ADB, and make adequate resources available, through 
budgetary allocations or otherwise, for this purpose.



20
Schedule 5

Exemption of Import Duties

20. The Borrower shall exempt the cost of Works contracts from otherwise
applicable customs duties.





