























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jul-2020 | Report No: PIDA29687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guinea-Bissau P174336 Guinea Bissau Emergency 
Food Security Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST 18-Jun-2020 28-Jul-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
(i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase access to food for consumption by food insecure 
households in Guinea Bissau 

 
Components 

Support to Agricultural Production 
Support to Community Safety Nets 
Support to Risk Mitigation 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 15.00 

Total Financing 15.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 15.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 


World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 15.00 

          IDA Grant 15.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Moderate 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Guinea-Bissau is one of the most fragile countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, plagued by political 
turmoil and coup d’états since independence in 1974. Between 2000 and the present, the country has 
had 16 Prime-Ministers appointed to lead different Governments. The internal instability, often 
associated with problems in the political and military structure of the country, has prevented the 
formation of stable and accountable institutions and had devastating effects on the economy.   

2. The incidence of poverty is high, with over 69 percent of the population living below the poverty 
line (2011 PPP at US$1.90 per person per day), making it one of the poorest countries in the world. 
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where it is compounded by deprivation of social services, human 
capital, and infrastructure. Average real GDP growth, although modest, improved from 0.3 percent per 
year in 2013 to 6 percent per year in 20171, mainly driven by increased global demand for cashew nuts - 
the country’s main export crop. Per capita GDP is now estimated at US$780, although the Gini coefficient 
is high (sharply increasing from 0.35 in 2002 to 0.5 in 2010), pointing to high levels of inequality- with 
economic growth mostly benefiting the top income group. The country ranks 178th out of 189 countries 
on the 2019 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index, and thus falls 
under the low human development category. 

3. The impact of COVID-19 on the overall economy is expected to be severe. The main transmission 
channels include external (falling global cashew demand and price, tighter financial conditions, and low 
oil prices) reduced remittances, and domestic (economic disruptions caused by lockdowns and direct 
health impact of a wider spread of COVID-19). Health sector capacity is low and government effectiveness 
is weak. Guinea-Bissau has no fiscal and financial sector buffers to counter a sharp economic downturn, 
but it benefits from regional monetary buffers in the short-term. In the baseline scenario where 
lockdowns are short-lived, growth is projected to decline from 4.6 percent in 2019 to -1.5 percent in 2020 
and the fiscal deficit to increase from 5.1 to 6.2 percent. In the downside scenario, where lockdowns are 
sustained, growth would decline to -3.1 percent in 2020. The crisis could undo the modest gains made in 
poverty reduction2. 

 
1 Declined to 3.8 percent in 2018 due to a sharp drop in cashew production and somewhat lower international cashew prices. 
2 Guinea-Bissau: The Economic Impact of the COVID-19 Global Crisis. World Bank Note (April 30, 2020). 


4. Although Guinea Bissau has mineral resource endowments that could generate substantial 
revenues and greatly contribute to economic growth and development, agriculture is still the mainstay 
of the country’s economy. Over 80 percent of population relies on agriculture for their livelihood and the 
sector employs close to 70 percent of the country’s work force (most of whom are women)3. The sector, 
driven by cashew nut production, generates most - 95 percent - of the country’s foreign exchange, 17 
percent of fiscal revenues, and accounts for over 47 percent of GDP. 

5. Guinea-Bissau is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to climate change. Recent climate 
scenarios portend significant changes in the climate of Guinea-Bissau. These scenarios systematically 
signal increased average daily temperatures of up to +1.4°C for the period 2016-2045, potentially reaching 
up to +2.2°C in the 2046-2075 period, per a low emissions assumption. Under a high emissions scenario, 
the changes are in the order of +1.6°C to +3.1°C for the period 2046 to 2075. These changes are expected 
to lead to a dramatic reduction in rainfall, with serious implications on agriculture, especially production 
of rice, the main staple. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. Agriculture (defined as crops, fisheries, livestock and forestry) is the dominant sector in the 
economy, contributing about 47.5 percent of GDP. Agriculture represents the primary source of income 
for 85 percent of the population and provides the livelihood for most of the poor. Within agriculture, the 
production and export of raw cashew nut is the dominant sector, acting as the main source of income for 
more than two thirds of households and for virtually all smallholders in the country. It also accounts for 
more than 95 percent of total export revenue and 17 percent of its fiscal revenues. High concentration in 
and dependence on cashew nuts exposes the country’s economy to both external and internal shocks on 
the sector.   

7. While the favorable ecological and climatic conditions render more than 60 percent of the total 
land area suitable for crop production, less than 12 percent is currently under permanent or seasonal 
cultivation. Years of instability destroyed household capacity as well as productive relationships, 
traditional markets, infrastructure, and social and economic institutions that support the sector. In 
addition, chronic public sector underinvestment in agriculture (less than 1 percent of GDP) undermines 
delivery of public goods and as a result, the sector is characterized by low productivity - with yields of key 
crops lagging behind those of the country’s regional peers (for example: 320 kilograms per hectare for 
cashew nuts compared to 520 kilograms per hectare in Cote d’Ivoire; and 1.7 tons per hectare for rice, 
compared to 4 tons per hectare in Senegal). Any increases in aggregate production have largely been 
achieved through area expansion, rather than improvements in total factor productivity and average 
annual sector growth has barely kept pace with population growth.  

8. A confluence of the comparatively superior benefits from cashew production (see Table 1), gaps in 
the land property law (which incentivize tree planting as a way of strengthening tenure security), and lack 
of an enabling environment4, has  over the last four decades, mediated a strong shift in the country’s 
agriculture production system towards cashew production.  

 
3 Female employment in agriculture in Guinea Bissau was 70.7 percent in 2019, compared with 65.8 percent for male 
employment-http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/guinea-bissau 
4 Including poor infrastructure, constrained access to inputs, technology, knowledge, markets, capital and availability of skilled 
labor. 


Table 1. Comparative advantage of the cashew crop in relation to main crops in Guinea-Bissau. 

Crop option Days spent Added value per day (CFA) Advantage compared with cashew (CFA) 

Paddy rice 312 232 -2,478 
Pluvial rice 109 177 -2,533 
Maize 70 1657 -1,053 
Sorghum 94 870 -1,840 
Millet 114 618 -2,092 
Peanuts 78 660 -2,050 
Cotton 115 987 -1,723 
Cashew 118 2710 0 

9. From 14,000 ha in 1978, area under cashew cultivation has expanded at an average annual growth 
rate of 8 percent and now stands at 223,000 ha, which is about 56 percent of total area (about 400,000 
ha) under cultivation. Most farming households maintain a disproportionately higher share of their 
cultivated area under the perennial cashew, devoting the rest to food production- mainly rice, sorghum, 
millet, maize, peanut, and cassava. Farmers also use income from cashew sales to finance the purchase 
of agricultural inputs necessary to produce the food crops. 

10. Low average productivity5 and the already smaller acreage devoted to food crops, constrains, not 
only the production of amounts of food crops enough to meet farming households’ food requirements, 
but also the generation of marketable surpluses that could feed into the domestic market. 
Consequently, most farmers are also net food buyers and yet again use cashew nut proceeds to meet, in 
some cases up to 6 months of their food needs. Because of insufficient domestic production, the country, 
as a whole, relies on imports to bridge the gaps in domestic production. These food imports are mostly 
financed by forex revenues accruing from cashew exports. 

11. Guinea Bissau’s food security is therefore intimately tied to the cashew nut sector and any market 
volatilities or shocks to the cashew sector, are wired to have wide ranging implications on food security. 
The COVID-19 pandemic vividly spotlights these links. The country is now reeling from the effects of 
COVID-19 related cashew value chain disruptions on food security. Among others, due to stalled cashew 
sales: (i) most farmers cannot access necessary input and now face the dire prospect of not engaging in 
the forthcoming food crop growing season; (ii) those who rely on cashew sales and wages from the cashew 
value chain to meet some of their food security requirements are already experiencing challenges in 
accessing food; and (iii) food imports required to fill the demand gaps, are expected to be constrained by 
the limited foreign exchange reserves as a result of both the delayed cashew sales as well as the expected 
lower prices. The prevailing political uncertainty exacerbates these food security challenges. 

12. Government strategies acknowledge the risk posed by the high concentration in and high 
dependence of the economy on a single commodity. Within its limited resource and capacity constraints, 
the Government has been increasingly intentional in supporting more diversified agricultural production 
to wean the country off the raw cashew nut sector. The Government, with support from the World Bank 
Group has also supported the emergence of a cashew processing industry to reduce marketing risks and 
to help the country capture a larger share of final cashew prices through value addition. In the specific 
case of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Government has made available about US$0.65 million to help 
16,359 agricultural households to access input for the coming cropping season. There are also ongoing 
discussions with the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) for a US$43.8 million project 

 
5 Mainly due to limited access to advisory services, inputs, technologies, financing, and poor physical infrastructure. 


targeting diversification of production (some of the proceeds of which could go towards supporting 
increased food production in the short to medium term), as well as the African Development Bank for 
assistance with responding to the food security challenge and to support the cashew campaign. In 
addition, the Government also used the WAEMU/Central Bank facility to borrow FCFA 15 billion to support 
the cashew marketing campaign implemented through an MOU with the five locally based commercial 
banks. This operation contributes to these  efforts and will focus on: (i) provision of agricultural input 
(seed, fertilizer, small equipment, and labor) necessary to engage in food production in the short term; 
(ii) provision of a community safety net tied to a public works program; and (iii) developing market risk 
reduction strategies for the raw cashew nut sector. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

13. The objectives of the project are: (i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase 
access to food for consumption by food insecure households in Guinea Bissau. 

Key Results 

14. The Project is expected to: (i) reach 50,000 farming households with agricultural assets or services; 
(ii) contribute to the production of 205,000 metric tons of food crops; and (iii) provide immediate 
conditional cash support to 10,000 poor beneficiaries through participation in public works (cash-for-
work). Overall, the Project is expected to reach 378,000 beneficiaries, at least 50 percent of whom will be 
women. 

D. Project Description  
 

15. The proposed project seeks to urgently support the government of Guinea Bissau to proactively 
mitigate the short-to-medium-term food security challenges that the country is expected to face, as result 
of COVID-19 impacts on cashew nut production and marketing and on food production and prices. In 
addition, financing will be provided to strengthen the resilience of the cashew sector to market risks.  The 
project will be organized around five components as described below. 

Component 1: Support to Agricultural Production (US$10.0 million) 

16. The objective of this component is to support an accelerated supply response focused on 
preserving/restoring the productive capacity of 50,000 eligible farming households to enable them to 
effectively engage in continued and expanded production of key staple foods in the short - to medium -
term (6-24 months). The project will finance: (i) procurement and distribution of improved seeds and 
planting materials, with a focus on key food crops and vegetables; (ii) access to necessary farm equipment 
and labor; and (iii) provision of requisite advisory services in support of improved production, productivity 
and production system resilience to climate change. Special focus will be provided to market gardening, 
an important farming activity in the urban and peri-urban areas, which is mainly a women’s vocation. 
Where deemed critical to household food security, the project will support livestock services, including 
vaccination, deworming, and disease management. In addition, support under this component will go 
towards promoting climate-smart agriculture (CSA) techniques and practices, drought-resistant seeds, 
and capacity-building of the farmers.  

Component 2: Support to Community Safety Nets (US$2.5 million) 

17. The COVID-19 pandemic shock on the cashew nut sector is expected to lead to job losses along the 
value chain.  The impact of these job losses is expected to be greater for the multitude of unskilled laborers  

in the value chain, for whom the daily labor wages are the only source of income for household food 
security. The anticipated escalation in food prices (partly due to projected lower domestic production and 
higher import prices), is expected to amplify the shock on their household food security.  

18. Investment under this component is to ensure household food security for sections of the 
communities affected by job losses, by mitigating the expected shortfalls in their incomes through support 
for public works community-level works. This activity will target 10,000 beneficiaries, and its focus will be 
on establishing public assets that would contribute to or enhance the impact of support under Component 
1 as well as those that foster adaptation to climate change. These could include support to the distribution 
of inputs, rehabilitation of storage facilities, opening of access roads to agriculturally productive areas, 
public irrigation infrastructure, construction of local markets, rehabilitation of rice fields, etc. Presence of 
clear post operation maintenance mechanisms will be key in choice of public works to be funded to ensure 
sustainability. The daily wages for the cash-for-work activities will be below the local level for unskilled 
labor thus providing an ‘in-built” self-targeting mechanism for the conditional cash transfers that would 
also ensure that the public works do not compete with agriculture for seasonal labor. Where high levels 
of structural unemployment dictate against self-targeting, beneficiary selection will be guided by local 
leadership. Beneficiary selection would be sensitive to gender considerations. 

Component 3: Support to Risk Mitigation (US$1.5 million) 

19. The COVID-19 pandemic, has unveiled the significant vulnerability of Guinea Bissau’s economy to 
shocks, occasioned by high dependence on the quasi monoculture of a singular crop. While diversification 
is the ultimate panacea for this vulnerability, a number of ex-ante risk management measures (e.g. 
forward contracting, insurance, hedging, improved storage, etc.) as well as ex-post risk management 
instruments (e.g. contingent risk financing) can reduce the specific vulnerabilities of the cashew sector to 
market risks. The proposal is to explore the feasibility, and then pilot the implementation of locally 
appropriate market risk management measures for the cashew sector. This would serve to strengthen the 
resilience of the sector to market risks that the sector is increasingly exposed to (e.g. a price drop in 2018, 
current disruptions to the global supply chains) and would lay the ground for a sustainable recovery.  

Component 4:  Project Management (US$1.0 million).   

20. The objective of this component is to support MARD in facilitating   efficient implementation of 
project activities and tracking of results. The component will finance activities related to project 
coordination and management, including developing annual work plans and budgets, financial 
management (FM) and procurement, safeguards compliance, project monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
citizen engagement as well as a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).    

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million) 

21. This zero-cost, contingent emergency response component (CERC) will finance eligible expenditures 
in case of natural or man-made crises, disasters, severe economic shocks, or other crises and emergencies 
in Guinea Bissau. Implementation of this component will follow a detailed Contingent Emergency 
Response Implementation Plan (CERIP) satisfactory to the World Bank that will be prepared for each 
eligible crisis. 

.

.  



 

Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

22. The project is expected to have positive impacts by targeting mitigation of food crisis due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic outbreak through the support of crop diversification, helping smallholders to find 
alternative income besides from cashew value chain production, provide a community safety net tied to 
public works program; and support market risk reduction for raw cashew nuts. As project locations are 
yet to be agreed upon, an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared 
covering environmental and social risks and impacts caused by the civil works, use of pesticides and 
fertilizers and generation of waste during the implementation of the project. The ESMF sets out the 
principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the impacts from civil works provided by the project 
and help guide the preparation of site-specific (Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and 
Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). It includes screening, measures and plans to reduce, 
mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and impacts, provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of such 
measures, and information on the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) responsible for 
addressing project risks and impacts, including on its capacity to manage environmental and social risks 
and impacts of the project activities. The ESMF will include general Environment Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs), Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
measures for the identified sub-projects. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be 
developed for proper handling and use of pesticides. The recipient will also prepare an Environmental and 
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with the support of the Bank. The ESCP will include the commitment and 
the timeline for the preparation of subsequent ESIAs. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

23. Project implementation will be the responsibility of MARD, through a Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to be set up in MARD with project support. The primary responsibility of this PCU will be: (i) ensuring 
coordination, timeliness and technical soundness of implementation; (ii) contracting of implementation 
support partners; (iii) monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank. For these functions, the PCU 
will be staffed with a competitively selected Coordinator, Agricultural Specialist, Monitoring and 
Evaluation expert, Environment and Social Safeguards specialists, Procurement Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, as well as a Communication Specialist. The PCU will also work closely with 
technical staff from the relevant MARD directorates, to provide backstopping support to implementation. 
The relevant MARD staff will be identified as part of the assessment that would need to be conducted. As 
needs arise, other expertise would be hired into the MARD-PCU.  

24. Because of potential delays in establishing a functional PCU against a backdrop of the emergency 
nature of the operation, project implementation will start with the support of the Food and Agriculture 


Organization (FAO) which will manage Component 1 and Component 2 implementation in close 
collaboration with the MARD. In this context, FAO will support the sourcing and distribution of production 
inputs, provision of advisory services to beneficiary farmers, and identification of eligible beneficiaries 
under the cash-for-work activities, overseeing implementation of the cash-for-work activities and 
payments to beneficiaries. Similarly, project procurement and financial management will be initially 
delegated to the Project Implementation Unit of an on-going IDA-financed Safety Net and Basic Services 
Project (P163901), established within the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration. Once 
the PCU under MARD is fully functional, it will take full charge of implementation, including for Component 
3 activities. 

25. A Project Steering Committee (PSC), chaired by the Minister, MARD (or his/her representative), will 
be established to provide general oversight of the project. The PSC will include representatives from the 
Ministries of Economy and Finance, Trade, Social Affairs, cashew sector stakeholders, FAO6, and other 
entities deemed relevant. The PSC will be responsible for providing overall implementation and policy 
guidance. The PSC will meet four times a year. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC29338 

 
The World Bank  
Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) (P173398) 

 
 

  
Jun 09, 2020 Page 2 of 11  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P173398  Accelerating Impacts of 
CGIAR Climate 
Research for Africa 
(AICCRA) (P173398) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 16, 2020 Sep 30, 2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing International Center for 
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) 

International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), 
International Livestock 
Research Institute (ILRI) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food 
systems in the face of climate change. 
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 60.00 

Total Financing 60.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Grant 60.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
A policy waiver will be sought from IDA to allow the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international 
organization, to serve as recipient of a regional IDA grant. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Agriculture remains central to the livelihoods of millions of Africans, yet far too many agriculture-dependent Africans 
remain food insecure and malnourished. After a period of moderate improvement, food security throughout the region 
has recently deteriorated. Slowdowns in productivity growth, combined with increasingly frequent food production 
failures, point to the need to significantly raise the bar when it comes to increasing the productive capacity and 
strengthening the resilience of rural households. The economic hardship resulting from the COVID-19 crisis are expected 
to further worsen food insecurity in the region, making resilience-building an even more urgent task. 

The livelihoods of African farmers and livestock keepers, long known to be vulnerable to the vicissitudes of weather, are 
being severely impacted by climate change. Climate-related shocks to food production have increased in frequency from 
occurring once every 12.5 years to occurring once every 2.5 years. The increased frequency of climate-induced production 
shocks have made it increasingly difficult to maintain positive growth in per capita food production over the longer term.   

Climate change is projected to further increase the number of drought days in Africa and shorten growing seasons. 
Droughts, floods, and tropical storms are the climatic events that affect food production the most. Substantial increases 
in these major drivers of crop and livestock production shortfalls are projected for large parts of Africa. This at a time when 
the number of people to feed will almost double by 2050 to over 2 billion―a population that will be increasingly urbanized. 

Climate change poses a serious threat to crop productivity in sub-regions within Africa that are already food insecure. The 
impact is projected to be highest in maize, millet, sorghum, and wheat. Climate change will also affect productivity in 
Africa’s livestock sector. Depending on the location and prevailing production systems, water scarcity will lower the 
productivity of pastures, reduce yields of milk and meat, and increase the incidence of diseases. All this will translate into 
a significant deterioration in food security, if no action is taken. 

Agriculture is an important livelihood source for women throughout sub-Saharan Africa and an important source of 
employment. Studies consistently show that in most parts of sub-Saharan Africa, productivity of women farmers 
consistently lags behind that of men farmers. The sources of the productivity gap have been amply documented including 
land, improved technologies, lesser access to inputs, credit, insurance, and advisory services. They are thus generally less 
well-resourced, and hence more vulnerable to shocks that negatively impact farming and livestock keeping activities.  

Women farmers are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts, due to household responsibilities as well as increased 
agricultural work from male out-migration. Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) options have the potential to provide benefits 
for women; when they have access to information on CSA, they are just as likely as men to adopt the practices. Women 
can be important agents of innovation, including in response to climate change, and ensuring that women beneficiaries 


of the project are able to avail of CSA technologies and climate information will be a focus of the project’s gender strategy.  

The ambition of many African governments to improve food security, nationally and at household level, is in danger of not 
being met. The 2014 Malabo Declaration set ambitious 2025 targets to end hunger, double agricultural productivity, halve 
post-harvest losses, and sustain agricultural GDP growth of at least 6 percent per year. The region is not on track to meet 
these targets, and it will be difficult to make sustained progress in the face of large climate-induced production shocks.  

Strengthening the productivity and resilience of African agriculture will depend critically on the ability of governments and 
their partners to bring science and innovation to the forefront of the development agenda. Urgent action is needed to 
improve climate adaptation of Africa’s food systems. Incentives, knowledge, science, and finance will all need to play a 
role, together with increased co-ordination among development partners to improve the climate resilience of production 
systems, build efficient value chains, facilitate internal and external trade, and boost the purchasing power of the most 
vulnerable households. As countries contemplate a shift towards climate-smart investments, investing in agricultural 
research is more critical than ever. The high returns to investment in agricultural research and innovation are well 
documented, and a large body of evidence shows that such investment is very effective at reducing poverty and hunger. 

In recognition of the critical role played by science and innovation in enabling the adaptation of African agriculture to 
climate change, the World Bank recently announced an increase in support to CGIAR. At the Climate Action Summit that 
took place during the UN General Assembly held in September 2019, President Malpass announced an increase in support 
to CGIAR. While the CGIAR system has in the past received direct grants from the World Bank, the unprecedented decision 
to use IDA financing to support CGIAR reflects the World Bank’s strong commitment to step up support to CGIAR despite 
a constrained budget environment. The incremental financing presents a unique opportunity to support critical CGIAR 
work being done for the benefit of millions of poor households in IDA countries whose livelihoods depend on agriculture.   

The World Bank’s increased support for CGIAR comes at a critical time, when the COVID-19 pandemic is further 
threatening food security throughout the region and undermining the livelihoods of millions of agriculture-dependent 
households. Going forward, efforts will be needed to increase domestic food production throughout the region and make 
food supply chains more resilient to the threat of pandemics, by promoting innovation and building additional capacity to 
manage pests and diseases while monitoring the health and safety of food. CGIAR will be at the forefront of these efforts. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
CGIAR is the world leader in international agriculture research on climate change adaptation. With a budget of around 
US$1 billion, CGIAR operates at a scale that when combined with the investments made by its many partners is having a 
measurable impact on climate adaptation efforts worldwide. CGIAR specializes in “translational research,” adapting 
knowledge produced through basic research so it can be applied in specific contexts. CGIAR does this by partnering with 
regional organizations, national research institutions, civil society organizations, and private firms and individuals.  

CGIAR can play a vital catalytic role in strengthening the agriculture research architecture in Africa, if the “missing middle” 
can be filled. At present, regional and national programs in Africa have difficulty engaging with CGIAR in a systematic way, 
and what is happening now is often done in an ad hoc manner. A major obstacle is the absence of resources to support 
interactions between CGIAR Centers on the one hand (funded mainly by international donors) and regional and national 
programs on the other hand (funded mainly by African governments). New sources of flexible funding are needed to 
facilitate the engagement between CGIAR and regional and national programs in Africa.  

The CGIAR Research Program (CRP) on Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food Security (CCAFS) is at the forefront of 
fostering climate adaptation in agriculture and food systems. The over-arching objectives of CCAFS are: (i) to identify and 
test pro-poor climate change adaptation and mitigation practices, technologies and policies for food systems, adaptive 
capacity and rural livelihoods; and (ii) to provide diagnosis and analysis that will ensure cost effective investments, the 


inclusion of agriculture in climate change policies, and the inclusion of climate issues in agricultural policies, from the sub-
national to the global level in a way that brings benefits to the rural poor.  

CCAFS is being implemented by a consortium of CGIAR and non-CGIAR partners, under the leadership of the International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), an international agricultural research center within the CGIAR system with the 
mandate to carry out research on problems of tropical agriculture for the benefit of developing countries. CCAFS work is 
led by staff at CGIAR Centers and at six partner universities, including: (1) Leeds University, (2) Columbia University, (3) 
University of Vermont, (4) University of Oxford, (5) Utrecht University, and (6) Wageningen University.  

CCAFS activities are focused on enhancing climate resilience in Sub-Saharan Africa, but the level of funding is inadequate. 
During 2017-2019, nearly one-half (48 percent) of the total CCAFS budget of $160 million went to support work in Africa, 
including 26 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in West Africa and 22 percent allocated to CCAFS programs in East 
Africa. CCAFS has an approved expenditure framework, but shortfalls in expected donor financing have resulted in 
significant funding gaps that threaten the achievement of some critical results. Moreover, since CCAFS was approved in 
2018, new evidence has emerged (for example, IPCC’s 2019 1.5 degree assessment report) that makes clear that the level 
of ambition to promote climate adaptation must increase dramatically. 

AICCRA will support CCAFS programs and activities that are targeted specifically to Africa and will help take to scale the 
most strategic and impactful CCAFS-Africa programs, promoting resilience to climate change and improved food security 
in the region. AICCRA will fill a critical gap by making cutting-edge CGIAR research and innovation available to NARS and 
other key stakeholders in Africa. It will support knowledge creation and capacity building activities to enable regional and 
national-level stakeholders to take CSA innovations to scale. It will achieve that by fostering partnerships between CGIAR 
and local research institutes, universities, civil society organizations, farmer organizations, and private sector. AICCRA will 
facilitate the development of Climate Information Services (CIS) and promote the adoption of CSA solutions across sub-
regions within Africa that are extremely vulnerable to climate change. The project will also support on-the-ground 
activities in selected countries in Western, Eastern and Southern Africa where CGIAR science has the greatest chance of 
success in delivering catalytic results, which can be adopted by other countries in the region. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
AICCRA is well aligned with World Bank regional strategies. AICCRA will support the World Bank Africa Regional Integration 
and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (2018). It will contribute to the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and 
Violence 2020–2025, as well as to the World Bank Group Adaptation and Resilience Action Plan (2018) and the World Bank 
Africa Climate Business Plan (2018) and New Generation Climate Business Plan (under preparation). In addition, it will 
contribute to the activities proposed under World Bank Country Partnership Frameworks for many countries being served 
in Africa by CCAFS.  

AICCRA will build upon the achievements of past and current engagements by the World Bank in Africa. The design of 
AICCRA incorporates lessons learned from other World Bank initiatives in the region, including the West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Programs (WAAPP), the Great Green Wall initiative (GGW), the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project 
(SIIP), and the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS), among others.  

AICCRA will complement and add value to future World Bank lending operations in Africa. The World Bank is preparing a 
series of new lending operations to mobilize cutting-edge science in addressing food security needs in the face of the 
global climate crisis by promoting the successful adoption of proven technologies on a massive scale. Noteworthy among 
these is the West Africa Food System Resilience Program (FSRP) The success of FSRP, which forms part of the Africa 
Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy, will depend critically on the ability of the participating entities 
to access the newest and most effective technologies available, especially those generated by CGIAR. AICCRA will 
complement FSRP by serving as a conduit for the international science generated by CGIAR Centers to reach the regional 


and national actors who will be supported by FSRP (e.g. ECOWAS, CORAF).  

As a regional project, AICCRA will fill an important niche in the Word Bank’s’ Africa portfolio and help to advance the 
regional integration agenda. By supporting activities that will be implemented at sub-regional level through multi-actor 
networks, AICCRA will be able to achieve outcomes that cannot be achieved easily, if at all, by engaging with individual 
partners at country level. On the research supply side, working at regional level justifies investment in infrastructure and 
personnel at scales that surpass minimum critical mass and allow economies of scale to be captured. On the research 
demand side, working at regional level facilitates the flow of innovations across national borders and enhances learning 
effects, increasing the number of adopters and amplifying the benefits. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The Development Objective is to increase access for agriculture research and extension service providers in Africa to 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools relevant to enhancing the resilience of agriculture and food systems 
in the face of climate change. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
Achievements of the Project will be measured using the following PDO level indicators: 
 
Results Area 1: Knowledge and tools needed to project likely impacts of climate change on agricultural systems available 
for use by beneficiaries in project area.  

Results Area 2: Climate-smart agriculture technologies available for upscaling in project area. 
 
D. Concept Description 
 

AICCRA will focus on bridging the gap between the research institutes that produce improved technologies and the 
development organizations that promote the adoption of improved technologies, for the purpose of enhancing the 
resilience of Africa’s agriculture and food systems in the face of climate change. Through support to CCAFS, AICCRA will 
strengthen the technical, institutional, and human capacity needed to move CGIAR innovations off the shelf and achieve 
impacts at scale in IDA-eligible countries in Africa. 

AICCRA will strengthen systemic capacity to monitor climate change in Africa, project the likely impacts of climate 
change on local agri-food systems, identify improved technologies that can strengthen the resilience of those systems in 
the face of climate change, and transfer knowledge about the improved technologies to agri-food system actors. The 
knowledge, technologies, and decision making tools promoted under AICCRA will be of value not only to productive agents 
(e.g., farmers, livestock keepers, assemblers, processors, and distributors), but also to the public, private, and civil society 
organizations that play critical roles in delivering improved technologies to productive agents.  

Climate advisories generated through monitoring networks and early warning systems work much better when they 
flow rapidly and easily into decision support systems and are integrated with input provision. For that reason, there is 
a need not only to strengthen monitoring and analytical capacity to make sure systems are in place that can generate 
timely and relevant climate advisories and early warnings, but also a need to implement policies and reinforce institutions 
to ensure that those climate advisories and early warnings can be translated into effective preventive actions, for example 
through changes in the types and amounts of inputs being used, or adjustments in management practices. In addition, 
decision support systems must be capable of channelling information from service users back to service providers, to 
inform research so that it becomes more demand-driven and responsive to local needs.  



AICCRA will consist of four components. Box 1 provides illustrative examples of the results which are anticipated from the 
three large areas of support under AICCRA. The results will be further elaborated during project preparation and 
development of the results framework. All activities will be undertaken for the benefit of IDA-eligible SSA countries.   

Component 1. Knowledge and Services 

Component 1 will support the generation and sharing of knowledge products and tools that will address critical gaps in 
the design and provision of climate services, enable climate-informed investment planning, and support the design of 
policies to promote uptake of CSA practices. Activities to be supported under Component 1 will include one set of 
transversal activities to be pursued Africa-wide, as well as two subsets of geographically tailored activities to be pursued 
in Western and Eastern/Southern Africa, respectively. 

Subcomponent 1.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 1.1 will support the generation of new knowledge and associated 
delivery platforms that are expected to be relevant throughout the region to improve targeting in the provision of agro-
climatic services as well as planning of CSA investments. The following activities will be financed, inter alia: (i) Identification 
of adaptation interventions targeted to agricultural land-use categories, small-scale farmer groups and associated climate 
hazards; (ii) Development of climate information service packages to accompany climate-smart interventions based on 
needs assessments and qualitative-quantitative cost-benefit analyses; (iii) Development or refinement of indicators and 
other adaptation tracking systems that can feed into planning processes and assist with national reporting related to NDCs 
and NAPs; (iv) Identification of big-ticket CSA investment opportunities, detailing the potential social, economic, and 
environmental benefits at national, regional, and continental scale (an example might be assessing the potential to launch 
large-scale initiatives to produce and distribute seed of drought-resilient varieties); (v) Development of business models 
and identification of innovative finance options for scaling-up CSA and climate-resilient value chains, with special 
consideration of gender and social inclusion; and (vi) Undertaking climate, agricultural and environmental policy 
coherence analyses to identify regional policy overlaps, gaps and alignment. 

Sub-component 1.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 1.2 will support the development of new or improved climate 
service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. Activities 
to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana 
and Senegal).  

Sub-component 1.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 1.3 will support the development of new or improved 
climate service tools that can help bridge the gap between meteorological services and agricultural extension systems. 
Activities to be financed include the development of ag-data hubs, design of climate service and visualization tools and 
dissemination systems, and strengthening of partnerships for the delivery of early warnings, climate services, and climate-
informed digital agro-advisories to support agricultural decision-making. The sub-component will also seek to identify 
tailored climate information services and digital agro-advisory packages for use in building new extension systems or 
strengthening existing extension systems. Activities will take place in selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 2. Partnerships for Delivery 

Component 2 will support building of partnerships and networks to strengthen the ability of actors all along the research-
to-development continuum to anticipate climate effects and project their likely impacts on agriculture, food security, and 
rural livelihoods, with the goal of accelerating the identification, prioritization, and uptake of best-bet adaptive measures 


within defined application domains. Activities to be supported under Component 2 include training and building of 
partnerships and networks, at regional and national levels. A particular focus will be on planning and implementing 
appropriate delivery channels to promote the flow of innovative knowledge generated under Component 1, via regional 
and national partners.  

Subcomponent 2.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 2.1 will support capacity development activities designed to strengthen 
the ability of regional multi-stakeholder platforms to conduct participatory visioning and priority setting, supported by 
quantitative and qualitative analytical methods at different scales. It will encourage engagement with regional institutions 
(AGRHYMET, ICPAC, and others) to collaborate in sharing knowledge and scaling up national climate services within and 
across regions. Where needed, it will backstop national, regional and continental groups involved in climate negotiations. 
Activities to be financed include, inter alia: (i) formal and informal training, (ii) workshops, (iii) study tours, (iv) knowledge 
exchanges, and (v) technical assistance. 

Sub-component 2.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 2.2 will support training and provide institutional support to 
enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure sustained delivery 
and use of climate services. Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national meteorological services (NMS) 
real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) Capacity building of public and 
private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of context-specific climate services 
delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and supporting national stakeholders 
to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) 
Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, co-production and feedback 
processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private sector and media for effective 
implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. Activities will take place in selected 
countries in Western Africa (Mali, Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 2.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 2.3 will support training and provide institutional 
support to enhance the capacity of diverse groups of beneficiaries to form innovative partnerships that can ensure 
sustained delivery and use of climate services, Activities to be financed include: (i) Strengthening of national 
meteorological services (NMS) real-time monitoring, weather forecasting, data archiving and generation systems; (ii) 
Capacity building of public and private sectors (e.g., NMSs, NARES, MoA, ICT companies and media) for effectiveness of 
context-specific climate services delivery models; (iii) Strengthening National Frameworks for Climate Services (NFCS) and 
support national stakeholders to implement effective governance for sustained national early warning, climate services 
and agro-advisory delivery; (iv) Training farmer organizations and other value chain actors in the use of climate services, 
co-production and feedback processes; and (v) Training extension officers, input providers, development agents, private 
sector and media for effective implementation and use of prioritized CSA options in crop and livestock value chains. 
Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 3. Supporting the Uptake of Climate-Smart Agriculture  

Component 3 will support the uptake of CSA among small-scale farmers and intermediaries in selected value chains by 
supporting the validation of CSA technologies in the field, linking validated CSA technologies to technology transfer 
systems, and improving assess to climate-informed agricultural advisory services that will help farmers and other value 
chain actors make better decisions about CSA technologies and practices. It will also support the development of climate-
smart agriculture investment plans (CSAIPs) at national level as a sustainable scaling mechanism for CSA, coupled by CSA 
and CIS bundling collaborations through regional bodies.  

Subcomponent 3.1. Africa-wide. Sub-component 3.1 will support regional and continental efforts to promote the use of 
CIS in support of CSA at scale by influencing the planning and implementation mechanisms of regional bodies (i.e. African 
Risk Capacity) and large implementation agencies (i.e. WFP). Activities to be financed include: (i) Identification of initiatives 


that are seeking to promote regional and continental collaboration around climate modeling, introduction or 
strengthening of early warning systems, and/or promotion of CSA technologies; (ii) Promoting dialogue among 
participants in these initiatives, with the goal of securing agreement on common standards and protocols for delivery of 
climate advisory services; (iii) Identification of opportunities to use regional and continental networks to promote 
dissemination of the results of CGIAR climate research; and (iv) Development of approaches and mechanisms to ensure 
sustainability of regional and continental initiatives.  

Sub-component 3.2. Western Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in selected 
countries in Western Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-smartness of candidate 
technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options in key value chains, 
through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and youth; (iv) 
Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for distinct 
smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture investment plans 
(CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, including new 
CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in selected countries in Western Africa (Mali, 
Ghana and Senegal) 

Sub-component 3.3. Eastern and Southern Africa. Sub-component 3.2 will support the uptake of CSA at national level in 
selected countries in Eastern and Southern Africa. Activities to be financed include: (i) Assessment of the climate-
smartness of candidate technologies; (ii) Participatory selection and prioritization of best-bet and promising CSA options 
in key value chains, through stakeholder engagement; (iii) Identification of scaling mechanisms, especially for women and 
youth; (iv) Formulation of recommendations to be integrated into tailored climate-informed agro-advisory systems for 
distinct smallholder profiles; and (v) Refining of investment opportunities from existing climate-smart agriculture 
investment plans (CSAIPs), developing investment prospectus, and identifying specific investors and funding instruments, 
including new CSAIPs for countries without CSAIPs, as needed. Activities will take place in Eastern and Southern Africa 
(Ethiopia, Kenya and Zambia). 

Component 4. Project Management 

Component 4 will support project management functions. Consistent with the objective of strengthening systemic 
capacity in CGIAR, project management activities will be distributed among all of the CCAFS partners. CIAT as the Lead 
Center for CCAFS and recipient of the IDA grant will hold ultimate responsibility for technical, administrative, fiduciary, 
legal, and safeguards compliance functions. The CCAFS management team will provide oversight of the technical work 
program, ensure coordination among and between the implementation entities, supervise monitoring and evaluation 
activities and compile consolidated M&E reports documenting progress achieved. Under the shared accountability 
approach, the CCAFS implementation entities will be expected to comply with all applicable administrative, fiduciary 
(procurement and financial management), monitoring and evaluation, and safeguards requirements, and they will be 
responsible for providing information needed by the CCAFS management team and by CIAT to fulfill compliance with the 
terms of the IDA grant.   


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  
 

The relevant Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) are: ESS 1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and 
Social Risks and Impacts; ESS 2 (Labor and Working Conditions); ESS 3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Management); ESS 4 (Community Health and Safety); and ESS 10 (Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure). 
Key risks are related to: waste management, pest management, resource use (including water, soil, energy), Occupational 
Health and Safety (OHS) and labor issues. The Project will not finance activities that involve land acquisition, restrictions 
on land use and involuntary resettlement, or adversely affect biodiversity conservation, sustainable management of living 
resources and cultural heritage. The Project will be implemented mainly in established agricultural research stations and 
will not be implemented in areas in which Indigenous Peoples / Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities are present, or have collective attachment to a proposed project area. 

 

 
 
  

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

  
Jun 04, 2019 Page 1 of 16  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC23122 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P165129  Integrated Project for 
Source Sustainability 
and climate Resilient 
Rain-fed Agriculture in 
Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 25, 2019 Feb 27, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Department of Forest, 
Government of Himachal 
Pradesh 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 80.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 



          Borrower/Recipient 20.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
Not applicable. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India’s growth remains robust but has moderated from prior high levels in the past fiscal year (FY18/19).  After 
growing at 7.2 percent in FY17/18, economic growth slowed to 6.8 percent in FY 18/19, with quarterly growth falling to 
5.8 percent (y-o-y) in Q4. Growth remains broad-based, but the impact of accelerating industrial growth was 
counterbalanced by decelerations in services and agriculture growth, on the production side. On the demand side, 
consumption has been bolstered by public spending, but investment growth has decelerated.  In FY18/19, the current 
account deficit is estimated to have reached 2.6 percent of GDP but a strong rebound in foreign investment over the 
second half of the year allowed foreign reserves to remain at a comfortable level of US$411.9 billion, as of end-March 
2019 (equivalent to about 9.7 months of imports). Going forward, output growth is projected to recover and stabilize at 
around 7.5 percent, thanks primarily to resilient private consumption, but also to a rise in exports of goods and services 
and a gradual recovery in investment. The current account deficit is projected to narrow to 1.9 percent of GDP in 
FY19/20 but external headwinds—in the form of re-escalating trade tensions and elevated oil prices – could put pressure 
on the balance of payments. 
 
2. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between FY2011/12 and 
2015, poverty declined from 21.6 to an estimated 13.4 percent at the international poverty line (2011 PPP US$ 1.90 per 
person per day), continuing the earlier trend of robust reduction in poverty. Aided by robust economic growth, more 
than 90 million people escaped extreme poverty and improved their living standards during this period. Despite this 
success, poverty remains widespread in India. In 2015, with the latest estimates, 176 million Indians were living in 
extreme poverty while 659 million, or half the population, were below the higher poverty line commonly used for lower 
middle-income countries (2011 PPP US$ 3.20 per person per day). Recent trends in the construction sector and rural 
wages, a major source of employment for the poorer households, suggest that the pace of poverty eradication may have 
moderated. 
 
3. India is the world’s third largest emitter of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) and is highly vulnerable to climate 
change. It has ratified the Paris Agreement (COP21) and is committed to “enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
resilience, and reducing vulnerability to climate change”. India’s federal intended national determined contributions 

(INDC) commits to reduce the energy intensity of GDP from one-third and to increase the share of renewable energy 
(including from hydro generation). It also commits India to expand its existing carbon sink by 2.5 – 3.0 billion mt of 
carbon dioxide. Large areas of India are likely to be under water stress: 54 percent of the country’s area is subject to 
high or extremely high water stress, and almost 600 million face disruptions from surface water supply disruptions. 
Punjab and Haryana – major rice and wheat producing states – are particularly affected. More than half of the country’s 
groundwater wells are dropping, 16 percent by more than one meter per year.1 With shared water resources and given 
the region’s complex history, the region could see escalating tensions over water use in the future. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Himachal Pradesh (HP) is a Special Category state in the Himalayan mountains. Special Category status is 
afforded due to inter alia: (i) mountainous terrain; (ii) low population density (123 per km2); (iii) significant population of 
scheduled tribes; (iv) HP’s strategic location bordering neighboring countries; (v) it’s ‘backward’ status in terms of 
economic development and infrastructure; and (v) non-viable nature of the state’s financial situation (the fiscal deficit for 
FY2019/20 is projected to be 4.4 percent of the state’s GDP). With an altitude ranging from 350 meters above mean sea 
level [msl] to 6,975 msl, much of the state’s area is sloping, with inclines of between 0.5 – 70 percent. Land with a slope 
of up to 40 percent is already typically under agricultural production; in some areas farming is practiced on even steeper 
gradients of 60 – 70 percent. Of a total of 3,243 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in HP, 551 (or 17 percent) have been declared 
‘backward’ status and therefore subject to special programs from the Government. Scheduled tribes are scattered 
throughout the state with concentrations in Kinnaur and Lahaul and Spiti, and parts of Chamba amounting to 6 percent of 
the total population of which 32 percent are located in Scheduled Areas of the State; there is also a considerable scheduled 
caste population of 25 percent. Himachal Pradesh is among India’s leading States on gender equality and social 
development. It has the highest female labor force participation rate in the country2, even though it has declined since 
2005. Much of the state’s female workforce participation is driven by women’s self-employment in agriculture, still the 
mainstay of the state’s largely rural economy. Women’s higher participation in agriculture, horticulture, and livestock 
sectors is socially and culturally embedded in the state, largely due to traditional out-migration of men for jobs that leaves 
the women behind to provide labor and supervisory inputs to pre-harvest and post-harvest activities. However, their 
access to ag-tech & climate resilient technologies, markets and finance, as well as to skills and entrepreneurship 
opportunities remains limited. Non-farm jobs for rural women remain limited. New opportunities in agribusiness are 
important to reverse the decline in women’s participation in agriculture.  
 
5. HP has a particular role to play in contributing to India’s INDC commitments. Its topography and available water 
resources are well suited to hydro generation with an installed capacity of 3,421 MW controlled jointly by the GoHP (8 
percent) and GoI (92 percent), against an estimated potential of over 27,000 MW. Only 14 percent of India’s total 
generation is from hydro, of which 8 percent is from HP.3 Meeting the INDC commitments on reducing the carbon intensity 
of India’s energy generation will depend on further exploitation of hydro in states like HP.  Improved watershed and 
catchment area management upstream of hydro reservoirs can reduce operational costs from siltation and water turbidity  
. Similarly, HP enjoys around 1.126 million ha of forest cover, representing 25 percent of the land area in the state and 1.5 
percent of India’s total forest cover of 70.827 million ha.4 Although currently a small share of the overall area, HP has 
substantial potential to further expand forest cover (including through increased density) and therefore will play a major 
role in contributing to the national commitments on carbon sequestration.  

         

 
6. The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) is already well experienced in management of its natural 
resources as a driver for development but recognizes the need to increase the quality and sustainable use of these 
resources. Over two-thirds of the total land area in the state is formally categorized as forest land, of which, 46 percent 
supports coniferous and broadleaved forests while the remaining 54 percent includes high altitude areas above the tree 
line, snow peaks, alpine pastures, and river beds. The state has zoned 23 percent of the legally classified forest area as 
protected areas (5 national parks, 26 wildlife sanctuaries and 3 conservation reserves) and HPFD manages these to protect 
biodiversity and promote ecotourism. These forests provide catchment areas for 5 major river basins. Despite 
considerable investments to date in catchment treatment and afforestation, forest quality (measured as canopy density) 
remains poor in HP. The gross area of forests is increasing due to better law enforcement, afforestation to offset forests 
cleared for development, and the partial lifting of the felling ban in 2018, which allowed for selective felling of older trees 
and subsequent regeneration. However, the quality of forests has not improved over the past six decades due to several 
factors, including poor afforestation techniques, lack of maintenance, incorrect site/plant selection, and uncontrolled 
grazing and fires.  The state has enjoyed significant success in agricultural development in particular fruit production and 
as a major source of off-season vegetables exported to other parts of India. Fruit production exceeds 600,000mt of which 
three-quarters is apples) while over 1.8 million mt of vegetables are produced annually. However, the majority of 
agricultural land (85 percent) remains under rain-fed agriculture and the land under irrigation reports a low intensity of 
137 percent (i.e. only one-third is used for more than one crops a year). Given changing weather patterns already observed 
(annual and monsoon rains declining by 2.26mm and 2.85mm per year respectively; mean annual temperature increasing 
on 0.02 degrees Celsius per year) progress could be easily reversed unless the state invests in adaptation strategies to 
increase resilience. 

 
7. Natural resource management (NRM) therefore remains pivotal to the state’s long-term economic and social 
development, especially in the context of climate change. A profile of climate smart agriculture (CSA) in the state, 
commissioned as part of project preparatory tasks highlighted critical aspects of both the mitigation and adaptation 
agenda in the state: 

 

• Mitigation: Agriculture is a minor source of the state’s GHG emissions, constituting only 1.8 percent (164,000mt 
of CO2 equivalent) of the total. Of these, 90 percent are attributable to rice cultivation over 43,450 ha of area; 
crop residue burning adds a further 8 percent and enteric fermentation contributes less than 2 percent. 
 

• Adaptation: There are many examples of CSA technologies already being deployed in cereals, horticulture, 
vegetable and livestock sectors. However, observed adoption rates are typically less than 30 percent, meaning 
there is considerable scope for scaling these up throughout the state. Adoption rates in the horticulture and 
higher-value vegetable sectors are typically higher. This is because the financial incentives are stronger but also 
because the farmer endowments that drive past diversification out of cereals are the same as those that make 
adoption easier. CSA technologies are not scale neutral, they are risky, and there are significant up-front 
investment costs. Integrating CSA technologies more thoroughly into the existing Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK; i.e. 
research and extension) system is essential.  
 

simultaneously both the direct cause and the victims of degradation. Supporting GPs to lead community-based 
development has and will continue to be a key tenet of the GoHP’s approach moving forward. 
 
9. GoHP has a clear and relevant vision for its NRM sector. First, it seeks to continue its impressive trajectory of 
rural transformation by raising agricultural productivity, strengthening market linkages and diversifying production 
patterns to increase agricultural value addition, while maintaining biodiversity and ensuring sustainable land and water 
use. Second, GoHP recognizes its role as custodian of a unique landscape with a special set of critical natural resource 
endowments that provide critical environmental services not only for its own population but for other states and indeed 
globally. Therefore, it recognizes the importance of reconciling the imperative of delivering results in terms of continued 
development for its population without undermining its natural resource base.  
 
10. The project addresses several elements of outstanding agendas in the realm of NRM, forestry and agriculture. 
A review of ex poste assessments (implementation completion reports and project or thematic evaluations) reports a 
positive track record of past interventions that have delivered on their project objectives, although considerable effort is 
required to achieve the necessary outcomes. This is in part a question of scale – past interventions have been necessarily 
focused – whereas in other aspects additional transformation and innovation is required. Notable innovations include the 
greater role of GPs in taking responsibility for, and managing investments in, sustainable landscape management and the 
development of CSA practices and their integration into existing farmer extension systems. Other innovations include the 
successful application for climate change financing and achievements in diversification into higher value market-oriented 
fruit and vegetable production, leveraging HP’s position as a major off-season producer serving distant Indian markets. 
The major challenges moving forward are to further scale-up these successes by utilizing Bank support to address specific 
institutional and technical constraints for doing so – i.e. not just the financing of scale-up which can in principle be deferred 
to GoHP’s own resources. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) juxtaposed: (i) India’s development priorities as 
outlined in its FY2017-19 action agenda as well as national missions and programs; (ii) the assessment of India’s challenges 
in sustaining progress towards the twin goals as set out in the Bank’s Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD); (iii) the WBG’s 
comparative advantage in the country; and (iv) lessons derived from decades of WBG engagement in India. The CPF 
identified three substantive areas: (i) promoting resource efficient growth; (ii) enhancing competitiveness and enabling 
job creation, and (iii) investing in human capital. In addition to these focus areas, the CPF also set out four operating 
modalities. These are: (i) leveraging the private sector; (ii) strengthening public sector institutions; (iii) engaging a Federal 
India; and (iv) promoting a “Lighthouse India” that connects practical know-how for the benefit of India and the wider 
world. 

 
12. The project is consistent with the CPF by delivering outcomes for resource efficient growth in targeted GPs in HP 
and in enhancing competitiveness of farmers and related agribusinesses in selected value chains. It also seeks to 
strengthen public sector institutions while leveraging the private sector and will contribute significantly to Lighthouse 
India by demonstrating approaches in challenging agro-ecological conditions of wider interest across the Himalayan range. 

 


     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
13. To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
14. Proposed PDO-level indicators are as follows: 

• Increased sustainability of perennial water sources in targeted watersheds 

• Selected upland areas managed in accordance with site-specific management plans 

• Increased agricultural water productivity among participating farmers 

• A more institutionally integrated approach to multi-sectoral watershed-level decision making 

• Increased adoption of climate-smart technologies among participating farmers 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
15. The overarching problem statement the project seeks to address is that HP is facing increased demand for, and 
reduced supply of, water resources and therefore needs to manage these better if it is to maintain its economic growth 
without jeopardizing continued downstream supply to the grain basket of Punjab.  HP’s population increased 13 percent 
over the decade 2001 – 2011 with an ever-greater share now residing in urban areas. Niti Aayog reports5 that half of all 
springs are now dry or seasonal. Addressing this challenge requires progress under three pillars: 

 

• Sustainable land and water resource management; 
 

• Improved agricultural productivity and value addition; and 
 

• Institutional capacity of GoHP to sustainably manage watersheds and resource use trade-offs and to effectively 
deliver environmental services. 

 
16. Each element contributes to the overall theory of change that underpins the proposed project design, as follows 
and summarized in the Figure below: 

 

• Land and water management: Current land use practices in upstream watersheds is resulting in excessive soil 
erosion and degradation, rain-water run-off and depleted rates of recharge of critical aquifers. Soil run-off results 
in reduced natural soil fertility (with a resulting loss on productivity or additional costs for replacement of 
inorganic fertilizers) and reservoir and intake sedimentation with the consequent loss of hydro generation 
capacity and damage to turbines, and/ or reduced availability of stored water for drinking or irrigation. This is 
compounded by retreating glacial sources and changes in rainfall patterns linked with climate change. 
 

• Existing agricultural productivity remains low – both in terms of physical yields (mt/ha) and value (Rs/ha). The 
use of irrigation is extremely limited across the state, with surface irrigation predominating and more limited use 
of the drop or sprinkler systems required for higher value crops, which can lead to substantial increases in water 

                                            
5 Niti Aayog (2018) Report of Working Group 1: Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security  



productivity. The absence of irrigation remains a binding constraint on farmers’ ability to increase incomes (and 
therefore undermines the policy objective of doubling farmer incomes) and renders them vulnerable to climatic 
shocks; a situation that is becoming increasingly precarious with climate change. 
 

• The GoHP lacks robust institutional mechanisms for making trade-offs and investments to ensure sustainability 
of environmental services into the future. It cannot properly evaluate relative values of competing uses for the 
states’ natural resources, especially in terms of the states’ overall management of environmental services. There 
is an absence of underlying analytical foundation for such trade-offs to be evaluated, and no formal structures to 
facilitate integrated decision-making. Moreover, fragmentation amongst ministries and agencies means that any 
investments in upstream watersheds are typically insufficient and/ or inconsistent and therefore not adequate or 
efficiently delivered. 

 
Figure 2: Summary of the Theory of Change 
 

 
 
17. The project will deploy institutional and technical solutions to address these challenges. These are explained in 
more detail below with each proposed project component corresponding to the constraints thereby completing the 
project’s theory of change. 
 
Component 1: Sustainable Land and Water Resource Management 

 
18. This component promotes participatory and sustainable land and water management through financing the 
planning and implementation of investments in selected catchments based on the Sutlej Basin Comprehensive CAT 
(CCAT) plan, and micro-catchment plans in other river basins. For each of these, range-level site-specific management 
plans (SSMP) will be prepared to specify detailed activities by location. The main implementers and beneficiaries will be 



HP Forest Department (HPFD) staff and relevant community organizations, particularly Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs). The component will include a combination of TA, investments, and partnerships with other agencies 
and will lead to improved forest cover (and hence carbon capture), increased water and sediment regulation, reduced 
erosion, and improved community participation in and benefits from forest management.  

 
Subcomponent 1A: Improved planning for participatory and sustainable land and water management 
 
19. Subcomponent 1A will strengthen landscape planning. Specifically, it will: (a) review progress and revise the 
existing Sutlej Basin CCAT plan; (b) prepare micro-catchment plans in other project river basins; (c) support additional 
diagnostic studies, designs, and assessments; and (d) develop SSMPs through a participatory process led jointly by the 
HPDD and JFMCs. The CCAT plan review will identify the most cost-effective interventions implemented to date and 
propose revisions to plan investments and locations based on new hydrological and sediment load modeling. The CCAT 
plan review will include the design and implementation of a comprehensive M&E system for CCAT plan investments 
initially across the Sutlej Basin and later replicated in other project catchment areas and will include measurement of 
water flows and sediment loads to refine the hydrological models and ensure that investments maximize silt retention 
and surface water absorption. 

 
Subcomponent 1B: Implementation of participatory and sustainable land and water management investments 
 
20. This subcomponent will finance the implementation of activities identified in the SSMPs will contribute to 
improved forest cover and quality (including carbon emission reductions and sequestration), as well as improved water 
and sediment regulation. Activities supported by this subcomponent include, but are not limited to, the following areas: 

 

• Soil and water conservation measures. Vegetative measures, such as af/re-forestation, grass seeding, grass turfs, 
brushwood, live hedges, and spurs, as well as mechanical measures, such as check dams, drop structures, crate 
wire spur structures, bunds and water harvesting, and drainage line treatments, like gully plugging.  
 

• Development of high-quality seed stands. Establishment of a geo-referenced seed production system; 
construction of a centralized seed center to process, treat, store, and test seed; and construction of a climate-
controlled seed bank.  
 

• Nursery development. Provision of machinery and equipment to produce the additional seedlings. 
 

• Forest management. Planting and management of trees in open and medium density forests and slopes vulnerable 
to soil erosion and protection of plantations 
 

• Pasture management. Introduction of rotational grazing, delineation of forest areas for the supply of fodder, and 
the introduction of voluntary systems to prevent livestock from grazing in young forest. 
 

• Forest fire prevention and suppression. Organization of community fire protection groups; provision of locally-
appropriate firefighting equipment to the HPFD offices and participating communities; and training of 
communities on controlled burning, and the collection and use of pine needles. 

 
 
 


     

Component 2: Improved Agricultural Productivity and Value Addition 
 
21. This component would support interventions in downstream areas where the primary (existing or potential) 
water use is for irrigation in agriculture. It would seek to augment the use of irrigation as a principle strategy for shifting 
from low-value cereal production to higher-value fruit and vegetable production but would do so with a focus on 
increasing water productivity so as to maximize the financial returns to water use. Key interventions include infrastructure 
to increase high-productivity water utilization (drip and sprinkler irrigation plus the necessary primary and secondary 
distribution systems) 
 
Subcomponent 2A: Increasing value addition through improving water productivity  
 
22. Subcomponent 2A will support investments in the provision of water by investing in primary and secondary 
distribution infrastructure and matching grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler (i.e. high-
tech) irrigation technology. It will support decentralized water infrastructure development under the Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) based on robust micro-watershed plans across clusters of GPs in locations. By focusing on 
water productivity rather than water availability it will only invest in increasing water utilization in GPs where: (i) upstream 
investments in source sustainability are being implemented under Component 1; and (ii) where productivity of subsequent 
use will be maximized thereby ensuring ‘more crop for the (incremental) drop’. 
 
Subcomponent 2B: Adoption of Climate Smart Technologies and Diversification into High-Value Crops 
 
23. This component supports the adoption of climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping 
patterns in beneficiary GPs and also facilitates farmers to diversify into high-value crops, either in conjunction with 
high-tech irrigation equipment. The project will leverage HP’s agricultural research and extension system and existing 
Government-backed interventions to expand the adoption of contemporary CSA practices among participating farmers. 
CSA practices will apply to both existing cropping patterns and to new higher-value crops. Where the evidence of what 
constitutes CSA practices in these new crops is limited, the project will collaborate with the research institutions to 
strengthen the evidence base. This component will leverage and support the Government’s own KVK farmer extension 
system and their Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY; now known as the Remunerative Approach for Agriculture and Allied 
Sector Rejuvenation). By focusing on the market, and in conjunction with Subcomponent 2C, the approach adopted here 
will take a value chain perspective with competitiveness at the fore.  
 
24. This sub-component will also support greater use of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) as part of the 
diversification agenda, and as a mechanism for incentivizing community participation in sustainable land and water 
management. This will create alternative livelihood opportunities, by removing barriers to investment in NTFP value 
chains, and increase local incomes from sustainable production and increased value addition. This sub-component targets 
NTFP collectors, often women, and producers interested in cultivation of NTFPs (medicinal, aromatic plants) and other 
high-value commodities identified for value chain development. Alignment with the relevant line departments (e.g., 
agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry) will be ensured. In addition to improving local livelihoods, the proposed 
activities will reduce pressure on watersheds and contribute to increased carbon sequestration and storage and reduced 
erosion. Strengthening NTFP value chains and institutions with a focus on women, will enhance livelihood diversification 
and improve communities’ resilience to climate change. 

 
25. There is potential for securing climate change finance for on-farm and/ or community investments in 
reforestation and/ or economic trees. HP successfully secured the first ever Clean Development Mechanism subproject 



in project under the Kyoto Protocol was registered with the UNFCCC in March, 2011. This was implemented in 11 
watershed divisions and covering 140 GPs it generated carbon credits trough reforestation activities supported under the 
MHWDP. A scoping assessment supported by the World Bank has identified significant potential for similar carbon 
financing via Indian private sector conglomerates seeking to invest in carbon offsets for their industrial enterprises as well 
as for corporate social responsibility (CSR) motivations.  
 
Subcomponent 2C: Support to farmer groups linked to agri-business clusters 
 
26. This component will promote agribusiness clusters among several GPs in high-potential areas already 
benefitting from project interventions under Component 2. Fostering value addition, agribusiness and agro-industry 
clusters requires coordinated planning and investments by a range of departments. The key objective is typically to 
aggregate production to internalize economies of scale and provide sufficient volume to meet the minimum efficient scale 
of agro-processors hereby stimulating private investment by agribusinesses and promoting value addition. There may be 
other efficiencies for instance in waste treatment and the clustering of ancillary businesses. The project will seek to 
aggregate via clusters in collaboration with farmer organizations (which will also be strengthen under the project). This 
component will coordinate such investments to promote clusters which will connect groups of beneficiary farmers, via 
their respective farmers’ associations, to agribusiness to facilitate processing and value addition.  
 
27. Interventions will include technical assistance to farmers’ groups and prospective agribusinesses as well as 
some (likely modest) infrastructure provision to locate participating agribusinesses. This will fall short of ‘agro-business 
park’ models but could include specific locations for the establishment of agro-businesses close to the producing areas 
and including last-mile infrastructure as well as facilities for storage, packaging and waste management. 
 
Component 3: Institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs. 
 
28. The objective of this component is two-fold: first, is to support a more comprehensive and holist approach to 
managing the state’s water resources recognizing competing uses both within HP and downstream in other states in 
particular Punjab; second to facilitate a better alignment of institutional mandates for IWM and strengthen the HPFD’s 
institutional structure and capacity for improved forest service delivery. It will be implemented through a combination of 
TA and investments.  
 
Subcomponent 3A: Improving the governance structure for integrated watershed management 
 
29. Through the convening power of the HPFD and its role in managing watersheds, this subcomponent will provide 
TA to support improving integrated watershed management (IWM). The subcomponent will support an IWM 
institutional assessment to (a) identify the institutions that affect water supply, quality, use, and management and their 
roles, responsibilities, and mandates; (b) conduct a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis of the 
current institutional framework and highlight any overlaps and/or gaps that undermine IWM; (c) identify opportunities 
for institutional coordination and synergy; and (d) build consensus on the need for reform and develop the goals and 
vision for institutional collaboration, a time-bound action plan, and an implementation road map. The results of this 
assessment are expected to inform the GoHP on the necessary longer-term reforms to the relevant state institutions that 
will result in effective interagency cooperation and, ultimately, IWM.  
 
Subcomponent 3B: Institutional reform and strengthening of the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department 
 


30. This subcomponent will support the institutional development of HPFD. It will provide TA and investments to (a) 
conduct a functional review of forest institutions (FRFI) that will produce a vision, goal, and time-bound action plan for 
change; (b) implement an initial set of prioritized HPFD institutional reforms; and (c) strengthen the HPFD’s capacity to 
deliver its core mandates. This subcomponent will also support an initial set of prioritized institutional governance reforms 
through TA and investments. These reforms include the (a) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD 
IT and knowledge strategy that integrates all relevant applications on a common geospatial platform and allows for 
watershed-level planning;6 (b) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system; (c) establishment of a centralized staff performance monitoring system; and (d) development of regulatory 
and management standards for pastures. Finally, this subcomponent will finance training and capacity-building activities 
based on a comprehensive training plan. The trainings will cover diverse subjects and will be designed with a climate 
change lens to build climate resilience.7 Training will include all project participants. 
 
Subcomponent 3C: Improve water resource coordination and decision making at the macro-level 

 
31. This subcomponent will operationalize some of the opportunities for institutional coordination and increasing 
synergy between the different institutions involved with water resource management, identified in subcomponent 3A. 
Coordination. Successfully managing watersheds and water supply/use, both the upland and downstream areas, will 
require managing tradeoffs between the different treatments, uses and beneficiaries. There are a great number of 
stakeholders involved, including numerous state departments (e.g. HPFD, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Horticulture, 
Irrigation and Public Health etc.), individuals and the private sector, donor supported projects, NGOs, local governments, 
and local communities. This component will set up a high-level decision-making process (based on improved data collected 
by the project), in a transparent and participatory process to provide strategic guidance and to manage the trade-offs 
necessary to ensure sustainability.  
 
Component 4: Project Management. 

 
32. This component would support the project management function including key staff and operational costs. The 
precise nature of the project management entity is to be determined (see below) although at least in the medium-term 
financing will be required for staff on secondment from other Departments and externally recruited staff in areas with 
skillsets outside the current bureaucratic endowment. A key example is agribusiness for which few existing staff of 
Departments have the required expertise. It would also support the project monitoring and evaluation functions as well 
as grievance redress apparatus, and project communications and outreach including the contribution to Lighthouse India 
by which project lessons can be shared with other states. 
 
33. The component would also support a robust evaluation of impact. The team will consider options for statistically 
robust evaluative techniques (randomized control treatment GPs; discontinuity methodologies utilizing similar treatment 
and control GPs etc.) as a foundation for project evaluation. 

 
Information and Communication Technology 

 
34. The project would specifically seek innovations in information and communication technology (ICT) in all 
aspects of the project (building on experience in other agricultural projects in HP and across India). ICT and geospatial 

                                            
6 The preparation of the IT strategy will include the analysis of the most appropriate disruptive technologies. 
7 The subjects will include management of seed stands, nursery management, range management, forest protection, community 
mobilization, and institutional development. 


analysis would be utilized to inform project planning and implementation and a web-based GIS platform will be established 
to report progress, and to allow stakeholders to report implementation concerns. Furthermore, there are opportunities 
for ICT-based tools to quickly assess soil type (for optimum fertilizer application) which when used offer direct benefits to 
farmers while also helping construct a detailed soil map of the state. Remote monitoring systems can provide real-time 
data on weather, water flows and turbidity and can play important roles in weather-related risk mitigation, irrigation 
scheme-level and farm management decision-making and in project monitoring. The use of blockchain technology is 
increasingly being deployed to facilitate traceability of fresh produce in agricultural value chains and will be encouraged 
by the project. Greater use of cell phone-based market information systems can increase market efficiency and empower 
farmers to supply more remunerative markets and to negotiate higher prices. 
 
Proposed Project Locations 

 
35. Project locations will be identified based on a robust and objective set of criteria. The primary criteria will be to 
identify (i) high priority micro-watersheds that are in urgent need of remedial steps to maintain their perennial water 
sources and then to overlay these with (ii) locations with high potential as agricultural and agribusiness clusters. Once 
these areas are identified, further criteria will be to select specific GPs recognizing the need for a qualitative approach. It 
is expected that in total around 900 GPs will be included. 
 
36. The project will be applied in all districts of HP with the exception of the two high mountain districts of Kinnaur 
and Lahul and Spiti. There are seven main river basins in HP and in principle the project could select micro-watersheds 
within any basin. However, a modified approach will reflect those basins for which activities similar to those proposed in 
Component 1 are already being supported by other Development Partners (DPs) (for instance, KfW supported HP Forest 
Eco-System Climate Proofing Project in Kangra and Chamba Districts and the JICA supported Project for Improvement of 
Himachal Pradesh Forest Ecosystems Management and Livelihoods in Bilaspur, Shimla, Mandi, Kullu, Kinnaur and Lahul 
and Spiti Districts). In such cases, this project would collaborate closely with those interventions, gap-filling Component 1 
where necessary and focusing more on delivery of Component 2. 

 
37. The project will also consider the merits of structured phasing. For instance, one option would be to defer 
interventions in Sutlej basin until the Comprehensive Catchment Area Treatment (CCAT) plan revision is completed as this 
would help better target the resulting investments under Components 1 and 2. Conversely, there may be proposed project 
areas which are already high priority with an underlying analytical foundation for the rapid delivery of interventions under 
Components 1 and 2 (perhaps those in areas supported by KfW and/ or JICA projects). 
 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 TBD 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project will undertake measures to improve the state of water resources in Himachal Pradesh towards ensuring 
sustainability and climate resilience in the agriculture sector. It will achieve this through interventions across the areas of 



natural resource management, forestry and agriculture. In particular the project will: i) promote participatory and 
sustainable land and water management through strengthened landscape planning and ii) implement NRM activities 
from the plans such as soil and water conservation measures like check dams, bio-engineering structures, etc, 
development of high quality seed stands, nursery development, forest and pasture management and forest fire 
prevention and suppression; iii) provide water through primary and secondary distribution infrastructure and matching 
grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler irrigation technology; iv) support the adoption of 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping patterns and facilitate diversification into high value 
crops; v) strengthen NTFP value chains; vi) promote agribusiness clusters including technical assistance to farmers groups 
and infrastructure provision to facilitate storage, packaging, waste management as well as last-mile linkages and vii) 
undertake institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs focusing on 
the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department (HPFD). 
The environmental risk rating of the project is ‘Moderate’. Overall, the impacts of the project financed activities on forest 
cover and quality, water and sediment regulation, water use efficiency and carbon sequestration are expected to be 
positive.keeping in view the proposed activities envisaged at this stage of the project, it is understood that “no adverse 
impacts to critical habitats are expected.” Because activities will be outside critical natural habitats or any activities that 
would impacts on critical habitats will not be financed. No adverse impacts to critical habitats or cultural heritage are 
expected. The risk seems to be moderate. 
Potential for adverse social impacts come from i) infrastructure (aggregation, processing, soil and water conservation, 
water distribution, pasture and nursery development); and ii) access and use restrictions related to natural resource 
management, NTFP value chains and forest fire prevention interventions. Other potential social risks are exclusion of 
small and marginal farmers, nomadic tribes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from project institutions and benefits 
that relate to on farm irrigation inputs, seeds and other improved farming inputs and training. Community level conflicts 
could also arise from water sharing infrastructure and systems, any land use restrictions mentioned above.While most 
interventions are likely to be small scale, and the impacts are not expected to be significant, the capacity of the borrower 
to implement and manage the above social risks as well as those related to labor, community health and safety and 
sustained stakeholder engagement raises the risk profile to moderate. 

 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project III (P171331) 

 
 

  
Jun 16, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDC27269 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cambodia P171331  Land Allocation for 
Social and Economic 
Development Project III 
(P171331) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Feb 28, 2020 Jun 19, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Kingdom of Cambodia Ministry of Land 
Management Urban 
Planning and Construction 
(MLMUPC), Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF), National 
Committee for Sub-National 
Democratic and 
Development Secretariat 
(NCDDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources and selected 
infrastructure and social services in project communities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 70.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 30.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 10.00 

          Borrower/Recipient 10.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

High  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the past two decades, Cambodia has undergone a significant transition, reaching lower middle-
income economy by raising its per capita income from USD 250 in 1995 to an estimated USD 1,230 in 2017. Driven 
by garment exports and tourism, Cambodia has sustained an average growth rate of 7.7% between 1995-2018, 
ranking sixth in the world1, among the fastest-growing economies in the world and has achieved impressive gains in 
poverty reduction. As global demand peaks in 2018, economic growth is estimated to have reached 7.5%, compared 
to 7% in 2017. Growth is expected to remain robust over the medium term. Growth was accompanied by a significant 
decline in poverty incidence, which dropped from 47 percent in 2007 to about 13 percent in 2013 thanks largely to 
high agriculture commodity prices globally as well as strong job creation in manufacturing and services. Around 3.6 
million jobs in industry and services were created over the past two decades. Cambodia’s growth has been pro-poor. 
The percentage of Cambodians living under the national poverty line fell from 47.8 percent in 2007 to 13.5 percent 
in 2014, according to official estimates. The Gini coefficient declined to 0.30 in 2014 from 0.34 in 2009. Cambodia 
has made significant progress in attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Since 1990, the country has more than 
halved extreme poverty and maternal mortality, achieved nearly universal primary education enrollment, and made 
significant progress in combating HIV/AIDS. Poverty reduction was particularly dramatic from 2007 to 2009, when 
poverty declined by 25 percentage points and 3.3 million people escaped poverty, owing in large part to an expansion 
of cultivated area and high international food prices which benefited both farmers and agriculture workers. 

2. Among the main drivers of growth have been exports of goods and services and foreign capital inflows. 
Since opening its economy to international trade and capital flows in 1992, Cambodia has become one of the East 
Asian countries most open to trade and foreign investment. Exports of goods and services grew at an average of 18 
percent during 1994-2017, with Cambodia ranking 4th in the world in exports during that period. Notably, its export 

                                            
1 World Development Indicators. Four countries that experienced a recession during this period are excluded.  


 

success is driven by a few products, with final garments and footwear accounting for nearly three-quarters of total 
exports and has been facilitated by preferential access to key markets. Cambodia is also among the top countries in 
the world in terms of attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), which has facilitated entry into some global value 
chains (GVCs).  
 
3. With an aspiration to become an upper middle-income country by 2030, Cambodia needs to strengthen 
its existing drivers, which are weakening, while building new drivers of growth. The end of the commodity super-
cycle, coupled with adverse weather shocks, have resulted in a sharp slowdown in agriculture growth. Meanwhile, 
Cambodia’s labor-intensive, export-oriented garment and tourism sectors are facing rising wages and greater 
competition from abroad. There is evidence that all merchandise export growth, tourist arrivals, as well as FDI into 
manufacturing have slowed during 2013-2017.  Moreover, the EU is considering the suspension of preferential 
market access for Cambodian exports under the Everything-but-Arms (EBA) scheme, which could mean tariffs of 
about 12 percent for Cambodian garment exports, threatening sector competitiveness. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
4. Growth has also been driven by the country’s rich and diverse natural capital, which supports the 
livelihoods of millions of Cambodians. Agriculture, which depends heavily on natural resources and ecosystem 
services, contributed 27% of the annual gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018. More than five million people depend 
on agriculture and fisheries, to supplement their income and support their food security, and 88 percent of the 
population still relies on traditional biomass for cooking. Cambodians are also the largest consumers of freshwater 
fish per capita, with fish and other aquatic resources contributing to 37 percent of total protein consumption. 
Tourism, another engine of economic growth, is also becoming increasingly dependent on natural resources and 
environment. 
 
5. Going forward, Cambodia may not be able to rely on the same factors that drove strong growth and 
poverty reduction over the past two decades. In the case of agriculture, the outlook for commodity prices is not 
positive, and Cambodia’s scope for further gains in cultivated area is more limited nowadays, especially considering 
the need for environmental sustainability. Risks posed by the degradation of natural resources could affect economic 
sustainability. It is crucial to maintain and develop natural resources while strengthening climate resilience. Low 
prices for agricultural commodities along with rising salaries will require improvements in productivity to remain 
competitive. Given the continued importance of the agricultural sector to growth and poverty reduction, Cambodia 
will need to foster a gradual transformation of the sector through intensification, diversification, and value addition. 
The public sector could facilitate expanded irrigation, knowledge, and technology adoption in collaboration with the 
private sector and strategies of quality differentiation by enhancing systems for managing quality and food safety 
and introducing an overall coherent approach to ‘brand’ Cambodian food and agriculture.  
 
6. The benefits of economic growth and the reduction of poverty has not been shared equitably among 
Cambodian citizens. Disparities in income and access to opportunities remain, particularly in rural communities. 
Rural communities which are still heavily relying on land, forests, and other natural resources for their livelihoods are 
still faced with widespread poverty in rural Cambodia.  Landlessness and access to natural resources remains a 
problem. 
7. Inequality in ownership and/or access to productive assets such as land is a major concern because it 
implies the likelihood of a trend to growing inequality of production, income and consumption in the future. In the 
absence of dramatic expansion of off-farm employment or livelihood opportunities to absorb landless labor, the 

concentration of land in fewer hands implies a growing gap in the opportunities available to different types of 
households.  
 
8. Key reforms are needed for Cambodia to sustain pro-poor growth, foster country’s competitiveness, 
sustainably manage natural resource wealth and improve access to and quality of public services. Cambodia 
continues to have a serios infrastructure gap and would benefit from greater connectivity and investing in rural and 
urban infrastructure is essential.  
 
9. The Royal Government of Cambodia is making growing efforts to address landlessness and tenure 
insecurity, including increasing Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT). Commune-based and national Social Land 
Concession projects, both Government and donor funded have been established, addressing rural poverty and 
providing a social safety net or retirement benefit for demobilized soldiers. Where accompanied by adequate 
infrastructure and service provision, these projects have shown to be able to provide sustainable livelihoods. 
However, needs (and demands) of landless and tenure-insecure population groups and the challenges in addressing 
them remain significant. Landlessness and poverty remaining an issue in rural areas. 
 
10. Under the original LASED and the second phase LASED II projects, participatory planning of agriculture 
and livelihood activities has progressively led to the adoption of good practices in agriculture production in the 
land recipient communities. 5,000ha of agricultural land are newly under perennial or annual crops, on 3,000ha 
beneficiaries apply improved production technologies that help raising incomes and protect natural resources.    
Accompanying investments in infrastructure, including the planned and ongoing support to small-scale irrigation 
schemes, have further increased sustainability of agriculture-based livelihoods, making sure products and production 
processes respond to market demands and are resilient to the short and long-term climate changes affecting the 
areas. At the same time, road linkages to and from the SLC areas benefit not only the direct land recipients but many 
more stakeholders that travel to and from the area, providing new business opportunities, decreasing transaction 
costs, and stimulating economic and social exchange.  A new, third phase and project would expand and extend 
activities and benefits to new target groups in new provinces.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

11. The Project supports the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote 
shared prosperity through its emphasis on expanding the benefits of poverty-targeted land distribution and 
infrastructure and service provision, as well as reduce climate risk vulnerability to a broader segment of the poor and 
marginalized population in rural areas.  The Project is also consistent with, and part of the World Bank Group’s Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Cambodia 2019-2023 which received Board approval in May 2019.  Furthermore, it 
supports the objectives in the government’s Rectangular Strategy IV (RS4), particularly the objectives of poverty 
reduction, agriculture development, diversification and commercialization, and improving rural infrastructure and 
services. The project supports the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 on eradicating extreme 
poverty and SDG 2 on preventing hunger and improving nutrition. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
12. The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources 
and selected infrastructure and social services in project communities.  

Key Results (From PCN) 


13. The key results that the Project would achieve include: 

 

• Tenure security for formerly landless or land-poor, and other marginalized groups or individuals, i.e. 
indigenous communities. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of registered land rights (including titles) and the area 
(ha) that was provided to beneficiaries.  

• Infrastructure and service provision in the project areas, benefitting not only the direct target group but 
supporting broader area development. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of people that live along newly built or upgraded 
roads and who benefit from improved connectivity and market access. 

• Sustainable, agriculture-based livelihood development for individuals and groups in the project 
communities. 
Achievements would be measured by increased incomes from farming, and improved food security (and 
nutrition) amongst the target beneficiary families.  

 
14. With a potentially nation-wide coverage, implementation will focus on the existing LASED provinces, plus 
the Northeastern Provinces of Mondulkiri, Rattanakiri, Stung Treng and Preah Vihear.  A total of 30-40 project sites 
(sub-projects) would be included, covering a total of approximately 10,000 -15,000 direct beneficiary households.  
Benefits from improved infrastructure availability and usage will accrue to a broader beneficiary group in the project 
areas. 

D. Concept Description 
 

Component 1: Social Land Concession (SLC) and Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT) Investment 
Planning and Prioritization (approx. US$20million) 

 
15. This would continue support for: (a) participatory preparation and updating of SLC or ICLT plans for the new, 
and where necessary also existing sites, respectively; (b) identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate 
technology and infrastructure investments, including the collection of project baseline data at additional sites, and 
responding to increased monitoring requirements; and (c) processing of individual SLC land titles for eligible land 
recipients in the existing sites. Additional and adjusted activities would include (d) facilitating incorporation of climate 
smart/climate change resilience considerations, and where appropriate specific NRM protection in new and or 
existing land use plans for project areas; and (e) processing of communal land titles in areas where the project sites 
include indigenous communities with respective demands. 

Component 2: Land Preparation and Infrastructure Development (approx. US$50million) 
 
16. This would support the settling-in requirements as well as the required land preparation and prioritized 
infrastructure investments at new project sites. These include the: (a) provision of settling-in assistance to newly-
installed land recipients; (b) provision of initial land preparation assistance including a first cover crop; and (c) 
provision of productive/economic and social community infrastructure investments such as rural roads, small-scale 
irrigation systems, water supply and sanitation facilities, school buildings, teachers’ houses, health posts and 
community centers, among others. Based on the experiences in existing SLC areas and responding to the significant 
infrastructure gaps in rural areas expected to be encountered at the proposed new project areas, it is expected that 

the Project’s largest investments would be provided for rural climate resilient roads, with benefits of those expanding 
beyond the direct beneficiaries, including entire communes and areas.  With the substantial increase in project area, 
the absolute amount for infrastructure investments will be considerably larger than under LASED II.  The second 
largest item for project investments concerns water infrastructures, both for climate change resilient small-scale 
irrigation schemes or water reservoirs and for provision of safe water supply and sanitation.  

Component 3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (approx. US$20million) 
 
17. This would primarily support the improvement of climate-change resilient agricultural production systems, 
livelihoods and food security of new land recipients, including facilitation and provision of support services and 
technical assistance. These would include support for: (a) community organizing and development; (b) provision of 
agricultural service and extension support following a pluralistic service provider approach; (c) establishment of 
farmer-managed demonstration plots and model farms; (d) establishment and/or strengthening of farmers 
organization, agriculture cooperatives, production and marketing groups and other community interest groups; and 
(e) provision of community fund to strengthen successful local initiatives. Agriculture and livelihood support would 
be adjusted, where applicable, to the specific sociocultural and biophysical environments of new project areas, in 
particular in IP areas. Promotion of nutrition-sensitive agriculture will be part of the training curricula prepared and 
implemented by MAFF and PDAFF.  Adaptation and expansion of existing MAFF materials on nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture production will be part of the support.  

18. The Project will build on the experiences with LASED interventions, which highlight the need of strong 
agriculture development support to quickly integrate farming systems into the local and wider economy, 
strengthening agriculture-based livelihoods and provide quick returns and strong incentives to land recipients.  
Taking into consideration that additional project locations under the Project will include areas in provinces with 
important natural habitats, the Project will incorporate in its agriculture and livelihood development plans activities 
for protecting private, communal and public lands.  Where applicable, community forestry activities will be supported 
alongside private agriculture activities.   

19. An additional focus of agriculture and livelihood development under LASED III will be a specific response to 
climate change challenges.  In order to (further) strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food systems in the 
existing and new sites under the Project, responses to short- and long-term climate changes will be an integral part 
of support.  This will particularly include irrigation and water management support, integrating site specific planning 
into ongoing or prospective broader area development approaches.  

Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and M&E (approx. US$10million) 
 

20. This component would support adjusted project administration and coordination activities. It would ensure 
in particular the timely and transparent flow of funds, procurement, auditing and reporting. It would also support 
project implementing entities at all levels (including the new provinces and new communes) to establish (where 
needed) and strengthen their fiduciary, administrative and reporting capacities. Clear assignments for procurement 
and FM responsibilities of each IA will guide effective an efficient implementation. Ministry of Land Management 
Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) will be the executing agency, with participation from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), National Committee for Sub-National Democratic and Development 
Secretariat (NCDDS) as implementing agencies for this proposed project.  They will carry out procurement activities 
at national level for their respective activities in the components and sub-components, respectively.  Communes and 
communities will carry out procurement activities at the sub-national levels if and as applicable.  

21. Specific attention and support would also be provided to adapt and strengthen the Project’s M&E system, 
and further expand and enhance the Project and SLC/ICLT-related management information system as input to the 
site planning and prioritization. Support would include technical assistance, training, incremental operating costs, 
vehicles and equipment, among others. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The overall environmental and social risk classification is high. The screening of risks and impacts is based on discussion 
with the task team, consultations and observations undertaken during a mission, secondary data, and specialist 
experience with LASED II. 
 
The project will support the process for SLC and ICLT, establishment of sustainable infrastructure and livelihood systems 
including land preparation, provision of social and economic infrastructure, agriculture support and livelihood 
development. Restrictions on access to land and natural and cultural resources resulting from these activities may impact 
on nature-based livelihoods and tenure of vulnerable or marginal households and communities where decisions may not 
be managed in a participatory manner. While the project aims to deliver a range of benefits including economic 
development and community livelihood opportunities, project activities have the potential to generate significant social 
impacts, direct and indirect, due to the range of activities related to land consolidation, indigenous community lands, 
agriculture and infrastructure. The scale of the proposed activities, across sensitive locations (indigenous areas) and new 
focus on ICLT presents risks related to collective registration of indigenous communities’ lands.  
 
Nine of the standards have be screened as relevant. Standard ESS9 on Financial Intermediaries is not considered 
relevant. 
 
The implementing agencies have good competency in implementing projects in accordance with national requirements 
and World Bank Safeguards Policies but have less familiarity with and experience in delivering projects in line with the 
Environmental and Social Framework. Prior to project appraisal an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) 
will be prepared which will take into account the need to ensure budget, staffing and operational arrangements for 
project environmental and social risk management. For new sites involving indigenous communities as sole beneficiaries, 
to understand and address project related risks and impacts, a social assessment will be prepared prior to appraisal to 
inform project design and project level social risk management framework, also to be prepared prior to appraisal. The 
assessment will inform revisions to existing social risk management frameworks and plans, including on stakeholder 
engagement, at both project and community level. 

 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Eastern Ukraine: Reconnect, Recover, Revitalize (3R Project) (P172348) 

 
 

  
Apr 01, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
     

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDA28762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Ukraine P172348 Eastern Ukraine: 
Reconnect, Recover, 
Revitalize (3R Project) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 10-Apr-2020 30-Jul-2020 Social 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ukravtodor, Ministry for 
Reintegration of 
Temporarily Occupied 
Territories 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen transport connectivity, support agricultural sector recovery, and engage conflict-affected communities 
in the design and monitoring of investments in project areas. 

 
Components 

RECONNECT: Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, Services 
RECOVER: Agricultural Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization 
REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform 
CERC: Contingent Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context  

1. Ukraine’s economic growth has been uneven since the country’s independence in 1991 and has been 
impacted by both external factors, such as the global financial crisis of 2008, and the internal conflict that 
began in 2014.  During the 2000-2007 period, Ukraine sustained high annual growth rates of 7 percent on 
average. Capital inflows surged, and credit growth boomed, fueled by the external borrowing of commercial 
banks. This enabled an expansionary fiscal policy that resulted in the accumulation of a structural deficit. Growth 
was almost entirely driven by favorable external conditions, but was not supported by structural reforms. With 
the onset of the global financial crisis, the Ukrainian economy contracted rapidly. During 2008‐2013, growth 
was negative and averaged ‐0.7 percent annually. The Maidan Revolution of 2013/2014, the events in Crimea 
in March 2014, and the armed conflict in the east of the country since 2014 resulted in a continued severe 
recession, and the economy contracted by 16 percent during 2014-2015. The Government of Ukraine (GoU) 
subsequently undertook a series of fiscal and business environment-related reforms that helped stabilize the 
economy. Economic growth has resumed, albeit at a modest rate: gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 2.3 
percent in 2016, 2.5 percent in 2017, 3.3 percent in 2018, and 3.5 percent in the first half of 2019.1 

 
2. Poverty rates vary across the country as fiscal and conflict-related pressures amplify traditional factors 
of vulnerability. Ukraine is characterized by significant regional disparities, and the benefits of past economic 
growth have not been shared evenly. Poverty remains higher in rural areas (8.5 versus 5.1 percent), where local 
communities face challenges such as poor living conditions, outdated infrastructure, and limited public services 
provision. Inflows of internally displaced persons (IDPs) due to the conflict have put an additional strain on local 
resources and services in host communities. Reversing the trend of increasing poverty rates and promoting 
shared prosperity remain significant development challenges that require Ukraine to capitalize on the drivers of 
growth through structural, policy, and investment reforms and the development of human capital. 

 
3. The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has impacted the lives and livelihoods of over five million Ukrainians 
through damage to infrastructure, interruption of markets and services, restrictions of movement, loss of 
employment, and psychosocial impacts. To date, over 13,000 people have been killed and 2.7 million persons 
displaced, including over 1.3 million internally displaced. Despite the extension of the ceasefire agreement in 
February 2015 (Minsk II), the security situation remains volatile, with daily hostilities occurring along the contact 


line separating Government-Controlled Areas (GCAs) and Non-Governmental Controlled areas (NGCAs) in 
Eastern Ukraine. 

  
4. The conflict has severely impacted socioeconomic activity in Ukraine’s eastern industrial heartland of 
Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Prior to the conflict, these areas (referred to as “the Donbas”) accounted for 12.5 
percent of Ukraine’s population and generated 15.7 percent of the country’s total GDP and a quarter of its 
exports. Because of the conflict, an estimated 70 percent of enterprises in the Donbas have reported decreased 
investment and revenues, disrupted trade relationships, lack of demand for products, and shrinking 
workforces.2 A World Bank survey of the socioeconomic impacts of the conflict in 2017 highlighted the welfare 
and socioeconomic challenges facing IDPs, veterans, and host communities.3  

 
5. Since taking office in May 2019, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has made outreach and 
development support to Eastern Ukraine a key policy priority, emphasizing socioeconomic integration of the 
region. This policy shift represents a window of opportunity for the World Bank to support the GoU in promoting 
the recovery and development of conflict-affected areas. Luhansk Oblast GCAs are proposed as the geographic 
focus for initial World Bank investment because of their acute lack of connectivity and economic opportunity 
compared to other areas of Eastern Ukraine, to complement and leverage other international partner funding 
more heavily concentrated in Donetsk Oblast, and to promote economic recovery of the region through a focus 
on agricultural development in line with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural sector 
reform agenda as a future engine of economic growth.4  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Economic impacts of the conflict have been among the most acute in Luhansk Oblast. With the division 
into GCAs and NGCAs, the oblast’s rural and agricultural north was severed from its industrialized and more 
urbanized south. Out of a pre-conflict population of 1.5 million people, Luhansk GCAs now have an estimated 
population of 692,000 people. Twenty-two of the region’s 34 cities, including Luhansk City as the oblast regional 
center, are now located in the NGCAs. An estimated 84 percent of the industrial capacity and 81 percent of all 
jobs in Luhansk Oblast have been left outside of the GCAs. Unemployment in the GCAs reached 17.5 percent 
among working age individuals in 2018, the highest of any oblast5 and the region has experienced the sharpest 
decline of any oblast in GDP between 2010-2017. While outmigration from Luhansk Oblast averaged 4,000 to 
6,000 individuals per year during the 2008-2013 pre-conflict period, it has since increased to more than 13,000 
people per year.6   
 
7. Luhansk GCAs also face severe connectivity challenges and lack a quality transport system to serve as 
a backbone of the regional economy. Before 2017, the financial and institutional arrangements in Ukraine’s 
road sector created a large backlog of periodic maintenance and rehabilitation. The shortage of funding, 
combined with a large share of overweight trucks, has resulted in premature deterioration of the network. From 
2011 to 2016, the share of national roads in poor condition (with an International Roughness Index (IRI) > 6) 

increased from 5 to 17 percent. Ukraine is also currently ranked 66th of a total of 160 countries in the World 
Bank’s 2018 Logistics Performance Index 7 and lags behind the best performers in the region and all European 
Union (EU) member states. For Luhansk Oblast, connectivity and logistical challenges are particularly acute. In a 
national comparison, Luhansk Oblast GCAs ranked as having the lowest connectivity level, based on its low 
proportion of roads per square kilometer and the limited access of its cities to major national markets. Major 
upgrading of the regional road network has not been undertaken since the 1980s. Luhansk’s transport system 
has also been severely impacted by the interruption of rail lines and road networks due to the conflict, resulting 
in an increase in overweight trucks transporting products over long distances. The average IRI on the network 
in Luhansk Oblast in 2017 was approximately 6.54, well below the national average.  
 
8. The long-term industrial decline and the recent conflict have increased the prominence of the 
agricultural sector in the Luhansk GCA economy and its importance to rural livelihoods. Before the conflict, 
the share of agriculture in the regional economy was about 10 percent and about 10 percent of the labor force 
was employed in the sector. Today, about 76 percent (or 1.5 million hectares) of the total agricultural land of 
the Donbas is located in the GCAs of Luhansk Oblast, with a growing percentage of workers employed in the 
agricultural sector.8 In the majority of Luhansk GCA districts, agriculture is the leading economic activity and 
sector of employment. In 2018, 23 percent of new jobs created were in agriculture, more than any other sector.9 
As of 2018, a total of 964 agro-industrial enterprises and more than 45,200 private family farms were involved 
in agricultural production.10 These family farms provide significant numbers of informal employment and 
support to rural livelihoods in the region. The sector remains critical because of its role as an employer of last 
resort and its importance for livelihoods for rural populations in the region. Luhansk’s regional development 
strategy highlights agricultural development as a key objective, including increasing productivity and efficiency 
and facilitating processing and access to markets. The project’s focus on agricultural development in Eastern 
Ukraine also aligns with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural reform agenda as a future 
engine of Ukraine’s economic growth and development. Finally, interventions in the agricultural sector, such as 
the introduction of new technologies and the development of value chains, are likely to be more efficient and 
cost effective for recovery than focusing on the restructuring or reconstruction of the former and now 
uncompetitive industrial sector. 
 
9. However, the conflict has resulted in significant negative impacts on agricultural supply and value 
chains in the region. Cereal and oil seed production has remained by far the most important agricultural activity, 
with 57 percent of arable land cultivated with cereals and sunflowers. Prior to the conflict, Luhansk Oblast relied 
on the Luhansk-Valuyki railway and road connections for the transportation of agricultural goods. Commodity 
flows have now been reoriented westward towards the Kharkiv region via longer, poorer quality road 
connections that have increased the required road haulage distance by an average of 65 kilometers. In 2018, 
transport costs for commodities increased by UAH 140-190 per ton of cargo, which impacted profitability and 
income.11 The resulting increased truck traffic has hastened the deterioration of the oblast’s primary and 
secondary road network. In addition, many of the large-scale grain and oil storage, processing, and logistical 

 
7 https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global.  
8 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. 2018. The Agriculture Sector in Eastern Ukraine: Analysis and Recommendations. 
Rome. 
9 United Nations Peacebuilding and Reconstruction Program. 2018. Comprehensive Analysis of the Regional Labor Market and the State 

Employment Service and Their Impact on the Vocational Education System in Luhansk Region. 
10 Luhansk Region Civil-Military Administration. 2016. Regional Development Strategy for the Period Until 2020. Severedonetsk. 

facilities, and most of the food processing industry and modern laboratory testing facilities are now located in 
the NGCAs and are therefore inaccessible. Production costs have also increased because of higher prices for the 
import and transportation of agricultural inputs, such as fuel and lubricants, seeds, and fertilizers.  
 
10.  Subsistence farming is widespread in Luhansk GCAs and is critical in supporting basic livelihoods in 
rural areas but small and household farmers producing vegetables, fruits, dairy products, and meat have lost 
access to aggregators and to the urban markets of Luhansk NGCAs, which accounted for over half of the 
oblast’s pre-conflict population. These producers now also face challenges because of the lack of access and 
investments in on-farm innovation and technology; limited storage, laboratory services, and processing 
facilities; and poor access to finance that would allow them to transition from subsistence level to more market-
oriented production. These challenges are exacerbated by the general uncertainty about the prospects of a 
political settlement and reintegration of NGCA urban markets and trade.  

 
11. Youth, IDPs, and veterans in Luhansk Oblast face particular development challenges. Among the 
average of 13,000 individuals that migrate from the GCAs each year, 67 percent are under 28 years of age, driven 
by limited opportunities for civic engagement, limited prospects for well-paying employment, and concern over 
poor social infrastructure for young families.12 Luhansk Oblast ranks second to Donetsk Oblast in the number of 
IDPs per oblast, with over 270,000 people officially registered. Tensions with host communities are low, 
however, and IDPs are well represented among employees of public service institutions. Yet IDPs face difficulties 
in accessing land, obtaining satisfactory housing, and joining established agricultural networks within the GCAs 
of Luhansk. Most IDPs have skills in engineering, processing, and other mechanical or technical trades that they 
acquired in their home areas, which are now in NGCAs. Veterans in Luhansk Oblast, as elsewhere, have to 
contend with unemployment and difficult transitions to civilian life, lack of psychosocial and rehabilitation 
support, long absences from farming and assets, and difficulty securing their benefit entitlements.13    
 
12. The conflict has exacerbated gender gaps, particularly for rural women. With men being predominantly 
engaged in military operations, women have taken on greater responsibilities for household affairs, with many 
becoming sole caregivers for their families, the elderly, and the disabled.14 Female pensioners, women IDPs, and 
female-headed households with young children are particularly vulnerable to the conflict-induced social 
disruption prevalent throughout Luhansk Oblast.15 Poor road conditions and the resulting longer commutes via 
personal vehicles as well as limited and neglected public transport systems also disproportionately disadvantage 
rural women’s mobility in the region and their access to employment, healthcare, childcare, and other public 
services. Poor mobility also constrains women’s access to more diverse employment opportunities and more 
lucrative markets.16 Many women in rural Luhansk GCAs are engaged in agricultural production at a small-scale 
or household level. However, the supplementary income and food security gained from farming activities is 
limited by poor access to markets, limited productive inputs (both advisory and technological), and lack of access 
to information and skills development around value chain development and value-added production.17 

 
12 SCORE data (2019) for driver identification. See Ukraine State Statistics Agency for outmigration s, 2018-2019. 
13 World Bank. 2017. Ukraine: Socio-Economic Impacts of Internal Displacement and Veteran Return. 
14  Spear, A., Kokanova, N., Magduyk, L., Dadalauri, N., Buzu., and Engvall, L. 2016. Gender analysis of the EU AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, 

Moldova and Ukraine. Swedish International Development Agency Publication. p. 60. 
15  Focus group discussions as part of a WB Rapid Gender Assessment for Luhansk GCAs during project preparation, February 2020. 
16 National official labor force participation rates reflect these realities. Employment among Ukrainian women (47%) is lower than 

among men (63%). UNDP. 2019. Human Development Report. 
17  United Nations Country Team – Gender Theme Group. 2018. Leaving No One Behind: Rural Women and Girls. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To strengthen transport connectivity and improve agricultural services with the active engagement of conflict-affected 
communities in project areas in Eastern Ukraine. 
 

Key Results 

• Travel time from agricultural communities to service centers/markets in Luhansk GCAs  

• Increased use of agricultural hub and laboratory services (disaggregated by type of 

producer/institution, small-/medium-/large-sized enterprises, women-headed enterprises)  

• Percentage of target beneficiaries of agricultural clusters reporting improved production 

(disaggregated by gender, youth, veterans, production type) 

• Percentage of target beneficiaries who report that the design/operation of infrastructure investments 

financed by the project reflect their inputs (disaggregated by gender) 

 
D. Project Description  
 

13. The project seeks to reinforce national commitment to recovery and development of Eastern Ukraine 
and highlights the benefits of socio-economic connectivity in support of a future settlement.  The project’s 
multi-sectoral investments aim to promote agricultural sector development in rural areas in Luhansk GCAs that 
could help stimulate future growth and opportunity in the region.  Prioritized investments reflect an intensive 
stakeholder dialogue during project preparation with national, regional and local officials, agri-industry, 
agricultural producers, agricultural communities, women, IDPs, veterans, and youth in project areas. 
Recognizing the socio-economic and administrative characteristics of Luhansk GCAs, the project will include the 
following components:  
 
14. Component 1: RECONNECT - Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, and 
Services.  Component 1 will support the rehabilitation of roads in Luhansk Oblast in support of the agricultural 
sector and connecting rural communities to urban service centers in Luhansk GCAs.  Poor and deteriorating local 
roads have been a key bottleneck to agricultural logistics and supply chains and the broader development of the 
region.  Component 1 prioritizes road investments that link farmers to processors, markets, and service centers 
in Luhansk GCAs.  The target road network will be rehabilitated to a category 2-3 standard which is a two-lane 
road with safety specifications including side crash barriers where required.  The project will finance all 
necessary road infrastructure such as bridges, interchanges, and railway crossing, safety measures, site 
supervision of civil works, and equipment.  Additionally, for protection of the investments, the project will 
include installation of weigh-in-motion stations and speed cameras.  The Component will also include activities 
to engage local administration and communities in project areas on road use, road safety measures, and will 
provide technical assistance to support development of ‘feeder roads’ to the network.  This is expected to 
promote local ownership and sustainability of transport investments.  
 
15. Component 2:  RECOVER - Agriculture Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization.  
Component 2 will complement the connectivity investments of Component 1 through select agricultural sub-
projects that address some of the conflict’s impacts on the agricultural sector in Luhansk GCAs, including loss of 
access to agricultural services, processing facilities, product testing and local urban markets, as well as limited 


technology and value chain to market support for the Oblast’s many small producers.  Component investments 
will include: (a) an Agriculture Logistics and Service Hub in Starobilsk City, including a grain/oil seed elevator; a 
small grain/oil seed quality testing facility; an office building for administration and business development 
support; an innovative online trading platform to link producers and traders; and an agricultural services support 
area; (b) a Regional Agricultural Testing and Food Safety Laboratory to address a critical gap following the loss 
of access to the agricultural product testing and food safety management services due to the conflict; and (c) 
Agricultural Cluster Development for small household-level producers.  Community-based Cluster support will 
facilitate the transition from current subsistence production towards more organized and market-oriented 
production practices, including value-chain to market support to an estimated 5 to 10 clusters of 100 to 150 
small household-level producers.  The component will also finance the associated detailed design studies. 
 
16. Component 3 - REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform.  Component 3 will support the 
development of an implementation support platform to address management capacity constraints, deficits in 
state-citizen dialogue, and requirements for national-regional-local cooperation to effectively delivery the 
project activities.  Component 3 will finance Project Management activities for the MRTOT.  Component 3 will 
also include the following activities: Luhansk regional public-private investment forums to gather project 
beneficiaries, international and Ukrainian private sector representatives, international and domestic financial 
institutions, GoU representatives, and development partners to raise awareness and promote investment 
opportunities in the region; user/beneficiary surveys and community forums to provide feedback on project 
design and implementation (project processes, budgets and outcomes) for infrastructure investments under 
Components 1 and 2; and a 3R Project beneficiary feedback mechanism (BFM), including Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM).  To educate communities and stakeholders in project areas on the objectives, procedures, 
purpose, and opportunities associated with the project and to emphasize the project as a national investment 
to support economic recovery in Eastern Ukraine, Component 3 will also finance strategic communications 
activities.  The implementation platform supported by Component 3 will promote sustainability and possible 
future scale-up and expansion of Project investments to additional sectors and geographic areas in Eastern 
Ukraine. .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 
17. The proposed project is expected to have substantial environmental and social risks. The 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification is based on the potential environmental and social risks associated 
with project activities, as well as project location (proximity to conflict areas) and baseline conditions, overall 
scale of the project, possible cumulative impact and anticipated challenges in environmental and social risk 
management supervision due to limited client capacity. 
 
18. Environmental risks. Although the specific sites where physical works will take place are mostly existing 
roads and urbanized areas, key environmental issues will be related to: (a) waste management of removed road 


surfaces and construction spoils; (b) noise and air pollution with dust; (c) the presence and handling of 
hazardous materials such as bitumen, paint, oil containing materials; (d) the health and safety of the populations 
of the villages and towns along the roads and travelers during road rehabilitation phases, as well as the 
populations living near the agriculture-related investment construction sites; and (e) impacts on water, soil, and 
air quality in case of construction-related spills. These predictable impacts are expected to be temporary, 
reversible, moderate in magnitude, and site-specific. The location of the project near the armed conflict zone 
and in a post-conflict territory raises the risk of unexploded ordnances (UXOs) and some of the locations may 
require demining activities to take place before civil works. Adequate adoption of UXO neutralization 
procedures and occupational health and safety practices for workers during construction and maintenance 
operations will be required. Also, the agricultural logistics and service hub is required to adopt HACCP (Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point) and integrate it into its operational model.  
 
19. Social risks. Social issues and potential risks identified include: one, works to be financed under 
components 1 and 2, and associated ESS5 impacts, particularly under component 1 roads investments; two, 
engagement with local communities and other relevant stakeholders (including with most vulnerable and 
disadvantaged groups) and challenges in ensuring their genuine participation in decision-making processes of 
the project; three, the challenging social environment and baseline conditions in Eastern Ukraine due to conflict; 
and four, limited capacity of Ukravtodor as well as MRTOT in handling ESF requirements.  In addition to these 
risks, the evolving situation around the COVID-19 pandemic may also potentially impact project 
implementation, particularly given public health guidelines on physical distancing and quarantine.  Meaningful 
community engagement will be a challenge in the project areas.  To mitigate this risk, implementing entities 
prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which among others, suggests preliminary tools (such as 
virtual consultations, etc) to ensure continuous community engagement. Consultation, communication, and 
feedback mechanisms in the design of the project will help to manage expectations, especially for large 
infrastructure projects, and orient investments in ways that address local priorities and strengthen transparency 
in resource allocation decisions.  
 
20. Environmental and Social Framework instruments. Detailed analysis of the application of the World 
Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) has been provided as part of the Environmental and Social 
Review Summary (ESRS). The project applies ESS 1-6, 8, and 10 as relevant at this stage of development and 
needed environmental and social measures will be implemented through the actions agreed in the respective 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) prepared by UAD and MRTOT and submitted to the World 
Bank. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with template ESMP, draft SEP, draft RPF 
and Labor Management Procedure were developed and will be updated during project implementation as 
required. Once the project activities are finalized and environmental and social assessments completed, 
additional measures such as subproject-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Traffic 
Management Plans (TMP) and Waste Management Plans (WMPs) are to be prepared. A project-specific 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established as outlined in the ESMF. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
21. Because the project is a multi-sectoral program of support for socio-economic recovery and growth in 
Luhansk Oblast, it requires the involvement of government agencies responsible for recovery/IDPs/veterans, 
transport, agriculture, local infrastructure, and economic development; as well as regional and local officials in 

Luhansk Oblast project areas.  The implementation arrangements will also encourage opportunities for 
interaction and dialogue between national and local levels of administration on project activities.  The Bank team 
agreed specifically on the following: 

 

• UAD will implement Component 1 through its central Project Implementation Unit (PIU) – SOE 
“Ukrdorinvest” (UDI) – and in coordination with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast.  Ukrdorinvest 
has experienced staff with project management, procurement, FM, and social and environmental 
safeguards experience.  Ukrdorinvest will also coordinate with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast 
to support supervision activities and to liaise with local authorities and communities.   
 

• MRTOT will implement Components 2 and 3, drawing on its mandate for conflict-recovery efforts and 
to support establishment of an implementation support platform for national investment in Eastern 
Ukraine.  MRTOT will implement the project through a central PIU and place select PIU staff in the already 
established Sector Office in Luhansk Oblast to carry out coordination, monitoring, communications and 
oversight functions in close coordination with local authorities.   
 

• A Project Steering Sub-Committee will be established under the current Inter-Governmental Council on 
Recovery of the Eastern Regions chaired by MRTOT, or any relevant successor coordination body on 
conflict-recovery.  The Sub-Committee will include participation of relevant national-level agencies, 
including Ministry of Infrastructure, UAD, MDETA, Ministry of Finance, and the Luhansk Oblast State and 
Civil-Military Administration.  The Sub-Committee will be chaired by MRTOT and provide overall strategic 
guidance and oversight to the 3R Project.   
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Burkina Faso COVID-19 Emergency DPO (P174315) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 5  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  17-Jun-2020| Report No: PIDC29848 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Burkina Faso P174315 Burkina Faso COVID-19 
Emergency DPO (P174315) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA WEST Nov 24, 2020 Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

REPUBLIK OF BURKINA 
FASO 

MINISTERE DE L'ECONOMIE, DES FINANCES ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
This operation aims at mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 shock on lives and livelihoods, and laying foundations 
for a resilient recovery. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 100.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 100.00 

     World Bank Lending 100.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
The proposed Development Policy Operation (DPO) supports the Government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
in the context of a deteriorating security and humanitarian situation. Burkina Faso was among the first countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa hit by COVID-19 and the Government took early and decisive action to contain and mitigate the 
spread of the virus. Prior to COVID-19, the country has experienced a rapidly deteriorating security situation since 
2018 with persistent armed violence that has severe humanitarian consequences. Against this backdrop, the COVID-
19 pandemic is transmitted through external and internal channels with a substantial economic impact. The COVID-19 
crisis is worsening the poverty and social conditions in the country. The proposed operation will help the Government 
tackle the COVID-19 crisis and address structural issues to reduce poverty and inequality in a sustainable manner to 


improve the social conditions over the long term. The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed 
operation with the risk of overall debt distress assessed as moderate.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-FY23, which is embedded in the twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner, provides the overarching framework for this 
operation. Policy reforms supported through this emergency operation are consistent with all three pillars of the CPF 
with other projects complementing the operation to achieve CPF outcomes. First, policy reforms related to public 
investment reprioritization (in combination with the the Emergency Recurrent Cost Financing Project ([P169486]) and 
access to credit (supported by the Financial Inclusion Support Project [P164786]) support the acceleration of 
sustainable private-sector-led growth for job creation (CPF Pillar 1). Further, policy reforms related to health (linked 
to Health Services Reinforcement Project [P164696]) and social protection (complemented by the Social Safety Net 
Project [P160371]) contribute to investing in human capital and social protection systems (CPF Pillar 2). Finally, policy 
reforms related to the digitalization of the public administration (supported by the Burkina Faso eGovernment Project 
[P155645]) and the governance of COVID funds (linked to the Economic Governance and Citizen Engagement Project 
[P155121]) contribute to strengthening governance and supporting citizen engagement (CPF Pillar 3). 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
This operation aims at mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 shock on lives and livelihoods, and laying foundations 
for a resilient recovery. 

 
Key Results  
This operation seeks to achieve results in multiple areas. In the health area, the operation seeks to improve the capacity 
to respond across all phases of the epidemic and to increase health system resilience. The social protection field, it seeks 
to facilitate access to services and strengthen the country’s response to COVID-19 and other crises. Further, this operation 
supports also business continuity of the state and prepares the digital transformation. Moreover, the DPO is expected to 
improve transparency and accountability in the use of COVID-19 funds and accelerate the response to future crisis. In 
addition, it will help improve the efficacy and efficiency of priority spending. Finally, the DPO envisions to improve access 
to credit for individuals, micro, small and medium enterprises and improve debt management and transparency. 
 

D. Concept Description 
 
The proposed operation is based on reforms included in the Government’s COVID-19 Response Plan, enacted in the Head 
of State’s address to the Nation. The plan is the result of recommendations from the National Pandemic Management 
Committee chaired by the Prime Minister and comprising a dozen sectoral ministries, technical and financial partners, 
and the civil society organizations. In addition, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank has intensified the policy 
dialogue in the health, social protection, education and agriculture sectors.  
 
The proposed operation supports the Government’s Government’s Emergency Response Plan through several angles. 
First, the DPO will strengthen the crisis response through the implementation of a national epidemiologic monitoring 
system. Second, the operation will help strengthen the Government’s response strategy through better identification 
and targeting of the most vulnerable, fast, adapted and transparent PFM and procurement procedures, and better, faster 
and if needed, contactless public services. Third, the operation will help strengthen the resilience of MSMEs and the 
informal sector through easier and better access to credit. Fourth, the DPO will help speed up and complete the ongoing 
public spending reprioritization exercise (with a focus on investment projects). Finally, the operation will support Burkina 

Faso’s macroeconomic stability through two channels: a more efficient public spending, and a better management and 
transparency of public debt. 
 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
The measures related to the health sector have strongly positive poverty and social impacts. The first sub-action supports 
the development and implementation for the large-scale pilot phase of the development and rollout of a One Health 
system. Improving preparedness, notification, investigation, response, and epidemic management capacity across the 
actors will mitigate against risks that affect both rural (animal husbandry and crops) and urban areas (shutdown effects, 
risk of transmission due to at-risk living conditions). The second sub-action through its information component increases 
targeting and coordination of resources and enables the provision of proper inputs in a timely and cost-effective manner. 
Reducing the duration of the epidemic will reduce the risk to populations, particularly the poor. The third sub-action is 
consistent with the CPF focus to increase service availability to all, but particularly the poor. Increasing prioritization of 
activities and investments and the focus on results will support better health results at lower total cost.  
 
Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
Policy reform in the area of public investment is expected to promote climate-smart infrastructure investments. The 
revised Public Investment Program will include a list of prioritized investment projects resulting from a multi-criteria 
analysis. Impacts on and from climate change are among those criteria. Other criteria are project maturity, economic 
return, and the impact on growth and jobs. For example, in the area of urban roads the following criteria are taken into 
consideration: (i) all-weather pavement resurfacing with material that prevents water damage; (ii) construction of wider 
drains and culverts as well as slope stabilization to accommodate heavy rainfall; and (iii) elevation of bridges, tunnels, 
and roads in flood prone locations to allow for increased amounts of runoff from torrential rainfall to be transported 
away from vulnerable areas. 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Turkey Resilient Landscape Integration Project (TULIP) (P172562) 

 
 

  
Mar 12, 2020 Page 1 of 15  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDC28743 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Turkey P172562  Turkey Resilient 
Landscape Integration 
Project (TULIP) 
(P172562) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 28, 2020 Dec 17, 2020 Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Turkey General Directorate of 
Forestry (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 300.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 300.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
tbd 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Turkey has achieved commendable economic and social development results between 2000 and 2016. GDP per 

capita more than doubled from US$4,200 in 2000 to US$9,505 in 2018. Poverty incidence more than halved over 2002-

2015, and extreme poverty fell even faster from 13 to 3.1 percent. During this period, Turkey urbanized dramatically, 

maintained strong macroeconomic and fiscal policy frameworks, opened to foreign trade and finance, harmonized many 

laws and regulations with European Union (EU) standards, and greatly expanded access to public services. However, 

growing economic vulnerabilities and a challenging external environment have threatened to undermine the 

sustainability of these achievements in the last few years. Turkey experienced a period of economic overheating in late 

2017 and early 2018 and intense market volatility in mid-2018, resulting in contracting economic output, rising 

unemployment (from 10 percent in January 2018 to 14 percent in mid-2019), and high inflation (estimated at around 15 

percent in September 2019). Recent adjustments in the Turkish economy have lessened external vulnerabilities and 

contributed to a more stable Lira. The economy grew in the first half of 2019 and has stabilized in the short-term. 

Nevertheless, stagnating output, high costs of production, and high consumer prices have also led to significant job losses 

and falling real wages. Poorer households have been most impacted because many low-income workers are employed 

in construction and agriculture – the sectors that saw a significant decline in jobs. Large regional disparities continue to 

persist, as rural poverty remains higher than urban poverty1. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Turkey has made progress in relatively decoupling growth from a range of environmental pressures, but rapid 

population growth, urbanization, and industrialization continue to take a heavy toll on the country’s natural resources 

and the environment2. Soil erosion, land degradation, and desertification are among the most severe environmental 

problems in Turkey. Soil erosion, mostly caused by human factors coupled with geographic, topographic, climatic, and 

soil characteristics, is observed at very large scales, affecting about 86% of Turkey’s lands3 and putting most of the country 

under risk of desertification4. Turkey has undertaken considerable afforestation efforts for erosion control, adding a total 

of 2.14 million hectares of forest land since 1973. Despite this increase in forest cover, about 43% of Turkey’s forests 

(9.64 out of 22.34 million hectares) are degraded5, and the deterioration of forest ecosystems and their associated 

ecosystem services and loss of biodiversity continue to be critical issues6. Water quality and scarcity are also of grave 

concern as they affect the availability of water resources for human consumption and economic uses. Deforestation, 

sedimentation, discharges of untreated industrial and domestic effluents into freshwater bodies and the sea, 

insufficiency of wastewater treatment facilities, and diffuse nitrogen and ammonia pollution from agricultural activities, 

all contribute to decreased water quality. By international standards, Turkey is currently considered a water-stressed 

country and, with rapid population growth, is predicted to be water-scarce by 20307. In addition to natural resource 


degradation problems, Turkey is also vulnerable to a range of natural disasters, with floods and landslides being the 

second (25.3 percent) and third (7.4 percent) most frequent and disastrous hazards after earthquakes8. Floods and 

landslides in Turkey are directly linked to topography, land use, land cover, urbanization levels, and rainfall regimes. 

Between 1975 and 2015, 1209 floods were recorded, causing loss of 720 lives and damaging 894,474 hectares of land. 

The amount of average annual property damage caused by floods has reached 300 million Turkish Liras. Hazardous floods 

are mostly observed in the Black Sea, Mediterranean, and Western Anatolia regions9. 

 
3. Climate change is expected to further exacerbate the pressure on the natural resource base of Turkey. The 

country is already experiencing an increase in annual mean temperature and changes in the precipitation regime. A long-

term downward trend in average yearly precipitation is projected for overall Turkey, although the distribution pattern 

varies across locations. The Eastern Black Sea and northeastern parts of the country will likely experience an increase in 

average annual precipitation, while the southern regions will experience a decrease. Projected climate change impacts 

include reduction in surface water availability, more frequent and severe incidences of floods, and more prolonged 

droughts. With a mostly arid and semiarid climate and environment, increased frequency and severity of droughts and 

extreme precipitation events will negatively affect water holding capacity of the upper layers of the soil, further 

exacerbating soil erosion and increasing the risks of flooding and landslides, particularly in terrains with rough 

topography10. More frequent droughts will negatively affect crop yields and threaten food security, while floods and 

landslides will continue to affect the safety and welfare of hundreds of thousands of people. Without accelerated actions, 

the combination of climate-induced hazards, a degrading natural resource base, and water scarcity and quality issues will 

increasingly affect societal wellbeing and act as constraints on growth. Poor rural communities whose livelihoods depend 

on natural resources will be disproportionately affected11, which could lead to an increase in rural-to-urban migration. 

 
4. Recognizing the importance of adapting to the impacts of climate change and protecting the country’s natural 

capital to sustain current gains, Turkey’s Eleventh Development Plan for the 2019-2023 period pays significant 

attention to a sustainable and inclusive growth pathway.  The Plan places “Livable Cities and Sustainable Environment” 

among its five fundamental pillars of development. Priorities and targets embraced under this pillar include reduction of 

environmental pollution, protection of biodiversity, and sustainable management and use of land, forest, water, and 

other natural resources through integrated watershed management. This pillar also includes targets to ensure access to 

healthy drinking water, including appropriate waste water treatment, combat poverty, promote the employability of 

rural labor force, prevent and mitigate disaster risks, and develop climate adaptation capacity and resilience of affected 

communities. The Plan highlights agriculture and forestry as one of the three priority development areas and emphasizes 

the need to bridge regional disparities and increase job opportunities and employment of women and youth12. 

 
5. Natural resource management in Turkey is guided by a multitude of sectoral strategies and plans, however 

integration among them is currently low. The Turkey National Forestry Program (2004 – 2023) has the objective to 

ensure sustainable forest management, ecosystems and biodiversity conservation, and efficient use of forest resources, 

with the participation of stakeholders, including local communities. A special emphasis is placed on the ecosystem 

services provided by forests, including soil conservation, water quality protection, prevention of desertification, erosion, 

and natural disasters, air quality regulation and carbon storage13. The National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat 

Desertification (2015-2023) aims at mitigating against the adverse effects of aridity, desertification, and land degradation 

and balancing conservation with efficient land use objectives14. The National Climate Change Action Plan (2011-2023) 

includes the objectives to increase the amount of carbon sequestered in forests and to reduce deforestation and 

associated GHG emissions from land use and land use change. The National Basin Management Strategy (NBMS) (2014-


2023) provides guidance for the medium and long-term investment programs for the sustainable management of 

Turkey’s 25 river basins15. Under the NBMS, River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) are now been prepared for each of 

the basins to address the water quality and quantity issues and meet the ecological status for both surface and 

groundwater bodies as per the requirements of related EU water legislation, including the EU Water Framework 

Directive, Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, and Urban Waste Water Directive. The NBMS attempts to integrate 

the objectives of several relevant sectoral strategies and plans by promoting an integrated landscape-based ecosystem 

approach at basin or sub-basin scale, through coordinated efforts of related agencies and stakeholders to enhance the 

sustainability, while also improving the productivity of natural resources in Turkey’s river basins. Such integrated 

watershed/sub-basin management approach can address the interrelationships among land use, soil, and water and the 

interlinkage between upstream and downstream areas, and help link natural resources management with socioeconomic 

wellbeing and regional development.16 Nevertheless, the RBMPs (the planning tools under NBMS) that have been 

developed so far are highly water-focused and not sufficiently detailed to be operationalized at the sub-basin level. There 

is also a lack of integration among various basin-related plans (RBMPs, Flood Management Plans, Drought Management 

Plans, Sectoral Water Allocation Plans) and other sectoral plans including land use planning, spatial planning, and 

agricultural development plans. 

 
6. Institutional coordination also poses constraints to the implementation of integrated natural resources 

management (NRM) approaches in Turkey. Institutions directly involved in NRM include the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Forestry and its line agencies such as the General Directorate (DG) of Forestry, DG for Combatting Desertification and 

Erosion, DG of Agricultural Reform, DG of Water Management, and State Hydraulic Works (DSI); the Ministry of 

Environment and Urbanization, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, the Disaster and Emergency Management 

Presidency under the Ministry of Interior, as well as the Provincial Directorates of these respective ministries, and local 

authorities, among others. The involvement of numerous institutions with often overlapping jurisdictions and 

responsibilities results in duplicities and fragmentation in management efforts, leading to inefficient use of public 

resources. The institutional arrangement for river basin management in Turkey is meant to bring these institutions 

together to coordinate their works, however, it has yet to be effectively implemented in practice.  

 
7. The Eastern Black Sea (EBS) Basin has the 3rd highest poverty rate (20.9%) in Turkey combined with a multitude 

of environmental challenges.17 The EBS Basin has the third-largest annual flow rate, after the Euphrates-Tigris and 

Eastern Mediterranean Basin18 and is home to approximately 2.46 million people19. It has a harsh mountainous 

topography with no extensive plains and the highest peak at 3,937 meters running parallel to shore. EBS has a prevailing 

humid-temperate Black Sea climate with the highest precipitation level in Turkey (averaged above 2500mm annually 

versus the national average of 574 mm)20. A combination of short rivers with rapid descending slopes, an abundance of 

snow and rains, and the highest rainfall level on the slopes facing the sea make EBS highly flood-prone, with flooding 

being the most commonly occurred natural disaster in EBS (39% of the total number of disasters). Climate-induced 

change in precipitation will likely further exacerbate flood risks. Additionally, soil erosion and landslide-caused disasters 

are prevalent in EBS due to topography, morphological structure, lithology, climate characteristics such as heavy 

precipitation, and land use change. The transformation of natural vegetation for hazelnut and tea cultivation since the 

1950s in the region has resulted in the formation and increased frequency of landslides.21 Landslide frequency is higher 

in the elevation range of 0-500 meters due to slope instability connected to the conversion of forest areas into hazelnut 

gardens and road construction.22 Despite the abundance in annual rainfall, EBS is considered water-stressed due to high 

seasonal rainfall variability, severe water pollution from agricultural and livestock activities, industrial and domestic 


     

waste discharges, and insufficient water storage capacity. EBS has four sub-basins, including Ordu-Giresun, Harşit Stream, 

Trabzon, and Rize-Artvin23. 

 
8. The Bolaman Basin, located within the Ordu-Giresun sub-basin of EBS, is an area severely challenged by 

landslides, flooding, and degradation of natural resources affecting the wellbeing and livelihoods of the local 

population. The Bolaman Basin has its distinct geographical boundaries and hydrological structure and covers an area of 

158,886 hectares almost entirely within the Ordu Province. With a population of 255,000, most of its residents live in 

rural areas across 97 villages, 53 of which are forest villages. Over 58 percent of the basin area is agricultural land, of 

which 39 percent is cultivated land, and 19 percent is pasture land. Forest land has been largely converted to hazelnut 

groves over the years and currently only accounts for 28.9 percent of the basin area. Hazelnut is cultivated monoculturally 

up to altitudes of 600-700 meters from the coast and accounts for 98 percent of cultivated lands. Ordu Province is the 

biggest hazelnut producer in Turkey. In 2018, Ordu produced 180,397 tons of hazelnut, accounting for 35 percent of the 

entire hazelnut production in Turkey with a total export value of US$3 billion. Hazelnut is almost the only source of 

income in all villages; the remaining comes from small-scale subsistence farming and livestock activities. Bolaman 

experiences a composite of problems typical for the EBS Basin, including soil erosion, degradation of forest ecosystems, 

surface water pollution, landslides, drought and floods. An estimated 457,411 tons of soil is moved annually due to 

erosion in the basin. Estimated annual point source and non-point source nitrogen and phosphorous pollution recorded 

in 2012 for the entire Ordu-Giresun sub-basin was the highest in EBS (6,866 tons/year and 421 tons/year, respectively)24. 

Drinking water in Bolaman is mostly supplied from surface water, and pollution of over 75 percent of surface water bodies 

seriously threatens the availability of drinking water sources for communities in Ordu. Turbidity problems experienced 

in heavy precipitation events and water level declines during episodes of drought further impede access to healthy 

drinking water. Ordu also experiences natural disasters that have caused the loss of life and properties to local 

communities. Between 1950 and 2011, 368 incidences of landslides, 44 incidences of flooding, and 36 incidences of falling 

rocks occurred in the province25. Landslides and floods due to excessive rainfall in 2016 and 2018 caused substantial 

damage to roads, settlements, bridges and agricultural and forest areas in Ordu.26 Recent landslide events resulted in the 

complete collapse of 15 and substantial damages to 30 houses and a flood in 2018 led to the collapse of a large bridge in 

the Ünye, Fatsa, and Çaybaşı districts. In 2019, a village completely collapsed by landslides in the Aybastı district and 

severe landslides affected the Kabataş district. The road system in the basin is frequently impacted and damaged by these 

disaster events, preventing access to markets and certain isolated settlements. Integrated solutions to the severe and 

multifaceted problems in the Bolaman Basin are urgently needed as this area has become a priority for the Government 

of Turkey (GoT). It also presents an opportunity for piloting innovative elements for integrated approaches to NRM that 

can generate valuable lessons for other basins in Turkey and the region. 

 
9. Turkey is well poised to pursue integrated approaches for the sustainable use of natural resources but lacks 

experience in current cost-effective innovations in NRM such as Nature-Based Solutions. Watershed management has 

evolved significantly since its inception. The first generation of watershed management projects in the 1970s and 1980s 

mostly applied an engineering approach to soil and water management with specific on-site and downstream physical 

outcomes. The investments were costly with limited benefits as the needs of upstream communities and their ownership 

of the interventions were not considered. The second generation of watershed management projects in the 1990s 

departed from this top-down engineering approach to focus more on farming systems and stakeholder participation, in 

order to create synergies between resources conservation and rural poverty reduction.27 In recent years, Nature-based 

Solutions (NBS), including Green Infrastructure (GI) and others, have been promoted as innovative, cost-effective and 

sustainable solutions to a variety of environmental, social, and economic challenges. NBS operationalizes the concept of 


ecosystem services to address specific problems and deliver multiple benefits such as buffering against natural disasters, 

regulating water, sequestrating carbon, and providing resources for sustaining livelihoods and economic activities.28 In 

many cases, combining GI with traditional gray infrastructure can create next generation solutions that can better protect 

communities by tackling the immediately pressing problems while restoring the regulatory functions of ecosystems that 

can enhance the performance, life cycle, and cost-effectiveness of gray infrastructure29. In the case of Turkey, this hybrid 

green-gray solution can prevent capital lock-in as most of the interventions implemented and planned at the basin level 

have been predominantly traditional gray infrastructure, which are highly expensive.30 In addition, previous investment 

operations spread out across large river basins have resulted in moderate visible results for local communities.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
10. The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Turkey for the 

FY18-21 period and with the objectives of Turkey’s 11th Development Plan (2019–2023). The CPF sets out the overall 

objective of supporting Turkey in achieving more sustainable and inclusive development by focusing on growth, inclusion, 

and sustainability dimensions31. The proposed project will contribute to meeting CPF objective 9 (Increased sustainability 

of infrastructure assets and natural capitals) under the sustainability focus area to help Turkey orient its growth toward 

a more resilient and sustainable trajectory. 

 
11. The proposed project will also contribute to meeting Turkey’s sectoral objectives as set out in multiple national 

strategies and plans as well as commitments under global conventions. These include: (i) sustainable development 

objectives under the 11th Development Plan; (ii) voluntary national Land Degradation Neutrality targets for afforestation, 

soil conservation, and rehabilitation of forest lands and pastures per the commitments under the United Nations 

Convention on Combating Desertification and National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat Desertification (2015-2023); 

(iii) water quality and quantity as well as disaster reduction objectives in line with the EU Water Framework Directive, EU 

Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, Urban Waste Water Directive, and EU Integrated Environmental Approximation 

Strategy (2007-23); (iv) increased carbon capture and sink capacity of forests in line with the Intended National 

Determined Contribution under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and Turkey Climate Change Strategy 

(2010-2023); (v) climate change adaptation objectives per Turkey’s National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and 

Action Plan (2011-2023); and (vi) rural development and income generation for rural communities as targeted in the 

National Rural Development Strategy (2014-2020) and National Strategy for Regional Development (2014-2023). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
12. The key results expected by the project and respective PDO indicators (including Corporate Results Indicators, 

CRIs) are: 

i. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (ha) (CRI) 
ii. Improved institutional capacity for integrated NRM at the national level (number of integrated NRM plans 

adopted for other basins) 


iii. People provided with increased access to climate-resilient infrastructure included in an integrated NRM plan 
(number, disaggregated by gender and type of service). Composite indicator including the following underlying 
indicators: 

a. People provided with increased protection against landslides and/or flooding 
b. People provided with access to improved drinking water supply (CRI) 
c. People provided with access to improved sanitation services (CRI) 
d. People provided with access to rural roads rehabilitated for climate and disaster resilience. 

13. Gender, GHG, citizen engagement, and additional CRIs will be included in the project’s Results Framework.  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed project will support the GoT in addressing the multitude of environmental challenges facing the 

Bolaman Basin in the Ordu province, while enhancing the livelihood security and resilience of local communities 

against the risks and impacts of climate-induced landslides, flooding, and drought. The project will adopt an integrated 

landscape management approach at the sub-basin scale (Boloman) to achieve these objectives. This integrated approach 

can help address the interlinked problems in Bolaman and rebuild the resilience of the social-ecological system within 

the sub-basin. Building on GoT and the Bank’s previous experience in watershed management, this project will design a 

participatory planning process to take into account inputs from different stakeholder groups, allowing for the 

coordination and integration of solutions among different government agencies as well as between government and local 

stakeholders. Such participatory planning approach will contribute to bridging various stakeholders within the NRM 

sphere and improving institutional coordination. The project will also deploy integrated green and gray infrastructure 

solutions as both short-term and long-term responses to mitigate the risks of landslides, floods, and drought, and 

enhance climate resilience of the local populations and ecosystems. NBS in combination with sustainable and climate-

smart agricultural practices will be designed based on sound technical, social, and financial analysis to achieve synergies 

between resources conservation and livelihood enhancement and ensure local stakeholders’ ownership and thus, the 

sustainability of project interventions.  

 
15. The integrated NRM approach of the project will generate valuable lessons and innovative elements that can 

be applied to other basins with similar problems in Turkey and in other countries. To demonstrate and promote an 

integrated landscape approach to NRM, the project will also include a technical assistance and capacity building sub-

component that will develop and employ planning tools at the landscape level to optimize the synergies and integration 

of interventions across the sub-basin and establish associated institutional structures.  

 
16. Theory of Change and Project design. The central problem statement the Project tries to address is that the 

degradation of natural resources and unsustainable land use, coupled with climate change, and the lack of appropriate 

infrastructures for landslide and flooding control, water and sanitation, and mobility are affecting the well-being and 

livelihoods of the local population in the Ordu province. The proposed operation will address these issues through six 

groups of interventions: (i) strengthening of institutional capacity for INRM; (ii) restoration of ecosystem functions and 

services; (iii) promotion of sustainable land use practices and diversification of rural livelihoods; (iv) construction of 

resilient flood and sedimentation control structures; (v) construction of resilient water and sanitation facilities; and (vi) 

climate and disaster-proofing of rural road network. These groups of activities, organized under three interlinked 

components, are expected to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level and increase 

access to climate-resilient infrastructure for flood and landslide control, water and sanitation services, and mobility for 

communities under the project lifetime. In the long run, these intermediate outcomes will help reduce the vulnerability 

to natural disasters and climate change impacts and enhance their well-being and livelihoods of the population in the 

Ordu Province and other vulnerable areas. The three project components are described below along with a menu of 

activities that have been pre-identified at concept stage. The detailed project activities will be refined during preparation 

through the development of a feasibility study and technical assistance to identify the right mix of green and gray 

infrastructure in consultation with local stakeholders. 

 

 
 
17. Component 1: Green and sustainable rural development (~US100 million). The objective of this component is to 

restore and maintain the health, function, and productivity of critical ecosystems and promote sustainable land uses 

within the watershed to improve the sustainability of the natural resource base, enhance the livelihood security of local 

communities, and build resilience against climate-induced hazards. Investments will include a variety of green 

infrastructure measures, sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices, and livelihoods diversification 

implemented by the General Directorate of Forestry (OGM) and the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform (TRGM) 

through their regional and provincial units. Forests play a key role in protecting soil cover and regulating water. Green 

infrastructure can improve the resilience and strengthen the functions of ecosystems and produce long-term climate 

adaptation and mitigation co-benefits such as soil, water and sediment retention, buffering extreme flood events, and 

reducing CO2 emissions. Green infrastructure can also provide habitats to enhance biodiversity and provide economic 

benefits through tourism and circular economy related activities. Increasing forest cover and improving forest health can 

help prevent soil erosion and landslides and reduce the impacts of floods. Green infrastructure will be designed in 

conjunction with gray infrastructure to optimize the functionality, cost-effectiveness, and resilience of the integrated 

natural and built system. Income generation and livelihood diversification for the rural poor enhance their livelihood 

security and welfare while reducing the pressure on the forest ecosystems upon which these communities traditionally 

depend. This will also contribute to reversing the current trend of outward migration of the local population. 

 

18. Sub-component 1.1: Green infrastructure and rural livelihoods. This subcomponent will be implemented by OGM 

and aim at restoring and sustainably managing ecosystems that provide resources for income generation to local 

communities and critical services for soil retention and water regulation that contribute to buffering against landslides 

and floods and regulating the flow and quality of water. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: (i) 

afforestation and reforestation; (ii) erosion and sedimentation control works; (iii) upstream natural water retention and 

storage works; (iv) restoration of riparian ecosystems and stream corridors; (v) rehabilitation and climate-smart pasture 

management; (vi) maintenance and sustainable management of secondary forests; (vii) income generation and livelihood 

diversification activities for poor forest communities, such as bee-keeping, non-timber forest products, and ecotourism. 

 

19. Sub-Component 1.2: Sustainable agriculture and climate-resilient value chains. This sub-component will be 

implemented by TRGM with the aim to promote sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices and associated 

climate-resilient agri-food value chains. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: i) sustainable and 

climate-smart agricultural production practices such as terracing for hazelnut gardens to protect topsoil layer, micro-

dosing to reduce the application pesticides and fertilizers, agroforestry, and rainwater harvesting to manage soils and 

water sustainably; ii) diversification of agricultural production (kiwi, persimmon, mushroom, truffles vegetables) to 

reduce land areas used for hazelnut cultivation; iii) improvement of livestock productivity to reduce environmental and 

natural resources footprint; iv) climate resilient and energy-efficient agri-food value chains to enhance market access for 

local farmers; and v) branding and marketing of sustainably produced agricultural products. 

 

20. Component 2: Climate resilient gray infrastructure (~US$ 185 million). The objective of this component is to 

increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure systems for protection against climate-related disasters such as 

landslides and floods, and for provision of drinking water supply, sanitation, and mobility for local communities. Although 

the Bolaman Basin is an area with relatively high annual rainfall, the lack of access to drinking water is a major problem 

in the cities and small villages within the basin due to the increase in population (particularly during the tourist season), 

seasonal changes in precipitation, polluted surface and groundwater sources, and turbidity problems in heavy 

precipitation and flooding events. Currently, Bolaman has a population of approximately 255,000 people, and the 

required drinking water need is 600 lt/s. By 2070, the population in the basin is projected to be roughly 550,000 people, 

with drinking water needs expected to rise to 1300 lt/s. Adequate infrastructures to meet drinking water needs and 

protect surface water and groundwater resources from domestic and industrial pollution are much needed. Drinking 

water sources are further threatened as wastewater from domestic and industrial sources are mostly discharged directly 

into the natural environment without any treatment due to a lack of wastewater treatment facilities, which could also 




treat water for reuse for agricultural purposes. The high precipitation levels in the region make it easier for bacteria, 

parasites, and harmful chemicals from untreated discharges to reach creeks, lakes, and rivers network. Landslides and 

floods that frequently occur in Bolaman are of a disastrous nature, causing the loss of life, property, transport and other 

infrastructure. All of these problems are threatening the wellbeing of the local population and requiring immediate 

solutions that can be readily met through “no-regret” gray infrastructure measures. The design of these infrastructure 

systems will integrate green infrastructure into their plans to deliver more cost-effective and resilient services and extend 

their lifespan. The design will also include appropriate measures to withhold the impacts of climate change. This 

component will be implemented by State Hydraulic Works (DSI) and the General Directorate of Highways (KGM), in close 

coordination with the Ordu Metropolitan Municipality General Directorate of Water and Sewerage Administration (OSKI). 

The scope and specific locations for some of these investments have already been pre-identified by participating 

institutions and will be assessed during preparation through a feasibility study. 

 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Flooding, landslide, and sedimentation control works. This subcomponent will be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) multipurpose reservoirs for effective use and 

regulation of water resources in the basin; (ii) flood control structures, precipitation levees, and sediment control 

structures; and (iii) disaster emergency maintenance of existing infrastructures and repair works. 

 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Drinking water and wastewater treatment works. This subcomponent will also be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) drinking water infrastructure systems 

rehabilitation and development (including treatment plants and distribution networks); and (ii) wastewater 

infrastructure systems rehabilitation and development (including wastewater treatment plants and sewage networks). 

The design of these systems will include energy-efficient measures and measures to minimize non-revenue water loss 

and promote water reuse where possible. 

 

23. Sub-component 2.3: Climate-resilient rural road system. This sub-component will be implemented by KGM and 

will invest in measures such as drainage and walls to climate and disaster-proof rural road segments that are frequently 

and heavily damaged by landslides, floods, and falling rocks, with the aim to provide safe access and mobility to local 

communities and markets. 

 

24. Component 3: Institutional coordination, project management and sustainability (~US$15 million). The 

objective of this component is to strengthen the capacities and coordination among participating institutions, to ensure 

not only effective and efficient project implementation, but also to support the institutional structures and processes 

that need to be established in a sustainable way to support integrated NRM planning and management in both the project 

area and elsewhere. Implementation of this component will be the responsibility of OGM and will include the following 

two sub-components: 

 

25. Sub-component 3.1: Institutional coordination and sustainability. Activities under this component will include: 

(i) technical assistance for developing an integrated NRM model, which will include planning tools at the landscape level 

that can be replicated in other basins with similar problems in Turkey; (ii) strengthening of institutional coordination and 

capacity building to establish institutional structures for integrated NRM to support the replicability and sustainability of 

the approach implemented by the project. 

 

26. Sub-component 3.2: Project management, environment and social aspects, monitoring and evaluation. 

Activities under this component will include: (i) project management support, including strengthening technical, 

fiduciary, environment and social capacities of participating institutions; (ii) support for environmental and social 

management aspects, including grievance redress, citizen engagement and communications; and (iii) monitoring and 

evaluation.  

 

27. Climate change. The project is designed to take into account Turkey’s climate change vulnerability context. In 

particular, climate change is expected to result in more frequent and severe incidences of floods, more prolonged arid 

seasons, and a reduction in surface water availability across the country. Climate change will also further exacerbate soil 

erosion and increase the risks of landslides in vulnerable locations. The Bolaman Basin is an area already prone to soil 

erosion, landslides, and floods due to its mountainous topography with steep slopes, morphological structure, lithology, 

and heavy precipitation. Climate change will further exacerbate these problems. The availability of drinking water during 

dry months will also be worsened due to more prolonged dry seasons and drought periods. The proposed project is 

designed to address these problems and enhance the resilience of local communities in the project area against the risks 

and impacts of climate change and climate-related hazards. The project will do so by implementing integrated green-gray 

infrastructure solutions for mitigating against landslides and floods, rehabilitating rural road system to be climate and 

disaster-resilient, and promoting climate-smart agricultural practices to enhance the livelihood security of the local 

population. Thus, activities under sub-component 1.1., 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 will generate significant adaptation co-benefits. 

In addition, support for agricultural value chains under sub-component 1.2 and drinking water and wastewater treatment 

systems under sub-component 2.2 will include energy-efficient measures in their design and will generate mitigation co-

benefits. GHG accounting for applicable investments will be calculated using Bank approved methodologies in the 

subsequent stage of project preparation. 

 

28. Gender. The environmental and social impact assessment of the project will include a gender analysis of the 

conditions, needs, and aspirations of women and men living within the Bolaman Basin. The gender analysis will be 

conducted during project preparation to identify relevant gender gaps concerning rural livelihood, access to 

infrastructure (drinking water, sanitation, irrigation), and access to agricultural investments and services. The gender 

analysis will also help to define relevant actions and indicators to reduce identified gender gaps. A gender action plan will 

be developed for the project to guide the mainstreaming of efforts for equitable distribution of project benefits between 

men and women during and beyond implementation. 

 

29. Citizen Engagement. The project will establish effective participation of stakeholders through extensive Citizen 

Engagement activities at local and national levels during preparation and implementation. The project will explore 

extensive and meaningful stakeholder consultations through focus groups and surveys, and employ monitoring 

mechanisms such as satisfaction surveys, grievance redressal (GRM) and multi-stakeholder forums. Priority needs in local 

communities particularly among marginalized/vulnerable groups will be identified through participatory mechanisms 

under components 1 and 2, which will inform project design and implementation to ensure equitable distribution of 

project benefits. Under component 3, the project will support capacity building for government officials and community 

leaders on citizen engagement and efficient response to beneficiary/citizen needs. A detailed citizen engagement 

strategy that highlights mechanisms and actions for enhancing multi-stakeholder dialogue and inclusion throughout the 

project cycle will be designed. An indicator in citizen engagement will be included in the project’s Results Framework. 


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 
 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDA29373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guatemala P173480 Responding to COVID-19: 
Modern and Resilient 
Agri-food Value Chains 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 09-Jun-2020 20-Aug-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance 
Guatemala (MINFIN) 

Ministry of Economy 
Guatemala (MINECO) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The PDO is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient technologies and providing 
emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 

 
Components 

Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 impacts on agro-industrial economic activities 
Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system 
Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response (CERC) 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 211.00 

Total Financing 211.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 
nk Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 50.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 50.00 

     Other Sources 11.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 11.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 4 of 10  

 

B. Introduction and Context 
Country Context 
 
1. Despite a stable macroeconomic framework, Guatemala struggles with low rates of economic growth and 
high poverty compared to its neighbors. Measured by per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Guatemala is the fifth 
poorest economy of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and remains one of the region’s countries with the highest 
rates of social and economic exclusion. GDP growth averaged only 3.3 percent over 2015-2018, with real GDP per 
capita growth stagnating and falling behind its Central America peers over the same period. Guatemala’s ability to 
provide basic public services and respond to changing conditions and demands is hampered by low collection of taxes 
by the Central Government (tax revenues are close to 10 percent of GDP) and highly rigid expenditures, as well as 
significant gaps in knowledge and job skills. For example, around two-thirds of Guatemalan children at late primary age 
today do not possess basic literacy skills.  
 
2. Poverty, inequality, and rurality are high and persistent.  Guatemala has one of the highest poverty rates in 
LAC, and deep inequality persist across various dimensions. In 2014, an estimated 60 percent of the total population 
of 17 million was estimated to live in poverty, up from 55 percent in 2000. Almost 80 percent of Indigenous people  
live in poverty (2014), and 50 percent live in extreme poverty. Income inequality is high, and the Gini coefficient rating 
stood at 0.49 in 2014. Vulnerability is particularly high among the Indigenous peoples, with almost 80 percent living in 
poverty in 2014, and half in extreme poverty. In 2017, about 48 percent of the total population was estimated to live 
in rural areas, where poverty is significantly higher (76 percent) than in urban areas (42 percent). Assessing more recent 
changes in poverty and inequality is difficult, due to the scarce availability of socio-economic data (Guatemala has had 
the second-lowest number of household surveys available in the region (after Haiti), in the period since 2000). 
However, qualitative evidence, available data and recent developments, do not point to progress on these metrics.  
 
3. Guatemala is among the highest rates in the Gender Inequality Index and has the lowest rate of female labor 
force participation in Latin America and the Caribbean. Many indicators of women’s economic opportunities have not 
improved since 2000 and are worse than the average in LAC and similar countries. Only 4 out of 10 women are in the 
labor force, less than half the corresponding rate of men. Similarly, female youth unemployment is almost twice that 
of men. Women are at a disadvantage with respect to their male counterparts also in terms of technical and soft skills, 
as well as business opportunities and access to information, technology, and markets for inputs and outputs – all of 
which translate into lower income levels. In terms of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Guatemala registers one of the 
highest rates of violent deaths among women in the world: 6.4 in 100,000 in 2018, almost 5 times the global rate. An 
estimated 628 women lost their lives to violence in 2018, almost two deaths per day. Lack of education, inclusion, and 
gender inequality are among the most relevant triggers of GBV.  

 
4. Guatemala has the sixth highest rate of chronic malnutrition in the world and the highest in LAC, with 
Indigenous and rural populations disproportionately affected. In 2019, Guatemala ranked 68th in food security out of 
113 countries, with only 40 percent of Guatemalan families enjoying food security. Some 77 percent of families have a 
poor or inadequate diet, characterized by high consumption of cereals (maize) and low consumption of foods of animal 
origin, fruits, and vegetables. Chronic child malnutrition (stunting) is very high according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), affecting 47 percent of all Guatemalan children under five, 58 percent of Indigenous children, and 
66 percent of children in the lowest income quintile. On the opposite side of the spectrum, overweight and obesity are 
on the rise, affecting over 50 percent of the adult population. 

 
5. Guatemala is extremely affected by climate and weather events and its poorer populations are particularly 
vulnerable. Guatemala is the ninth most at risk country worldwide from climate change. By 2050, economic losses 



from drought, flooding, and other extreme weather events are projected to reduce GDP by between 1.3 percent and 
3.7 percent. On the other hand, Guatemala's contribution to global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions is low compared 
to other countries: in 2011 the country emitted 3.4 tCO2e/capita (half of the average per capita emissions of LAC).  
Agriculture is one of the strategic sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation goals under Guatemala’s 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC). 

 
6. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a pandemic. and the 
impacts on Guatemala are expected to be severe. The economic impacts of the disease outbreak are envisaged to 
lead to a significant decline in GDP in 2020, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised the country’s 
economic growth projections for 2020 to negative 2 percent.  Impacts are starting to be felt mainly through reductions 
in exports and tourism, and through reduced remittances (12 percent of GDP in 2018). The COVID-19 outbreak will 
have significant effects on the external accounts, inflation, and government balances, with expected higher financing 
needs and public deficit. On March 18, 2020, in preparation for the spread of COVID-19 in Guatemala, the Government 
launched the “National Program for Emergency and Economic Recovery” to respond to the crisis. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture plays a significant role in Guatemala’s economic performance and employment. Primary agriculture 
accounts for about 10 percent of the country’s GDP with a significant multiplier when accounting for the full backward 
and forward linkages in the agri-food system and employs around 30 percent of the population. In 2015, the broader 
food sector represented 45 percent of the country’s total merchandise exports. Secondary processing activities also 
create opportunities for job creation and diversification of local production. Market-linkage programs in the sub-sectors 
of vegetable and fruit preparation for exports have in some cases, proven particularly beneficial for small-scale 
organized producers. 
 
8. Limited market access and inefficient value addition/preservation capacity and lack of market information 
result in low productivity and variable sales and incomes, for Guatemala’s micro, small and medium agro-industrial 
enterprises and small producers.  Within the domestic markets, smaller producers and SME agribusinesses face a 
number of challenges. Limited market transparency, lack of investment in on-farm and post-harvest technologies and 
other logistical market-access barriers lead to an abundance of middlemen, who capture a large portion of the value 
of any transaction. In addition, the quality of infrastructure varies greatly across Guatemala, which exacerbates regional 
income inequality, particularly between urban and rural areas. This also has severe impacts on access to agricultural 
markets, including contributing to high food losses (on-farm and throughout the VC and affecting food quality and 
safety.  

 

9. In particular, the Guatemalan agri-food sector faces the challenge of substantial post-harvest food losses, due 
to insufficient investment in storage facilities, limited market information and low uptake of good post-harvest 
practices.  According to the United Nations Environment Programme, 52,000 tons of post-harvest food is lost or wasted 
annually in Guatemala. More than 35 percent of beans and maize are spoiled due to poor harvest management, pests 
and animals, salmonella and aflatoxins. In addition, lack of information about market location and prices leads to high 
levels of food loss at the farm level and additional upstream loss in the value chain. Food Loss and Waste (FLW) also 
significantly contributes to GHG emissions 

 

10. To build toward its anti-poverty and growth potential as part of the new Government’s “economic wall of 
opportunities,” the agri-food system must improve significantly its productive and post-harvest efficiency while 
mitigating the deleterious impacts of the recent COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 is expected to impact in 



unprecedented ways the productivity and food security of producers and consumers within Guatemala’s food systems, 
as well as agri-food exports. While the sector has clear potential for continued expansion and diversification in export 
and domestic markets, the urgent challenge related to COVID-19 threatens producers, agribusiness micro-, small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), other supply chain actors, markets, and domestic and international demand. To 
improve access to markets and build resilience in the system, especially given the current dual health and economic 
emergencies, the proposed Project offers an opportunity to make investments that contribute to strengthening and 
improving efficiency in productive and post-harvest capacity, and to promoting food safety, food quality, 
competitiveness and broader resilience considerations. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient 
technologies and providing emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 
 

Key Results 

 

Reducing Food Losses 
• Reduction of food losses in selected value chains (as a percentage of total production)   

• Reduction of products rejected due to food safety received by buyers in selected value chains (as a 
percentage share of baseline).   

Increasing adoption of climate 
resilient technologies  

• Beneficiaries adopting improved agricultural technologies promoted by the Project to enhance climate 
resiliency, disaggregated by gender and ethnicity (number)  

• Beneficiaries demonstrating an improvement in empowerment  disaggregated by gender (IFAD core 
indicator) (percentage)1 

Providing emergency response 
to the Covid-19 pandemic 

• MSMES supported under MINECO’s COVID-19 emergency response fund, disaggregated by gender - 
(number) 

• Number of PFIs that use the guarantee fund (number)  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

11. The proposed Project will prioritize investments in select, strategic Value Chains (VCs) pre-identified by 
the Ministry of Economy (MINECO).  Project-supported beneficiaries will be eligible micro, small and medium 
agribusinesses and agro-industry, producers’ associations, and producers’ groups (hereinafter referred to as 
MSMEs).  

12. Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 Impacts on Agro-industrial Economic Activities. This 
component will invest in two strategic priority areas (i) Emergency relief to MSMEs through a MINECO partial 
guarantee fund, and (ii) Skills development for greater employability through training and an on-line labor-

 
1 This is a survey-based index for measuring empowerment, agency, and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector. Developed jointly by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), and thirteen partner projects 
in IFPRI’s GAAP2 portfolio, Pro-WEAI is composed of twelve indicators of women’s empowerment in agriculture: autonomy in income, self-
efficacy, attitudes about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access to and decisions on credit, 
control over use of income, work balance, visiting important locations, group membership, membership in influential groups, and respect among 
household members. 

matching platform. 

13. Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency. This component will operate 
at a national level, focusing on subprojects in select, strategic VCs. Eligible beneficiary MSMEs will receive 
financial support based on approved business plans to improve the quality of their productive processes through 
investments in post-harvest practices, including activities such as storage, agro-logistics, aggregation, and 
transformation of harvested products along the selected VCs. The Project will provide grants and beneficiaries 
will be expected to provide contributions.  The grants will be provided by MINECO with both IFAD and World 
Bank resources.  

14. Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system.  The objective of 
this component is to strengthen public sector institutions that are considered strategic in supporting the 
efficiency of the country’s agri-food system.  It is divided into two sub-components: (i) improving public 
infrastructure to enhance SPS standards, food safety, food quality and traceability and (ii) institutional 
strengthening of key public sector institutions, including MINECO, MAGA, and National Quality System and INE.  

15. Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This Component will finance the overall 
project management, monitoring, and implementation of Components 1 to 3.  

16. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The objective of this component is 
to support the Government’s emergency response to disasters. This will be activated upon request of the 
Borrower, upon the official declaration of a national emergency.  

.

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             Yes  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
17. Whereas the environmental risk rating is assessed as moderate, the combined Environmental and Social risk 
rating is considered SUBSTANTIAL, particularly driven by contextual social factors and borrower’s capacity: (i) the 
inherent challenges of implementing projects with multiple and diverse Indigenous groups with their own governance 
structures, languages and socio-cultural characteristics dispersed nationally; (ii) potential implementation of 
subprojects in remote and difficult to access areas due to inadequate and limited infrastructure, particularly during 
the rainy season, as well as potential overlapping with high crime and violence areas, creating challenges for providing 
technical support and effective monitoring; (iii) use of a guarantee scheme that triggers participation of financial 
intermediaries with no previous experience working with the World Bank; and, (iv) no existing institutional capacity in 
MINECO to develop and monitor Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments and no previous experience with the 
new areas covered by the Environmental and Social Framework. 
 
18. Given that the exact scope and location of subprojects will be defined only during project implementation, 
based on demand and subject to the specific eligibility criteria, and because specific risks are unknown, the project has 
adopted a framework approach to environmental and social management. The framework approach and phased 



preparation of E&S instruments is also required to accommodate project preparation with condensed procedures 
under paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing policy in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The E&S 
instruments will be developed in two phases. The Government of Guatemala (GoG) will develop, consult with key 
stakeholders, and disclose prior to appraisal a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a project-level 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Consultations for 
these instruments took place in the context of country-wide quarantine with strong mobility restrictions, following the 
recommendations set forth in the WB’s Technical Note, avoiding in-person gatherings, and using virtual interactive 
meetings, emails, online surveys, WhatsApp and traditional telephone calls, when stakeholders did not have access to 
online channels or were not used to them. The results of these consultations have been documented in the draft SEP 
and integrated into the design of the project and the SEP. 
 
19. The Borrower will also develop, consult with stakeholders and disclose within 30 days of effectiveness: an (i) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Labor Management Procedures with a dedicated GRM 
for project workers; (iii) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); and, (vi) a final SEP, including a project-
level GRM. The ESCP reflects the GoG’s requirements to implement the above-mentioned instruments at the site-
specific level and to complete periodic reporting to the Bank on its compliance. During implementation, as business 
plans are approved, Environmental and Social screenings will be carried out for each subproject. Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) covering environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) issues, as well as 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), will also be developed when applicable. All required construction phase mitigation, 
management and monitoring measures identified in the ESMF will be reflected in bidding and contracting documents. 

 

20. The PIU will include dedicated environmental, social and gender specialists and will be responsible for 
complying with environmental and social commitments, supervising firms and contractors to ensure application of 
mitigation measures, monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank and relevant national authorities. MINECO 
will submit semiannual implementation reports to the Bank, including a dedicated section on compliance with the 
environmental and social requirements set forth in the ESCP and specified in each of the E&S instruments developed 
for this Project. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

21. The Project will be implemented by MINECO. MINECO is the entity in charge of formulating and executing 
consumer protection and competition promotion policies. Specifically, it formulates and executes policies for 
national and foreign investment, promotion of competitiveness, industrial and commercial development. In 
addition, by delegation of the President of the Republic, it is the entity in charge of carrying out the negotiations 
of bilateral and multilateral international trade agreements and treaties. It also proposes, in coordination with 
the other ministries and State agencies, the specifications and technical and quality standards of national 
production; and facilitates the competitive development of micro, MSMEs through the provision of financial 
services and business development. The Project will be headed by the Vice Ministry of Investment and 
Competition of MINECO and the National Program on Competitiveness (PRONACOM).  
 
22. As part of the support to the agriculture sector, MINECO will provide technical support and capacity 
building for the other key institution in the sector - the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA). 
Among its functions, MAGA is in charge of implementing the food and nutrition security policy, as well as 
promoting community organization through productive agricultural projects by means of extension services, 


training, and technical assistance. In addition, it is responsible for generating, processing and disseminating 
geographic, cartographic, food security and risk management information to prevent and mitigate the effects 
caused by natural disasters. MAGA will receive technical support and capacity building through project activities.  

 . 
   

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 
 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 1 of 16  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDISDSA28417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Nigeria P173104 Additional Financing for 
MCRP 

P157891 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Multi-Sectoral Crisis Recovery 
Project for North Eastern Nigeria 

AFRICA 22-Apr-2020 26-May-2020 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Urban, Resilience and Land Investment Project 
Financing 

Federal Ministry of 
Finance 

State Governments of 
Borno, Adamawa and 
Yobe, North East 
Development Commission 
(NEDC) 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving 
critical service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected 
communities, and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and 
(b) in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or 
Emergency 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Additional Financing 
 
To improve access to basic services and  livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, 
Borno, and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries 

 
Components 

Peace Building and Strengthening Social Cohesion and Livelihoods 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Service Delivery Restoration & Improvement 
Technical Assistance and Program Management Support 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
  

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 176.00 

Total Financing 176.00 



of which IBRD/IDA 176.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
  
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 176.00 

          IDA Credit 176.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

The complex challenges in the North-East (NE) and the broader Lake Chad region are among the most 

pressing issues facing the Federal and NE State administrations in Nigeria.   

Recent resurgence in conflict exacerbates the humanitarian crisis 

1. Following the election of President Buhari in 2015, the Nigerian Government took steps to address 
the insurgency in the NE, with support from neighboring countries and the African Union through 
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF). They appointed new military leadership, created a 
Theatre Headquarters in Maiduguri and increased resources committed to NE activities. Significant 
territory formerly controlled by Boko Haram (BH) was reclaimed and relative peace restored, allowing 
for the return of at least 1.6 million internally displaced people (IDPs) to their homes or nearby, more 
than 750,000 of these in Adamawa State and over 650,000 in Borno. Large-scale international 
humanitarian aid averted famine in 2017.   

2. However, security in the NE has deteriorated sharply since 2018. Attacks have increased in Borno 
State, as well as nearby areas of Adamawa and Yobe (together the ‘BAY’ states). Islamic State West 
Africa Province (ISWAP), which split from BH in 2016, has developed into the more potent threat, 
employing more sophisticated military tactics and dominating swathes of northern Borno around its 
strongholds on Lake Chad. Major attacks, including those on Baga, Monguno and Rann in December 
2018 and January 2019, have triggered renewed large-scale displacement of people. Meanwhile, BH 
continues attacks on the population in south-east Borno and northern Adamawa, absorbing military 
attention and preventing a stronger response further north. 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing for MCRP (P173104) 

 

 

  
Jan 30, 2020 Page 4 of 16  

 

3. Around 7.1 million of the BAY states’ total population of 13.4 million need humanitarian assistance 
in 2019, according to the 2019-21 Nigeria Humanitarian Response Strategyi, which seeks to reach 
6.2 million people. Around 1.7 million face food insecurity (CH3-5). Some two million people are 
internally displaced across the BAY states, a net increase of more than 100,000 since December 2018. 
Around 230,000 Nigerian refugees are in neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. Within Nigeria, 
around one million people are now estimated to live in areas, mainly in the far north of Borno, that 
are inaccessible to humanitarian actors. Approximately 60 percent of the total number of IDPs live in 
host communities, while 20 percent reside in camps.  

4. The conflict has intensified the historical social, economic and development disadvantages of the 
NE. The NE poverty rate was the second highest in the country in 2013, after only the North-West, at 
nearly 48 percent against 33 percent nationallyii. The NE literacy rate in 2013 stood at just 22 percent 
for women and 40 percent for men. The NE has long suffered from poor access to health care and 
sanitation services, with under-five mortality of 160 per 1,000 live births, against 90 in South-West, 
the best performing region. The proportion of children age 12-23 months received all basic 
vaccinations was only 14 percent in the NE, compared with 52 percent for South-South.  

 

Government and partners have responded strongly, but unmet needs remain considerable 

5. The 2016 Recovery and Peace Building Assessment (RPBA) for NE Nigeriaiii estimated the economic 
impact of the crisis at nearly US$9 bn across the six affected states: Borno, Yobe, Adamawa, Taraba, 
Gombe and Bauchi. It put recovery and peacebuilding needs at US$6.7 bn, covering three strategic 
areas of intervention: US$150.5 m for peacebuilding, stability, and social cohesion; US$6.0 bn for 
rebuilding infrastructure and restoring social services; and US$473.5 m for economic recovery. The 
RPBA was prepared by the Federal Government, led by the Vice President’s Office, and the 
governments of the six affected states, with support from the European Union, the United Nations 
and the World Bank.  

6. In June 2016, the Federal Government released the Buhari Plan as the blueprint for humanitarian 
relief and socioeconomic stabilization of the NE, as well as durable solutions for displaced persons. 
The Buhari Plan incorporated the RPBA’s assessment of needs and established the scope and 
framework for targeted interventions, as well as defining the national vision and objectives for long-
term stability and economic redevelopment of the region. The Plan is built around 10 pillars, 
comprising safety and security, good governance, infrastructure, agriculture, health, education, 
entrepreneurship, women and youth empowerment, regional planning and strategic growth, 
environment, border security and international trade development, and solid minerals. 

7. Major programs are underway, but the considerable needs identified by the RPBA are far from 
being met, and much of the Buhari Plan remains to be implemented. NE recovery and peacebuilding 
efforts supported by the African Development Bank, the European Union, Germany, the United 
Kingdom, the United Nations system, the United States, the World Bank and other international 
partners total around US$1.6 bn. However, reliable data on total government or partner expenditures 
in the NE and overall implementation progress is not available. For the broader region, donors pledged 
US$ 2.13 bn for humanitarian and recovery activities for 2018 and beyond at the High-Level 
Conference on the Lake Chad Region in September 2018,iv of which US$985.5 m was for humanitarian 
activities. For NE Nigeria, the Humanitarian Response Plan seeks US$ 848 million, while the 2019-2020 
Nigeria Regional Refugee Response Planv aims to raise a further $135 million for 2019.  




8. In support of the RPBA and the Buhari Plan, the World Bank has approved US$775 million in IDA 
financing for the six NE States since 2016, the largest commitment among international 
development partners. The program addresses urgent needs, restores basic services and livelihoods 
and rebuilds infrastructure.  It has included additional financing for six existing projects for health, 
education, social protection and agriculture/food security, as well as a US$200 million Multi-Sectoral 
Crisis Recovery Project (MCRP) for North-East Nigeria.  

 
9. The MCRP has been effective since February 16, 2018 and has recently undergone its Mid-Term 

Review (MTR) in November 2019. Despite a 10-month gap from Board-approval to effectiveness, the 

Project has picked up significant pace over the last 18 months and its current implementation progress 

has been satisfactory, based on its financial progress and the current status of results achievement on 

the ground. The likelihood of achievement of the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the 

intended project outcomes and results is now rated as high. As at the Mid-Term, total project 

disbursements from the World Bank to the Government of Nigeria were at USD 95 million (of the 

USD200 million IDA Credit), representing 46% of the total project allocation amount. 

 
Rational for Additional Financing  

10. The Federal Government of Nigeria has requested that the country be included in the regional 
program supported by the proposed IDA Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project 
(PROLAC, P161706). PROLAC ($170 million) has been in preparation since FY18 for three of the four 
countries that border the Lake: Cameroon, Chad and Niger, slated for FY20 Board consideration. The 
participation of Nigeria, the fourth country, is important for the PROLAC program to have complete 
regional coverage, and because Nigeria is the largest country by far and the epicenter of the Boko 
Haram conflict, the impacts and drivers of which PROLAC seeks to address.  

 
11. PROLAC’s proposed development objective is to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region 

through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural 
livelihoods in selected provinces of the participating countries. It includes three main components: 
Component 1: Regional and National Coordination Platform and Local Capacity Building ($20 m) - This 
aims to reinforce regional dialogue and data collection and dissemination, institutional capacity 
building and knowledge sharing, including a Lake Chad Data and Knowledge Platform. Component 2: 
Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity ($75 m) aims to improve access of communities to markets, 
especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term 
employment, through civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads of regional importance. Component 
3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development ($60m) will promote public productive 
investments, value-chain development, citizen engagement and community participation activities in 
project areas.  

 
Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance 

12. An ‘Additional Financing for Restructuring’ is proposed for MCRP in the amount of $176 million, 
with the main purposes: (a) addressing the huge unmet needs of the three most affected states of 
Borno, Yobe and Adamawa (the originally estimated needs for NE recovery and stabilization were to 
the tune of US$6 billion, of which only about 1/3rds are estimated to have been financed through 



various government and development partner programs, and which will require the redesign of, and 
the addition of supplementary activities within, the existing project components ; (b) the MCRP 
implementation model has proven successful in putting the State Governments firmly in the 
leadership and implementation role for recovery and peace building, thus helping restore state-citizen 
trust, the erosion of which was a key structural driver of crisis; (c) the additional financing will serve 
the objective of bringing Nigeria into the Lake Chad regional program, which will also entail bringing 
in new components on agricultural value chain, rural access and regional connectivity. Given the 
consistency and complementarity of MCRP and PROLAC objectives and activities, and the need to 
bring Nigeria into the regional program quickly, the Country Management Unit and task teams 
consider that an Additional financing operation for MCRP, prepared in parallel with the finalization of 
PROLAC and presented to the Board as a single package with PROLAC, is the best mechanism for doing 
this. In the main PROLAC project, adjustments will be made to the regional elements, to promote the 
full inclusion of Nigeria. In addition to a regional focus, adapting MCRP to bring it into the program 
supported by PROLAC, will bring a more strategic focus on agricultural livelihoods and value chains 
and economic recovery, a natural evolution for MCRP.  

 
13. The restructuring will also be used to lay the groundwork for adapting MCRP to become an 

integrated central platform for the channeling of broader World Bank assistance to Borno, 
Adamawa and Yobe, the three states most affected by the Boko Haram crisis. Five additional 
financing operations, which were part of the Bank’s 2016-2017 $775 million Boko Haram response 
package along with MCRP, are set to close before the end of FY20. The restructuring will be used to 
further develop MCRP’s multi-sectoral approach, to allow it to absorb activities, and potentially 
unspent IDA funding from these five operations, which cover health and education service delivery, 
agriculture and food security, social protection and community development. This approach is also in 
line with the need for spatial sector consolidation of Bank projects towards increased impact and 
implementation arrangements streamlining. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
14. As foreseen in the MCRP PAD, the Presidential Committee for the Northeast Initiative (PCNI) has 

been replaced as federal apex institution for recovery in the northeast of Nigeria by the Northeast 
Development Commission (NEDC). As part of this, the NEDC has taken over from the PCNI as the main 
Federal counterpart for MCRP with responsibility for overall coordination. The NEDC is anchored in 
the newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development, 
while PCNI had come under the Office of the Vice President. The NEDC is a statutory body (unlike the 
PCNI, which was mandated through a time-bound Presidential executive order) and is responsible for 
the oversight and coordination of all humanitarian, recovery and development work in the six states 
of northeast Nigeria.  In addition to the coordination of multilateral development bank programs, at 
the federal level it is expected to lead program coordination among federal government MDAs and 
development partners, and vertical coordination between regional, federal and state level institutions 
and planning processes. 

 

Each of the BAY States has developed different coordination arrangements. In Borno, the Ministry 
of Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (MRRR) has overall responsibility for recovery 
planning and coordination. In addition, a statutory coordination agency has been created, under the 
auspices of the MRRR; Adamawa has created its own MRRR and a multilateral coordination office has 



been formed within the State Government Secretariat. Meanwhile, Yobe has recently set up a state 
level Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Original PDO  
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) support the Government of Nigeria towards rehabilitating and improving critical 
service delivery infrastructure, improve the livelihood opportunities of conflict and displacement-affected communities, 
and strengthen social cohesion in the North East Participating States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa; and (b) in the event 
of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency 
 
Current PDO  
To improve access to basic services and livelihood opportunities for the crisis-affected communities of Adamawa, Borno, 
and Yobe States, and enhance coordination among these States and other Lake Chad countries. 
 
Changes to the PDO are made to reflect the project’s regional dimension and removal of the aim to “strengthen social 
cohesion”. Selected targets have also been revised upwards, to accommodate some over-shooting to-date, with costs in 
some areas having proved lower than estimated originally. Additional sectoral indicators have been absorbed from the 
sectoral programs (AF operations) phasing out, while the indicators related to regional coordination are the same as the 
one under PROLAC.   
 

Key Results 
Achievement of the intended PDO will continue to be monitored by the following indicators: 
 

• Number of direct project beneficiaries (percentage of which are women) 

• Percentage of direct project beneficiaries who are female  

• Number of beneficiaries that have improved livelihood opportunities with project support (o/w 
female) 

• Number of beneficiaries with additional or improved access to service delivery infrastructure 
 
New PDO-level indicators include: 

• Increase in yield among farmers benefiting from agricultural benefits (percentage increase from 

baseline)   

• Number of peace groups that promote collective action  

• Number of government officials adopting new skills of peace building, conflict sensitivity and 
crisis recovery management 

• Number of school children benefiting from rehabilitated and re-equipped schools (o/w IDP 
children) 

• Number of women benefiting from improved health facilities 

• Joint statement and action plan agreed during an annual coordination meeting with 
participation of the four countries (two measurements: yes or no – measure every year; and 
from year two: % of agreed actions implemented) 

D. Project Description  
 

1. Strategic Shifts: From a broader strategic perspective, the AF is a natural evolution of MCRP from a 
program focused on urgent needs, early recovery interventions and reconstruction, to one that looks toward 
long-term recovery and development of livelihoods and the economy. Going forward, the expanded MCRP will 
have (a) a stronger focus on basic services, with the addition of health and education service provision activities; 
(b) greater emphasis on livelihoods and employment generation; (c) a new lens for transport support on 
enhancing connectivity, on the Lake Chad region, as well as locally, linking farms to markets and people to 
sources of employment; (d) continued strong support for peacebuilding and the strengthening of social 
cohesion; and (e) the fostering of regional stabilization  as a main priority.  

 

• Component 1:  
o The component name will be changed to: Peace building and strengthening social cohesion and 

livelihoods, to reflect a stronger emphasis on – and a more strategic approach to - supporting 
livelihoods, as well as a move from an emphasis on shorter term stability to longer term 
development  

o Consistent with this, a more strategic approach to support for livelihoods, including agricultural 
ones. For agricultural, this will involve moving on from MCRP’s current emphasis on distribution 
of seeds, small ruminants and basic tools to subsistence farmers, to a broader range of support 
with greater emphasis on sustainability.  

o A deepening of community engagement on planning, prioritization and oversight, through 
stronger community structures, potentially absorbing some of those created through the 
Community and Social Development (CSDP, P157898) and FADAMA (P131075) projects.  

o Inclusion of labor-intensive works (cash for work) activities, to be funded by community grants. 

• Component 2:  
o Complementary to the direct livelihoods support under Component 1, the inclusion of new 

activities for the restoration and strengthening of infrastructure and services related to 
agriculture, livestock and fisheries, including support for key stages of priority value chains and 
the development of Agricultural Clusters.  

o The inclusion of new activities for enhancing rural access/mobility and markets  
o Consolidation on Citizen’s engagements, Community Participation and Ownership Structures 

established by the  Community and Social Development Project (CSDP - P157898) 
o Addition of activities to strengthen service provision for health and education, absorbing 

activities underway through the Nigeria States Health Investment Project (NSHIP -P120798) and 
State Education Program Investment Project (SEPIP – P122124), possibly including  grants to 
school management committees and incentive payments to teachers - or introducing alternative 
mechanisms for improving service delivery that are closer to the original design of MCRP and 
achieve the same objectives of activities now under NSHIP and SEPIP.   

o Improving Operations and Maintenance (O&M) for existing and planned infrastructure 
subprojects under MCRP and the MCRP AF to enhance the sustainability of investments, such as 
for the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and transport sector, by introducing a system of 
performance-based grants or central resource pools in each state for O&M. 
 

2. Cross-cutting priorities of climate change adaptation and mitigation and labor-intensive public works: 
Where appropriate, project activities under both Component 1 & 2 will, from both a design and resource 


allocation perspective aim to increase climate sensitivity. Labor-intensive public works (LIPW/cash for work 
(CfW) will be used as a means of both delivering project outputs and creating local employment (with an 
emphasis on women and youth), through dedicated programs under Component 1 and as an approach that can 
be included in the design – and particularly in the maintenance strategies – for the larger infrastructure works 
included in Component Two. 

3. Component 3: Technical assistance and programme management support that focuses on the 
strengthening of institutional capacities for the coordination of recovery programming in the NE, and of MCRP 
implementation capacities. 

Proposed Changes:  

o Build capacity of Nigeria NE actors (including State governments, academia and teachers and 
students from research institutes other relevant stakeholders) to engage regionally through 
coordination, knowledge management, collaboration with the Lake Chad Basin Commission 
knowledge platform being supported under PROLAC.  

o Host thematic dialogues with academic and research institutions on the Lake Chad Region. 

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
4. Implementation of Components 1 and 2 remains broadly as described in the MCRP PAD. That is, Component 1 is 
implemented directly by the State PCUs through service delivery contractors with technical oversight from relevant 
MDAs, while Component 2 is implemented by state MDAs with PCU oversight. However, the North East Development 
Commission (NEDC) has provided a jointly agreed proposal on implementation arrangements with States, that 
maximizes flexibility that may need to be made across the States. The proposal provides a roadmap for the gradual 
transfer, harmonization and ultimate integration of existing institutional capacities into the implementation 
arrangements of the MCRP-AF. Further refining of the plan will be reflected in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
Relevant capacities of the existing PCUs of the soon closing additional financing projects will be either merged or 
otherwise connected to the MCRP implementation arrangements.  
 

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Borno, Adamawa, Yobe 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Amos Abu, Environmental Specialist 
Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi, Social Specialist 

 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The parent project  has recorded some implementation challenges and the task team has worked with the client to  
usually addresses as they arise. The following are the achievements recorded in the implementation of the safeguards 
instruments that have been cleared and disclosed: 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the parent 
project and are at different stages of implementation. Also about 114 grievances have so far been recorded and 
satisfactorily  resolved across participating states under the parent project.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies were strictly adhered to as at mid-term of the parent project. Safeguard 
Action plan was prepared and disclosed prior to implementation. The investment plan was screened and site-specific 
safeguards instruments were prepared, cleared and disclosed through the appropriate channels. A number of 
trainings were conducted to improve the capacity of ESSU (environmental and social safeguards units) of the PCUs. 
Several supervision missions were conducted to ensure implementation of the cleared and disclosed safeguards 
instruments.  
 
It is clarified by the task team that there are no new institutional arrangements per se, as per the transition plan 
proposed by the government for the “integration” of parts of existing staff resources and assets of NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP 



and FADAMA into the MCRP institutional arrangements. The existing PCUs/PIUs of these projects will cease to exist 
and only relevant staff will be transferred to boost the capacity of MCRP. In addition, the reference projects were 
implemented in geographical zones that included that of MCRP and the envisaged risks of MCRP AF, are materially 
consistent with the risk ratings of the original projects (NSHIP, SEPIP, CSDP and FADAMA). Further, the letter and spirit 
of the proposed integration is that existing activities of these projects will be adjusted, molded and assimilated into 
the design and implementation arrangements of the MCRP, rather than their continuation in the present form, and 
hence such transition and eventual integration will be organic in nature and scope, rather than a simultaneous 
continuation of the existing projects parallel to MCRP. Where new activities are added on MCRP on account of such 
integration, these activities will be fine-tuned to fall within the objectives and implementation modus operandi of the 
MCRP, and such that these activities would be screened to ensure that they are of similar environmental and social 
risk.  The task team does agree that such new activities should continue to be governed by the safeguards instruments 
of their parent projects. 
 
In the above vein, it is submitted that new policies are not expected to be triggered on account of the integration of 
these projects into the MCRP, as the activities if redesigned will fall within the safeguards instruments of the MCRP, or 
if continued in their original form, will fall within the safeguards instruments of the parent projects. A clause could be 
included in the Financing Agreement to ensure that the continuation of the use of safeguards instruments of the 
parent projects for MCRP is given legal effect. To this end, the task team will remove any references in the Project 
Paper to triggering of new Safeguards policies. 
 
However, the key environmental and social risk management concerns of the ongoing project that might be relevant 
to the MCRP-AF include: (i) possible soil, water and air contamination, loss of vegetation,  and noise nuisance, 
vibration, traffic congestion due to the planned construction and rehabilitation activities, possible exposure to health 
care wastes, potential injuries from accidents, incidents and near misses, poor management of sludge; and (ii) 
potential adverse social impacts that might result from the need for land acquisition and/or the loss of access to 
economic assets and livelihoods due to planned rehabilitation and investment activities as well as GBV risks.  As part 
of the project preparation, the team has updated the Safeguards Action Plan for the Project. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation, including mechanism for GBV prevention and response when necessary. 
 
In summary, there are no long-term impacts anticipated. The environmental and social impacts are expected to be 
site-specific and can be managed to an acceptable level. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Activities being planned under this project will have limited social and environmental impacts. In principle, MCRP does 
not envision to fund large-scale new infrastructure development projects (e.g. dams or power stations), but rather 
small to medium size rural infrastructural rehabilitation and reconstruction works in localized sites across the BAY 
areas. Much of the Project will focus on medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects of schools, health 
centers, public buildings, water sources, roads and bridges. The anticipated scale of potential adverse environmental 
or social impacts on human populations are site-specific, few if any of them are irreversible and in most cases, 
mitigation measures could be designed to address the impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The MCRP, in view of the fact that it is responding to an emergency situation, will not in principle fund large-scale new 
infrastructure development projects that could potentially have long-term and irreversible impacts. Instead, the 


proposed project focuses on small to medium size rehabilitation and re-construction projects that can be easily 
managed at the community level. A flexible and programmatic approach is being taken and will adapt to the evolving 
context and environment on the ground. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Specifically, the project will be processed through IPF Policy paragraph 12 (a) that allows for the deferral of the 
preparation of social and environmental assessment documents till implementation. Immediately after Board 
Approval , the client will prepare ESMF and RPF which will outline steps to be  followed in preparing site specific 
safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP, PMP, RAP) when the locations of the project activities are determined during 
implementation. The instruments would be consulted upon and publicly disclosed. The Project, including the ESAP 
have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities for the implementation of measures related 
to safeguard policies. In addition, costs related to safeguard policy measures are being included in the project cost 
tables. 
 
Each site approved for support by the project will be eligible for financing only when an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and RAP (if required) satisfactory to the Bank have been completed and disclosed. Under 
the parent project, the client has so far prepared and disclosed 1ESIA, 15 ESMPs have so far been prepared under the 
parent project and are at different stages of implementation 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include beneficiaries and local communities in the project’s areas, local NGOs working in the 
project area, the respective State Governments of Borno Adamawa and Yobe (BAY), and participating Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs). 
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards preparation, review and approval procedure to be followed under this project 
shall be consistent with the requirements from the Federal Ministry of Environment of Nigeria as specified in the 
Environmental Assessment Act (Decree No. 86 of 1992, hereinafter the EIA Act), the World Bank’s OP 4.01.  
Compliance with this procedure will constitute part of the evaluation methodology for proposed subprojects prior to 
approval for MCRP support.  The steps in the process are project screening, environmental and social assessment and 
instrument preparation, EIA review and approval, and oversight of implementation.  Stakeholder consultation is an 
integral part of the preparation process, and public disclosure and comment are necessary prior to the decision to 
accept or reject a proposed subproject on the basis of environmental and social information. The procedure for 
consultations on subprojects should conform to OP 4.01 and the EIA Act.  OP 4.01 requires consultation with 
stakeholders. For MCRP, safeguards work on subprojects entails an initial consultation of affected populations and 
interested NGOs as well as relevant agencies of federal, state and local governments, to inform them about the 
proposed activity and solicit recommendations, questions and concerns to be addressed in environmental and social 
assessment.  Once drafts of safeguards documents are completed by the client, they must be cleared by the Bank and 
disclosed. Both Nigeria and the Bank require public disclosure of the safeguard instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs, PMPs, RAPs 
and Audits-as the case may be).  The Bank’s requirements are the most detailed and, to comply with them, safeguards 
documents for MCRP subprojects will be disclosed, at public locations in the area affected by the project as well as in 
appropriate State and Federal agencies, and on the Bank’s external website.  Following a time period adequate for the 
review of those documents, which for MCRP is defined as 30 calendar days for Category B.  It is a policy of the Bank 
that consultations and disclosure should be in form and language accessible to the stakeholders, and that consultation 
 

should continue throughout project implementation. This consultation that has started during project preparation will 
be continued during implementation. In addition, the MCRP has a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that 
enables project beneficiaries to log in complaints and receive swift and fair resolution in real time. 
 
Under the parent project, consultations have been held with stakeholders at different levels: (a) As part of 
environmental and social screening for sub projects; and (b) During the preparation of site-specific safeguards 
instruments. So far 16 safeguards instruments 1ESIA and 15 ESMPs have been prepared and disclosed by the project. 
 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 

B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other  
OPS_EA_SG_DEFERRED_FCC_TABLE 

The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The proposed project activities include the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure which could result in adverse 
environmental and social impacts thereby triggering OP/BP 4.01. However, considering the limited scale and 
magnitude of rehabilitation and improvement works as well as the confinement of activities to existing footprints, the 
proposed operation is classified as category ‘B’. At this point in time, the locations of the activities that will be financed 
by the project is not known in sufficient details. Site specific safeguards instruments such as ESIAs, stand-alone ESMPs, 
RAPs and Audits (when necessary) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by the proponents prior to the 
commencement of civil works, and the relevant measures including E&S clauses clearly incorporated in contracts.   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process  
OPS_RA_SG _DEFER RED_FC C_TAB LE  

 
The review of this Safeguards has been Deferred.  
 
Comments 
The need for involuntary resettlement or land acquisition in specific subproject areas will only be known during project 
implementation, when site-specific plans are available. Therefore, subprojects will be screened for applicability of the 
resettlement policy and in case any activity or subproject involves land acquisition, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will be prepared in compliance with the Bank policy and Nigerian laws 
prior to actual implementation of the activity or subproject. Several issues will increase the complexity of land 
acquisition. For example, the lack of reliable land record systems, and the inability of people losing land to either 
document ownership or be physically present to make their claims for eligibility. Such situations can increase due to 
the situation of forced displacement in the North East as well as the weakened local authorities who can mediate in 
land ownership conflicts Site- specific Resettlement Plans will, therefore, include procedures for identifying eligible 
project-affected people, calculating and delivering compensation, and mechanisms for land dispute grievance redress. 
 
        



OPS_COMPLIANCE_INDICATOR_TBL 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program (P170419) 

 
 

  
Jul 30, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2019 | Report No: PIDC190843 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Morocco P170419  Morocco Digital and 
Climate Smart 
Agriculture Program 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

23-Mar-2020 14-Jul-2020 No 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries, Rural 
Development, Water and 
Forestry 

Agriculture and Food 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

The Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program aims at increasing the adoption of digital and climate-
smart technologies in agri-food value chains in Morocco. 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 1,000.00 

Total Operation Cost 200.00 

Total Program Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 200.00 

     World Bank Lending 200.00 
 

     
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the last two decades, Morocco has achieved relatively strong economic and social outcomes thanks to a 
series of reforms which resulted in the improvement of the well-being of its population. In the 2000-2017 period, 
Morocco’s real per capita GDP almost doubled from US$1,727 to US$2,948. Extreme poverty dropped to a level of 1 
percent and the national poverty rate declined to 4.8 percent. The main reforms which led to these achievements were 
(i) stabilization of the macroeconomic framework by reducing domestic and external vulnerabilities, (ii) enhancement of 
fiscal and financial policy frameworks, and (iii) support of economic diversification and competitiveness.  

 
2. Over the past 10 years, however, growth has been on a downward trend, and the economy has not generated 
enough jobs to reduce the persistent high rate of unemployment, especially among the youth and educated. Real GDP 
growth decelerated from an average of 4.8 percent over 1996-2006, to 4.6 percent over 2007-2011, to only 3.4 percent 
over 2012-2017. During the first half of 2018, GDP growth fell to 2.8 percent. Morocco continues to face high 
unemployment rates and substantial urban-rural disparities. Morocco has close to 34 million inhabitants of which 13.6 
million live in rural areas (WB, 2019). Approximately 1.1 million people in the country are unemployed; they represent 9-
10 percent of the working-age population and 20 percent among the youth. Poverty rates in rural areas remain twice as 
high as the poverty rates at national level and the rural population accounts for 79.4 percent of the poor. While inequality 
as measured by the Gini coefficient at national level declined from 40.7 to 39.5 between 2007 and 2014, it remains high. 

 
3. Morocco is highly exposed to climate change. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects a 
continued warming trend for Morocco. Every decade since 1970, a 0.5 degrees Centigrade temperature increase has been 
observed, greatly exceeding the global average by about 0.15 degrees. Unless strong action is taken to mitigate this trend, 
additional temperature increases of as much as three to seven degrees Centigrade are projected for Morocco by 2100. 
The largest increases (four to seven degrees) are anticipated for the summer months (June, July, and August). Annual 
precipitation is projected to decline by 10-40 percent, including a 10-30 percent decrease during the wet season from 
October to April, and a 10 to 40 percent decrease during the dry season, from May to September. As a consequence, 
droughts and other extreme weather events will be increasing in frequency and intensity in Morocco. 
 
4. To address those challenges and to foster the structural transformation of the economy, the Government of 
Morocco has launched a number of ambitious sectoral programs. Those programs, which cover the main economic 
sectors including the agri-food sector through the Plan Maroc Vert (PMV), which aims to promote market-oriented 
agricultural growth, doubling sector value added and creating 1.5 million jobs, have started to generate results in terms 
of increased investments, growth and diversification within each sector. Considering the remaining challenges, however, 
and while pursuing its macroeconomic reform agenda, the Government of Morocco is now looking at ways to increase 
the impact of those sectoral programs on growth, income generation and employment creation. A new strategy for the 
agricultural sector, building on the achievements of the PMV will focus on creating a rural middle class with a strong focus 
on increasing human capital and ensuring the sustainable management of natural resources.  

 
 
 
 



Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 
5. Morocco’s agri-food sector can contribute to economic growth, boost shared prosperity, and increase jobs, 
incomes, and livelihoods. The agri-food sector is a key growth area. The sector represents 15 percent of GDP, 23 percent 
of exports, and close to 30 percent of employment. From 2000 to 2015, the non-agriculture sector’s GDP grew at a slower 
rate than overall GDP, meaning that agricultural GDP was the fastest growing sector in Morocco (CEM, World Bank, 2016). 
Agriculture is the only source of employment and income for 80 percent of the rural labor force, hence growth in the 
sector results in substantial reductions of poverty rates. To ensure the sector’s continued performance and contribution 
to Morocco’s economic development, a stronger focus on job creation in agri-food value chains and on the sector’s 
resilience to climate change is needed. 

 
6. Increasing farm incomes and creating more and better rural jobs is a priority for Morocco’s agricultural 
transformation. Today, Morocco’s agricultural sector lies between the transition and urbanized agriculture stages in its 
agricultural transformation process.1 Hence, Morocco’s agriculture has yet to reach its full export and production 
potential, which could further boost shared prosperity in the country. Furthermore, Morocco is not tapping into the 
potential of its women and youth. Women are highly appreciated for their work ethic and rigor, but often lack access to 
the necessary assets such as extension services, finance or social security, which keeps them trapped in low-pay jobs. 
Morocco’s young population offers exceptional knowledge in new digital technologies but has difficulty in finding 
appropriate employment. Supporting growth in agri-food value chains—beyond agricultural production, and developing 
storage, processing, distribution, transport, logistics, retailing and other services—could ensure that Morocco’s food 
system increasingly contributes to job creation in the country. Furthermore, necessary policies and investments can 
improve the quality and quantity of jobs and facilitate the inclusion of more women and youth. 

 
7. The agri-food sector also needs to adapt to a rapidly changing climate. Moroccan agriculture is strongly exposed 
to climate change. With rising temperatures and high levels of water-stress, Morocco is likely to face longer and more 
frequent periods of drought over the coming decade, less predictable rainfall and more frequent extreme weather events. 
In addition, agriculture and land use activities represent a substantial share of greenhouse gas emissions, although their 
overall volume remains low. To ensure the sector’s sustainability, Morocco has incorporated the climate change issue into 
its development strategies in order to manage its impact and reduce vulnerabilities. Morocco’s vision is to make its 
territory and people more resilient to climate change while ensuring a rapid transition to a low carbon economy.  

 
8. Digital technologies offer solutions to the challenges faced by Moroccan agri-food value chains. Driven by both 
public and private sector, the digital transformation of Moroccan agriculture has begun. The sector is experiencing various 
digital improvements related to satellite imagery, internet and mobile phone-based technologies, IOT networks and E-
commerce platforms. The main examples of these digital solutions include: (i) Databases such as FERTIMAP2, Crop Growth 
Monitoring system (CGMS)3, Système d'information sur les prix des produits agricoles (ASAAR4), RNA (National Agriculture 

 
1 A country’s transition from an agriculture-based economy to a developed one can be broken down into five stages: (i) agri-based, (ii) pre-transition, (iii) transition, 
(iv) urbanised, and (v) developed. Policy priorities differ depending on where a country stands in the agricultural transition process. ‘Agricultural Transformation 

Process maps’ help decipher the different stages of agricultural development and where countries are located. Thes maps are created by taking into consideration (i) 

the percentage of farming jobs, and (ii) the primary agriculture’s share of total GDP and allow for the country categorization mentioned before. 

2 This provides (i) knowledge of soil fertility; and (ii) ad-hoc cost-effective fertilizing recommendations based on soil fertility map and soil sampling. The initiative runs 

on a GIS platform accessible online.  
3 It allows forecasting yields of cereals through (i) weather data processing (9km x 9km resolution); and (ii) simulation of crop growth. The platform is online 
4 Provides information on daily, time series and analyses on agricultural prices according to regions, type of market (wholesale, retail, souk, Ramadan) and type of 

product (horticulture, fruit and livestock). See: http://www.prixagriculture.org/ 

Registry)5, and ARDNA6; (ii) digital farm management services delivered to large cooperatives or producers/exporter 
associations7; (iii) a dynamic banking sector within which digital solutions (FinTech) are catching on8;  and (iv) E-commerce 
platforms that are starting to turn to food trade9. The digital transformation of agriculture in Morocco will require a 
significant effort in building domestic capacity to manage the access and use of data, build digital infrastructure in rural 
areas, improve the regulatory framework, foster the demand/adoption of digital solutions, boost the supply of technology 
by start-ups and SMEs, disseminate digital technical knowledge and improve academic currincula to address the market 
demand for digital expertise.  

 
9. The development of digital technologies in agri-food value chains will be underpinned by the overall digital 
economy.10 The Plan Maroc Numérique 2020 (Digital Morocco Plan) was developed by the Ministry of Industry, 
Commerce, Investment and the Digital Economy (MICIEN) and is the vision for the development of the digital economy in 
Morocco. This strategy aims by 2020 to digitize 50% of administrative procedures and bills, connect 20% of Moroccan 
SMEs, , and position Morocco as a digital hub. The transformation of the administration towards digital constitutes the 
backbone of this plan. The plan rests on three pillars i) Digital Transformation of the economy and national government, 
ii) Digital Hub for Africa, and iii) Digital Foundations including data infrastructure, digital skills and digital regulations and 
frameworks. In 2016, the Digital Development Agency (ADD), was created to undertake the implementation of the Plan 
Moroc Numeric 2020 and support the implementation and development of the digital economy, by encouraging the 
dissemination of digital tools and promoting their use among the population. The Digital Morocco Plan for 2020's major 
measures aim to authorize the entry of new players, to set up an investment-friendly legal and regulatory framework, and 
to use Public-Private Partnerships to deploy broadband infrastructure in areas that are less profitable for private 
investors.   

 

10. Digital Economy. Considering the current situation of broadband in Morocco, and the country's ambition to 
become a regional leader and to rise to the level of economic development of upper-middle income countries, the 
Moroccan government now faces the need to introduce a second wave of reforms in the broadband sector. Following the 
example of international best practices, Morocco should primarily strive to: (i) increase coverage for the remaining 40% 
of the population (who live in more remote, sparsely populated semi-urban and rural areas with poor and/or no 
profitability); (ii) encourage the arrival of new players (without limits on their numbers and without prohibiting 
infrastructure deployment) on all market segments (international gateways, backbones, backhauls, access); (iii) introduce 
regulation for open and non-discriminatory access to communications networks (wireline infrastructure, civil engineering 
and easements); (iv) promote private investment in telecommunications; and (v) improve regulatory framework for the 

 
5 That has significantly improved the national cadastre by merging agriculture census data and satellite imagery.  
6 An online capacity development, research, extension and communication platform sponsored by the Ministry of Agriculture and FAO. See: 

http://www.ardna.org/accueil# 
7 This is the case of AGRIDATA (http://agridata-consulting.com/en/ ) working with APEFEL (fruit and vegetable exporter association), Maroc Citrus (citrus exporter 

association) and COPAG (large cooperative active on dairy, meat, citrus and vegetables). 
8 Crédit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) stands out as it started the implementation of a “digital agenda” in 2011. 
9 Jumia is entering into niche products sold by cooperatives and is increasing its sales volumes of processed food for supermarkets.  
10 This is aligned with the Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) Initiative, which aims to digitally connect every individual, business and government in Africa by 2030 and 
ensure that each person is digital-enabled and ready to thrive in the digital economy. This includes every farmer and agribusiness. In order to digitally enable the 

broader food system in Morocco, there needs to be a concentrated effort to build up the core foundations of the digital economy including digital infrastructure, digital 

platforms, digital skills, digital financial services and an environment supportive of digital business and entrepreneurship. A simultaneous effort will be needed to 

mitigate the growing risks of the digital era including cybersecurity, data privacy and protection and market concentration. This becomes relevant for the large portion 

of rural inhabitants in Morocco. 


use of new digital technologies like IoT, Drones, Artificial intelligence key to the modernization and improvement of 
efficiency in the agriculture sector.11 

 
Relationship to CAS/CPF 

 
11. The proposed operation is fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2024. In particular, 
it is aligned with Strategic Focus Area A (Promoting job creation by the private sector) and Strategic Focus Area 3 
(Promoting inclusive and resilient territorial development). Specifically, the proposed operation would support CPF 
Objective 2 (Increase opportunities for private sector growth with a focus on MSMEs and youth employability) as well as 
CPF Objective 10 (Strengthen adaptation to climate change and resilience to natural disasters). Under CPF Objective 2 the 
CPF foresees to crowd-in the private sector to generate further growth and job opportunities. Under CPF Objective 10 the 
CPF envisages to support climate adaptation and resilience in sectors threatened by climate variability and change. Yet, 
the activities of the operation will also indirectly touch upon Strategic Focus Area B (Strengthening human capital), as the 
Program aims at building, strengthening and protecting human capital by extending academic curricula and developing 
digital extension services. Given the strong focus on gender and digital technologies in the Program, the Cross-Cutting 
Themes ‘Gender’ and ‘Harnessing Digital Economy for Jobs and Faster Growth’ are equally broadly covered in the Program. 

 
12. The proposed operation also supports the new MENA Regional Strategy on Economic and Social Inclusion for 
Peace and Stability. In particular the Program is aligned with (i) Pillar 1 on Renewing the Social Contract as it emphasizes 
more inclusive economic growth and the protection of natural resources which are considered public goods to be 
preserved as part of the intergenerational social contract, and (ii) Pillar 2 on Strengthening Resilience to Shocks, such as 
climate shocks. The Program is also aligned with the new enlargement of the strategy which focuses on youth, 
entrepreneurship, and technologies. In particular, the Program touches upon (i) human capital development, and (ii) 
digital transformation. With respect to human capital development the Program focuses on improving the quality of 
extension services and access to the social protection systems. With respect to digital transformation, the Program aims 
at improving skills for youth and women, support entrepreneurship and SMEs, improve contestability in markets, including 
via disruptive technologies. The regional strategy has an equally strong focus on gender equality and female 
empowerment, which is clearly reflected in the operation. 

 
 
 
Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument 

 
13. The World Bank has been engaged in the agricultural sector in Morocco for almost three decades and supported 
the PMV since its inception, through operations which have collectively built capacity and systems in the agriculture 
sector. This included: (a) a DPL series in support of the PMV (2011 to 2014, USD 408 million) with a focus on institutional 
and regulatory measures to – among others - improve the efficiency of domestic markets by reducing marketing costs and 
improving marketing services through the modernization of wholesale markets and slaughterhouses; improve the 
effectiveness of the agricultural innovation system; and establish an effective food safety management systems; and (b) 
two investment operations (Modernization of Irrigated Agriculture in Oum Er Rbia Basin Project, 2010-2017, US$ 70 million 
IBRD; Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project, 2015-2022, US$150 million IBRD) with a focus on improving water 
service to small farmers in large scale irrigation perimeters as a prerequisite to the adoption of improved irrigation 

 
11 The Program will be able to build on and create synergies with other WB sector projects, such as (i) the ‘Financing Innovative Start-ups and Small and Medium 

Enterprises Project’ (P150928), which aimed at increasing private equity and quasi-equity finance for innovative startups and small and medium enterprises in Morocco, 

and (ii) the ‘Financial Inclusion and Digital Economy’ project (P 168587), which focuses on fostering financial inclusion and contributing to digital transformation for 

individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.  



technologies and increase in agricultural water productivity. Furthermore, a PforR supporting the PMV (2018-2022, US$ 
200 million IBRD) aims to increase the volume of added-value products commercialized in the olive and citrus agri-food 
value chains. In addition, sustainability of the agricultural sector in rainfed marginal areas has been addressed through 
two dedicated grants by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) (Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the 
Plan Maroc Vert Project, 2010-2015, US$4 million; and Social and Integrated Agricultural Project, 2013-2017, US$6 million) 
focusing on climate change adaptation, biodiversity and land conservation. The proposed operation would complement 
and build on these project experiences by putting a stronger focus on equity/job creation and resilience/environmental 
sustainability in agricultural value chains, while also ensuring the sustainability of the investments made in earlier 
projects/programs, in particular the irrigation IPFs. 

 
14. The GoM is now seeking assistance to support the development and implementation of the new phase of the 
PMV—a new agricultural strategy currently being finalized. The GoM has demonstrated its commitment to results and 
reforms through the implementation of the PMV and the development of the new agricultural successor program of the 
PMV, which will be finalized in September 2019. During the preparation of the CPF 2019-2024, the MAPMDREF has asked 
for the continuous support of the World Bank to strengthen its agriculture sector by leveraging digital and climate smart 
technologies. On January 29, 2019, the GoM officially solicited World Bank financing and technical assistance to implement 
the new agricultural strategy. The request also stressed two angles to design the support: digital technologies and climate 
smart agriculture.  

 
15. The final choice of the instrument will be made during project preparation and appraisal.  
 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The Morocco Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture Program aims at increasing the adoption of digital and climate-
smart technologies in agri-food value chains in Morocco. 

 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
At PDO-level, it is proposed that the following three indicators would be used to assess the PDO results: 
 

• Number of farmers and agri-food SMEs adopting climate-smart technologies and practices;  

• Number of farmers and agri-food SMEs adopting digital technologies.  
 
D. Program Description 

 
 

 
16. The Government’s program is the next phase of the Plan Maroc Vert (PMV). The proposed projectwill focus on 2 
key areas of the Governement’s program: the diffusion and adoption of i) climate smart technologies and practices and ii) 
digital technologies in agri-food value chain. The Program will mainly focus on building the ecosystem and setting up the 
incentive schemes to enable the private sector to provide digital and climate smart technologies and farmers and agri-
food SMEs to adopt them. The increased adoption of these technologies will transform the Moroccan agri-food sector and 
will contribute to reaching the higher-level objectives of the new strategy: i) Creating jobs in rural areas (especially for the 
youth and women); and ii) Managing natural resources in a sustainable and climate-resilient way.  



     

 
17. The PMV was launched in 2008 to modernize and foster the growth of the agri-food sector. The PMV aims to 
transform the agri-food sector into a key source of economic growth that contributes to employment creation and poverty 
reduction in rural areas, while promoting the sector’s integration into the global economy, and helping the sector adapt 
to climate change. The PMV includes a set of transversal institutional reforms, as well as an investment support program 
based on public-private partnerships. At sub-sector level, specific targets and actions have also been jointly negotiated 
between MAPMDREF, the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and representatives of the private sector 
(Interprofessions) through Contrat-Programmes (CPs, result-based agreements) in 19 sub-sectors. For each action, the 
CPs define the respective contributions of the public and the private sectors. The PMV has also been translated into 
agricultural development plans endorsed by each region. 
 
 
 
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 
 
18. In terms of environmental and social risk management,  the concept stage examination of potentially critical 
aspects based on the PforR E&S tool for initial screening of types of risks shows that:  
 

a) Environmental and social risks: Initial assessments show that social and environmental risks are expected to be 
moderate, and that E&S management capacities are likely to be adequate to manage risks related to the social and 
environmental context of the project. In accordance with OP 9.00 the project would not finance activities expected to 
have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. 
The project’s operation proposals will be screened during program preparation and implementation for such adverse 
impacts. If such activities are likely to occur within the project, they should be excluded from PforR support. An 
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be conducted during preparation to ensure E&S risk 
management capacities are adequate, that screening capacities are adequate, and that eventual gaps are mitigated during 
implementation. In fact, the project is likely to yield important benefits for producers and processors in selected sub-
sectors, both through its institutional strengthening activities and the specific investments to be financed. Physical 
investments are expected to have no negative social impacts in terms of resettlement and land acquisition, while they 
may yield environmental benefits, particularly by developing climate-smart value-chains and improved environmental 
management practices. Overall impacts are expected to be positive, through improved environmental management 
practices along value-chains, and increased capacity and economic returns for beneficiaries;  

 
b) Capacity of National Systems: Morocco has a legal framework in place for environmental and social management and 
impact assessments, and reliable country systems to manage the risks associated with project activities. The key legislative 
text is Law no. 12-03 of May 12, 2003, aimed at minimizing the negative impact of projects and improving ecological 
sustainability. Regarding land tenure, the protection of property is ensured by Article 35 of the new Constitution of 2011 
and implemented through numerous laws. The Constitution also establishes equality, inclusiveness, participation (art 136, 
139), including disclosure and consultation processes, the right of petition, grievance redress mechanisms as well as citizen 
engagement (art 19, 136, 139, 156). Moreover, Morocco has adopted in March 2014 a National Charter of the 
Environment and Sustainable Development. As the main beneficiaries of the Program include farmers, SMEs and 
agribusinesses, it will be important for project design to identify cultural, social, economic, geographical and political 
constraints to equitable access to project benefits, giving special attention to the needs and concerns of women, youth 
and the most vulnerable groups. Some specific weaknesses still do exist and will have to be managed through the ESSA 
and Program Action Plans; for instance, timely compensation in cases of land acquisition. The need for coordination of 
safeguards standards and procedures across a number of agencies executing program activities deserves particular 



attention. Any specific weaknesses pertaining to the execution of the project’s activities will be the subject of corrective 
actions recommended in the Program Action Plan; 
 
c) Reputational and political risk: The PMV is not seen to be a controversial program and has been widely supported by 
beneficiaries. Program assessment should review both the overall decision-making processes and allocation of resources 
to strengthen social inclusiveness (e.g., ensuring that women, youth, and vulnerable groups at least have a fair opportunity 
to benefit from the Program). The primary reputational risk to the Bank is that the Program may not deliver the scope and 
scale of benefits envisioned, or that the explicitly environmental and social aspects of the program development objective 
cause the program to somehow become associated with broader social or political protest causes. 
 
 
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Henan Green Agriculture Finance Fund (P169758) 

 
 

  
May 22, 2019 Page 1 of 9  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDC26846 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

China P169758  Henan Green 
Agriculture Finance 
Fund (P169758) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 15, 2019 Mar 26, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing 
Investment Corporation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 200.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 200.00 

          Borrowing Agency 200.00 

   
 


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Since start of the reforms China has embarked successful rural transformation, which has stimulated economic growth 
and urbanization. On the other hand, broad-based economic growth, urbanization and industrialization have further 
enhanced rural transformation.  Over the last two decades over 200 million rural people have moved to urban areas to 
engage in labor-intensive industrial jobs.  Today about 58 percent of the Chinese population lives in urban areas, up from 
just 16 percent in 1960.  More than one billion Chinese – that is, 70 percent of the projected 1.5 billion population – are 
expected to live in urban areas by 2030.  Urbanization will increase aggregate demand for food as urban population 
consume more higher value products, especially meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables, as well as processed food.  
 
However, urbanization is also expected to increase the pressures on the agri-food systems in China through increasing gap 
between food demand and environmental supply limits. Addressing the latter requires managing pressures on intensive 
margins to increase productivity per unit of land, and on extensive margin to produce more high value food.  The largest 
environmental pressures come from primary agricultural production stage, which is dominated by large number of small-
scale production units. China is the world’s largest producers and user of synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer, both on an 
absolute and per hectare basis.  The consumption of agricultural fertilizers in China was 58 million tons in 2017.  Grain 
production is the leading user of chemical fertilizers at aggregate level, although the highest rates of fertilizer application 
generally occur in fruit and vegetable production. It has been estimated that only around 25% of nitrogen is taken up by 
crops in China compared to 50% in Europe and almost 70% in the U.S. and Canada, with the remainder running off into 
water sources or entering the air as nitrous oxide.  Ammonia emissions from inefficient use of N fertilizers contribute 
around 10% of the air pollution (PM2.5) over the North China Plain and Pearl and Yangtze River Deltas. According to the 
first census on national pollution source in 2010, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Total 
Phosphorus (TP) are major sources of pollutants from agriculture sector. While COD mainly comes from livestock sector, 
accounting for 96% the total emissions, TN and TP are primarily attributable to overuse of fertilizers in crop sector, 
accounting for 38% and 59% of the total emissions. The consumption of pesticides in China was about 1.8 million tons per 
year in 2015, and it has been estimated that only about 30% of it was utilized by crops. Soil and water pollution are also 
threat to the environment and food safety.  While industrial pollution is a leading source of soil and water contamination, 
the overuse of pesticides is also a significant contributor (about 10 million hectares of farmland are affected by overuse 
of pesticides). Heavy use of pesticides has been especially common in rice, vegetable, and tea production. Addressing 
above environmental management and pollution control in agriculture, requires thus a simultaneous attention on the 
modernization of farming systems, while meeting increasing consumer demand for nutrition, high quality and safe food.  
 
Chinese agriculture is also the largest producer of agriculture related greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the world, accounting 
for about 13% of total global agricultural GHG emissions. Overall, primary agriculture sector accounted for about 11% of 



China’s GHG emissions - third largest source of GHGs in China after energy and industry. Agriculture is major source of 
methane (from rice and livestock manure) and nitrous oxide (from manure and use of N fertilizers). Livestock, particularly 
cattle and pig rearing, is single largest sub-sector contributing to nearly 15.5 percent of total human induced GHG 
emissions in the country. There is evidence that climate change itself is contributing to increasing pressures on Chinese 
food production systems and already limited water and land resources. Further, climate change is also expected to 
exacerbate exposure of agricultural produce to pathogens and toxins that will increase the risk of food borne diseases. 
 
Henan is an important agricultural province in China. It is the largest producer of livestock and the second largest producer 
of grains (6.8 million ha of arable land) in China. It produces also a significant quantities of oil crops, fruits and vegetables.  
The total manure discharges from livestock industry has risen since 1990, reaching about 253 million tons per year. The 
increase is largely contributed to the rapid growth of pig and cattle production since 1990s as a response to increasing 
demand for meat. Pork industry accounts for 50.1% of the total manure discharges, followed by cattle 28.1%, and poultry 
with 12.6%. The consumption of pesticides in Henan was 128,700 tons in 2015 (the second largest after Shandong 
province), while the consumption of chemical fertilizers reached 7.06 million tons in 2017 (the largest in China). Grains, 
fruits and vegetables are the major users of fertilizers, accounting for 82.8% of total crop fertilizer consumptions.  Total 
COD discharges in Henan were 10.2 million tons, most of which come from livestock sector, while crop sector mas a major 
contributor of TN with 93,500 tons and TP discharges with 5,300 tons (NBS, 2017). Total GHG emissions from agriculture 
in Henan increased from 16.6 million tons in 1999 to 18 million tons in 2015 (9%).  Livestock sector was the biggest 
contributor to GHG emissions, followed by fertilizer use and soil management.  Henan has thus a good potential to reduce 
environmental footprint from agriculture (both at national level and globally) and contribute to the production of safe, 
high quality and nutritious food. The proposed project aims to support the transformation of Henan agriculture sector 
towards more resource-efficient, environmentally sustainable, and climate smart development path, which is expected to 
reduce agriculture’s environmental footprint and increase agri-food safety. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Transformation of Chinese agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path requires massive financing 
from financial institutions (both public and private) and private sector (e.g. agribusinesses, capital funds, etc.). However, 
financial sector institutions in China have lent a disproportionately lower share of their loan portfolios to agriculture, 
compared to agriculture sector’s share of GDP. The growth and deepening of agriculture finance markets is constrained 
by a variety of factors which include: (i) low profitability, (ii) collateral requirements, (iii) covariance of production, market, 
and price risks and absence of adequate market-based instruments to manage risks, (iv) fragmentation of value chains, (v) 
high perception of risks, etc.  
 
China has put in place policy environment which is conducive for the development of green agriculture financing to 
encourage transformation of its agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path. In 2018, the Government 
formulated its Rural Revitalization Strategy (RRS) which aims to create more modern and resource efficient production 
structures, while ensuring environmental sustainability and safety of agri-produce.  Promoting green agriculture is an 
important aspect of the RRS which provides the package of policies and incentives to encourage higher-quality agricultural 
development, strengthening environmental protection and pollution control in rural areas, while ensuring the quality of 
poverty-reduction efforts.  Other key goals of Government’s sustainable agriculture development plans include: (i) zero 
growth of chemical fertilizers and pesticides by 2020; (ii) control of methane emissions from rice fields and nitrous oxide 
emissions from farmland; and (iii) adoption of recyclable agricultural systems that includes reutilization of animal waste. 
These efforts also aim improved resource use efficiency (water, energy, natural resources) and improved environmental 
governance. The structural changes promoted through above policies, such as consolidation of livestock industry and 
transfer of farm land to more professional entities (agribusinesses, farmer cooperatives, etc.), better access to new 

 

technologies, and increasing resilience of production systems through more professional management practices could 
harbinger new opportunities for access to agriculture finance.  
 
China introduced Green Credit Policy in 2007 to encourage financial institutions to offer green credit for environmental 
protection, emission reduction, and energy conservation projects. However, little progress has been made in green 
agriculture finance, largely due lack of clarity in the definition of what constitutes “green”, the incipient nature of many 
potential innovations (e.g. enhanced efficiency fertilizers, etc.), and risk aversion towards the sector. Only few banks 
currently engage in green agricultural finance which is quite narrowly defined to cover organic agriculture and livestock, 
seed production, and animal breeding. The aggregate national level green finance portfolio is about $1.2 trillion of green 
credit and $ 89 billion in green bonds, most which has gone to energy, urban water, transport and industrial sectors where 
commercial investments options and technologies are relatively well defined. Total green finance for agriculture is about 
$9 billion or only 0.4% from aggregate national green finance.  Banks with larger loan portfolios in green agricultural credit 
are Agricultural Bank of China, Agricultural Development Bank and Postal Savings Bank.   
 
There are signs of emerging policy guidance for streamlining green financing for agriculture in China.  In 2018, the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) issued the Notice on the Technical Guide for Green Agriculture Development 
(2018-2030) outlining range of investments to accelerate the pace of green input creation, improve green technology 
supply, establish green development system and low carbon model, build or enhance green standards system, formulate 
the monitoring and early warning mechanism of agricultural resources, environment and ecology. However, on the policy 
side, there are currently little incentives for financial institutions to increase their lending for green agriculture investments 
beyond showing adherence with the PBOC green finance guidelines and counting towards their CSR activities.   
 
The demand of agriculture and agribusiness for green financing will be driven either by commercial opportunities or by 
stringent regulations. Some investments that increase the environmental efficiency of agriculture and agri-processing such 
as investments in precision agriculture or investments in energy efficient processing facilities are profitable on their own 
right, requiring mainly technical assistance and access to financing to be adopted by farms and firms.   On the other end, 
some environmentally necessary investments such as those related to the treatment of residual waste, water pollutants 
and livestock manure do not generate significant private income, although they significantly contribute to public welfare. 
The adoption of such investments thus depends on the existence of adequate regulations and enforcement mechanisms 
to ensure that they are adopted. It is expected that the 14th 5YP will bring increased push for more stringent enforcement 
of environmental and pollution control regulations, including agriculture. This should generate important new policy 
incentives to foster the demand for environmentally sustainable growth models and investments. 
 
Increasing demand for high quality, nutritious and safe food has created renewed private sector interest to invest in 
Chinese agri-food sector, which provides scope to harness green agriculture finance.  This renewed interest is creating 
new opportunities for financial institutions which would need to develop the right skills to capture opportunities in 
investing in green agriculture.  At the same time, emerging evidence obtained from CBRC shows that while agricultural 
loan NPLs in China are around 7%, NPLs for organic agriculture (one type of green agriculture) are only 3.5% indicating 
that lending to green agriculture could potentially be less risky.  There is thus an opportunity to create new  financial 
markets for agriculture green investments by equipping financial institutions with global knowledge of green agriculture 
finance standards, financing instruments, innovative risk measurement and control systems, and providing them tools to 
build a pipeline of bankable green agricultural investments for financing which could enhance their capacity and risk-
taking ability for expanding  green finance to agriculture sector in China over coming years.    
 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed Henan Green Agriculture Financing Fund Project is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership 
Strategy (Report 67566-CN) for China (FY2013–16), discussed by the Board on November 6, 2012 and the new CPF under 
preparation consistent under its expected objective of demonstrating sustainable agriculture practices and improving food 
system quality and safety.  The relevant criteria from capital increase paper which apply to the proposed project include:  
 

• Strengthening of institutional capacities for the graduation (development of the capacity to identify and manage 
green agriculture investments); 

• Delivering regional and global public goods (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture, climate change mitigation or 
adaptation in agriculture, etc.); and 

• Introducing innovative institutional and technical solutions to emerging challenges that can provide lessons for 
other middle-income countries (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture and pollution control, etc.).  

 
The project places emphasis on institutional and financing innovations for inclusive and green growth agenda contributing 
to enhanced economic opportunities in rural areas, addressing environmental pollution and climate change under the CPF 
pillar of promoting more inclusive development. Further, the proposed project would have the potential for generating 
high climate co-benefits and contributing to the achievement of China’s agriculture-related Nationally Determined 
Commitments (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan.  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
• Increased volume and value of green agriculture investments (particularly attracting more social capital); 
• Increased awareness among key stakeholders about green agriculture investment opportunities; and 
• Enhanced institutional capacity for managing green investments portfolio. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
The selected lending instrument is an Intermediary Financing (FI). The proposed IBRD funding is $200 million, with at least 
same amount being raised from social capital and other funding sources. The proposed project will have two components, 
the first one providing the funding for investments in eligible green agriculture sub-projects and the second one providing 
technical assistance.   
 
Component 1: Green Agriculture Fund (GAF). The project will establish a dedicated investment facility to demonstrate the 
viability of a financing vehicle in Henan, which will operate in a transparent manner conforming to market principles on 
sustainable basis. This facility will provide direct support to eligible firms with ‘patient capital’ using ‘blended finance 
options’. Direct investments by GAF will aim to leverage to the extent possible private and commercial capital from social 
capital partners (i.e. local commercial banks, private investment firms and financial institutions).  
 
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (IBRD financing $20 million). The project will support the Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing Investment Corporation (HADFIC) and its social capital partners in building their institutional 

 

capacity in managing green agriculture investment cycle including: pipeline development, investment policies, 
implementation guidelines and monitoring mechanisms meeting prudential and regulatory requirements under the 
framework for green financial system.  
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
Overall, the project will bring about positive environmental and social benefits in terms of reducing the pollution from 
agricultural productions, reducing the GHG emissions, and reducing health risk for consumers by improving the food 
safety and quality. As the project will involve small or medium size civil works for processing and/or storage facilities, the 
potential environmental impacts in construction phase may include the dust, noise, solid waste, and wastewater, and 
social disturbance, such as the traffic safety. Other potential adverse environmental impacts could include noise, dust, 
solid waste, wastewater generated from the manufacturing of equipment, high-efficiency fertilizers and biocides as well 
as processing of agro-products; occupational health concern regarding the mechanical damage by operating machine 
tools, inhaling fine particles in processing of agro-products, and toxicity by production, storage and use of biocides which 
is albeit low toxic to human beings. The probability for such risks is very low, and the impacts are small given their size. In 
addition, the use of multi-resistant varieties will cause a concern on both environemntal and social aspects. However, the 
specific information is not clear for these varieties at current concept stage. The criteria for assessing and excluding any 
invasive species and screening for risk categorization will be developed in the ESMS. The potential environmental 
impacts are mostly temporary, predictable and/or reversible, and the nature of the Project does not preclude the 
possibility of avoiding or reversing them. They are medium in magnitude and/or in spatial extent. These adverse impacts 
can be readily and reliably managed through the environmental mitigation hierarchy. As per the Environmental and 
Social Directive, the environmental risk for this project is classified as Substantial.  
 
The main social risks and impacts for the project are related to (a) land acquisition and resettlement for establishing 
facilities and structures by targeted enterprises, (b) leasing of land use rights (LUR) and land consolidation for 
appropriate-scale farming, (c) management of direct workers and primary supplier workers, and (d) community health 
and safety and (e) social implications (positive, negative or perceived) relating use of multi-resistant varieties. Land 
acquisition and resettlement would happen upfront before determination of the sub-projects; however, documentation 
should be provided to ensure compliance with national regulations. According to ESS9, the FIs will categorize any sub-
project which involves resettlement as High or Substantial risk (unless the risks or impacts of such resettlement are 
minor). Leasing of LUR, different from involuntary land acquisition and resettlement, is carried out at village level and 
Henan has put in place relatively sound laws and regulations to facilitate this process. However, the level of regulation 
enforcement could vary from one village to another in terms of public consultation, and arrangement of rental 
payments. Adequacy of current system is subject to further assessment. The project would introduce a few direct 
workers and the number of primary supplier workers, which could potentially increase the risks related to working 
conditions and community health and safety, if not well managed. Use of multi-resistant varieties would induce social 
implications which will be further assessed when “green agriculture” is defined under this project and there are more 
information on project activities. Based on possible social risks associated with the leasing of LUR and until relevant 
national and provincial systems and practices governing such activities are fully assessed, the overall social risk of the 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 5  

     

     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  18-Jun-2019| Report No: PIDC27150 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Colombia P170728 Colombia Institutional 
Strengthening for Territorial 
Development DPF 
(P170728) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 16, 2020 Governance Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Republic of Colombia National Planning Department 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Advancing inclusive, sustainable and productive territorial development is one of the salient objectives in Colombia’s new 
National Development Plan (NDP) for 2018-2022. Historically, gaps in the frameworks and institutions for territorial 
planning and subnational public management have contributed to important challenges to equitable regional 
development in Colombia, as reflected in poor service delivery indicators and inequality measures. Recognizing the 
importance of addressing these challenges, the Government’s 2014-2018 NDP outlined a program of reforms targeted 
at establishing the enabling environment and regulatory framework for integrated territorial development, actions that 
were supported by the First Programmatic Territorial Development Development Policy Financing (P158520). Important 
milestones - including approval of a new territorial planning policy, a comprehensive cadaster policy, and the 
strengthening of investment agreements between the national and subnational governments, among others - were 
achieved under this Program. Under the framework of the new 2018-2022 NDP, the Government is now advancing on 
the next generation of policies aimed at strengthening the institutional frameworks needed to further consolidate 
territorial development in Colombia.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed operation is well-aligned with Pillar 1 (Fostering Balanced Territorial Development) of the 2016-2021 CPF, 
which recognizes the important role of subnational governments in supporting territorial development.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to  foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development.  

 
Key Results  

 
Key results are expected from improved coordination, planning and resource allocation that promote strategic 
investments at the regional level, more efficient rural and urban land markets such as increased coverage of cadastral 
information for improved multisectoral public management, and improved public management capacity at the 
subnational level.  
 

D. Concept Description 
The proposed operation aims to achieve its objective in supporting policy actions under three pillars. As the design further 
develops, these may be consolidated into two pillars.  
 
Pillar 1: Coordination, Planning and Resource Allocation that Promote Strategic Investments at the Regional Level -  
Despite recent advances in the implementation of Colombia’s frameworks for effective territorial development, 
challenges related to weak inter-institutional coordination at the territorial level and investment atomization continue.  
Thus, further efforts are needed to consolidate these reforms and address persistent regional inequalities in territorial 
development. As such, reforms under this pillar focus on strengthening the institutional framework for multi-level 
governance, enhancing coordination within and between regions, and incentivizing regional investments aimed at 
supporting strategic regional development needs. 


 
Pillar 2: Fostering Efficient Urban and Rural Land Markets - Rural and urban land markets in Colombia have operated 
inefficiently, in part due to the lack of reliable and current information about land parcel demarcation, land ownership, 
land prices and overall land economic potential. As a result, land disputes have multiplied exponentially, complicated by 
the country’s long civil conflict which impeded access to the entirety of the territory. The operation will support 
government policies to establish efficient land information systems and processes and more dynamic land management 
at the urban level. 
 
Pillar 3: Improving Public Management Capacity at the Subnational Level - The effectiveness of the Government’s 2018-
2022 NDP in achieving its regional development objectives will depend, to a great extent, on the capacity of subnational 
governments to effectively manage the underlying processes essential for operationalizing and implementing policy, as 
well as for the central government to effectively monitor the process and provide subnational entities with relevant 
incentives and support.  As such, the operation supports reforms that build on previous and existing efforts to strengthen 
institutional capacities in subnational governments.  
 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 

The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) will be organized around the pillars outlined in the DPF. In particular, the 
policies in Pillar 1 aimed at strengthening policies and institutions to enable integrated territorial development are 
expected to have positive effects on territorial management and planning at the subnational level, as well as on the 
enhancement of territorial development. The effects on welfare are likely to be mostly indirect and moderately positive 
overall, operating through a better provision of public services and local public goods. Actions under Pillar 2, supporting 
policies to improve the efficiency of rural and urban land markets are expected to have moderate positive effects in the 
long-run through tenure formalization, and the improvement of efficiency and performance of sub-national entities that 
could help to reduce socio-economic gaps. The impact on poverty and shared prosperity of policy actions under Pillar 3, 
aimed at supporting the strengthening of management capacity in the public sector at subnational level are expected to 
be positive; it will, however, depend on the way those savings will be allocated and the elasticity between local public 
investment and poverty. Further analysis and a more extensive literature review will take place as the team moves forward 
to determine the distributional impact of these prior actions. 
 
Environmental Impacts 
 

The policy actions supported by this operation will likely contribute to more adequate management of local resources and 
a better planning of territorial development, which, by way of integrating environmental preservation and conservation, 
can generate better contributions in information, institutional coordination and allocation of budgets for environmental 
management. To expand the coverage of cadastral information should contribute to increased tenure security and secure 
access of local communities to forest and natural resources and to strengthen local governments’ ability to generate 
resources, improve public service delivery, and potentially develop environmental enforcement capacity; those 
improvements can help to reduce illegal deforestation and degradation of rural landscapes, maintain vital ecosystems 
services, reduce greenhouse emissions, and improve agricultural productivity. Policies supporting strong environmental 
requirements for urban permits and urban land regulations could bring about climate change co-benefits in cities. The 
environmental analysis identified a potential risk for possible indirect negative environmental effects from some policies 
supported under the DPF, which are not considered to be significant, as long as government applies existing environmental 
legislation and best practices.  
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2020 | Report No: PIDA29255 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uruguay P172796 
UY - COVID-19 Response & 
Economic Recovery 
(P172796) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

18-Jun-2020 
Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Oriental Republic of Uruguay Ministry of Economy and Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating the 
economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic 
recovery.  
 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 

SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
 

 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate 

   
B. Introduction and Context  
 
Country Context  
 

1. The COVID-19 outbreak is expected to push Uruguay’s economy into a recession for the first time in two 
decades. Over the past years, real GDP growth had been on a downward trend, declining from 4.6 percent in 2013 to 0.2 
percent in 2019, the lowest level since 2002. Prior to the outbreak, it was expected that this trend would be reversed in 
2020 as result of the implementation of the new Government’s reform agenda as well as the prospect of large 
infrastructure investments associated with a paper mill project of historic proportions coming on stream. The economic 
fallout resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak has changed this scenario dramatically. Total exports contracted y-o-y by 
10.9 percent1 as early as February, due to a drastic drop in exports to China, Uruguay’s largest trading partner. The 
domestic lockdown mandated in March then triggered a sharp decline in economic activity, affecting both demand and 
supply. Real GDP growth projections are nearly 6 percentage lower than they were at the beginning of 2020; they are 
projected to register at -3.7 percent, from an originally projected growth of 2.0 percent.  

 
2. The economic fallout will result in a significant increase in poverty and will generate an enormous strain for 
many Uruguayan families, with children and youth being particularly vulnerable to the shock.  Although the Government 
swiftly adopted emergency measures to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable, building on existing social safety nets 
and adding temporary measures to expand the protection to those that do not qualify to existing programs, notably 
informal workers, Bank staff estimate that poverty will increase from 8.8 percent in 2019 to 11.8 percent in 2020, 
annihilating the major progress witnessed over the past decade. This is due to the economic impact of the pandemic 
layered over the effects of the drop in agricultural productivity from the drought as well as contagion from both 
Argentina’s economic crisis and Brazil’s recession. The increase in the poverty incidence translates into 106,000 additional 
people falling into poverty, disproportionately affecting households with children. Afro-descendants (1 in every 5 people 
in the poorest decile) and informal workers (7 in every 10 workers in the poorest decile) are disproportionately exposed 
to the shock. People in the bottom 40 percentile of the income distribution face higher risks of unemployment and labor 
income losses and make up a disproportionally large share of the workforce in the sectors most affected by the crisis, such 
as retail and hospitality. The expected increase in poverty incidence and severity threatens to erode human capital with 
lasting negative effects, and to raise concerns about perpetuation of disadvantages and social exclusion which stands in 
contrast to Uruguay’s societal preference for equity and social cohesion.  
 
3. To spur a strong economic recovery, Uruguay will have to set the foundations for a robust growth trajectory, 
notably by strengthening policies and institutions to enhance resilience to different types of shocks. The unprecedented 
economic shock caused by the COVID-19 outbreak is hitting Uruguay at the time of multiple risks pressing on the economy. 
First, Uruguay is confronting an increasingly adverse regional economic scenario, notably the protracted economic crisis 
and high market volatility in Argentina. Second, Uruguay is faced with a growing exposure to climate variability that is 
putting at risks major sectors of its economy, particularly agriculture. The different risk dimensions - health, fiscal and 
environmental - are mutually reinforcing and have the potential to create a “perfect storm” for the Uruguayan economy. 
The COVID-19 outbreak highlights the need for a more comprehensive and integrated approach to risk management, at 
the core of which is restoring prudent fiscal policy making. In order to put the economy back on a strong recovery path, 
the new authorities will need to embark on their ambitious medium-term reform program once the crisis abates, with a 
focus on the following dimensions: (i) fiscal consolidation, (ii) development of the private sector and (ii) resilience to 
climate and weather-related shocks.  
 

 
1 Although exports began to recover in March (in line with the rebound in industrial activity in China), they still were 23 percent lower than in 
March 2019. 


Relationship to CPF 
 

4. The proposed operation is fully aligned with the 2016-20 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), and the 2018 
PLR, notably as it supports Uruguay in “building resilience to shocks.” The 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) had 
identified the need to “build resilience to face economic volatility and extreme weather events” as one of the three main 
challenges for Uruguay. Accordingly, the first of the CPF’s two Focus Areas is dedicated to “building resilience to shocks.” 
This operation responds to the immediate needs to cushioning the impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable 
workers and firms (Pillar 1) and lays the ground for a strong recovery (Pillar 2), through enhanced resilience to future 
shocks. The SCD update, currently under preparation, deepens the analysis of the vulnerability of the Uruguayan economy 
to multiple, reinforcing shocks (i.e. fiscal/financial, sanitary and environmental) and identifies key institutional weaknesses 
in this regard.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
5. The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating 
the economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient 
economic recovery.  
 
Key Results  

 
6. Following corporate guidance on new IBRD financing for countries with an income above the Graduation 
Discussion Income (GDI), this operation addresses critical institutional shortcomings. At the core of the operation are 
policy and institutional reforms that will lay the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery, notably through 
enhancing resilience to multiple shocks. It supports measures that aim at mitigating the economic shock caused by COVID-
19, helping weather the impact on public finances, and restoring a robust fiscal outlook in the medium term. The operation 
thereby also contributes to safeguarding access to external capital markets on reasonable terms, an additional key feature 
of corporate guidance on GDI countries. This is critical given that the COVID-19 crisis has rendered access to sovereign 
financing more challenging for emerging economies, including Uruguay. Uruguay is currently rated just above the 
investment grade2, with a negative outlook in recognition of its large fiscal consolidation needs in a time of economic 
downturn. In addition, through its objective of enhancing resilience of the economy against climate shocks, the operation 
supports the provision of regional and global public goods.   
 

D. Project Description   

7. The proposed DPL is a stand-alone operation aimed at mitigating the economic and social impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak and improving policies and institutions for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The policy matrix of 
the operation includes key priorities in the Government’s emergency response to the COVID-19 crisis and in the medium-
term reform program. The first pillar is focused on supporting efforts to cushion the expected strong social and economic 
impact of the crisis, with a focus on the most vulnerable households and firms that would otherwise by financially viable. 
The second pillar is reflective is reflective of the ambitious medium-term reform commitments of the Government to 
support a strong and resilient economic recovery through: (i) instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal 
and debt sustainability, (ii) improving business climate for private sector development, (iii) enhancing disaster and 
environmental risk management and, (iv) transforming agricultural production towards higher resilience to climate 
change and increased productivity.  

 
2 Uruguay’s sovereign credit rating, according to Fitch, is the lowest possible rating within the creditworthiness band, i.e., BBB- with a negative 
outlook. The other two major credit rating agencies place Uruguay at BBB. 


 
8. The proposed DPF will support important reforms along two pillars:  
 

• Pillar 1 of this operation aims at supporting a series of temporary countercyclical measures to protect the most 
vulnerable and avoid the destruction of productive assets in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. These measures 
include: (i) the enactment of a series of countercyclical measures, including the creation of the COVID-19 Fund to 
swiftly respond to the sanitary crisis (PA#1), (ii) the strengthening of three important social assistance programs to 
(partially) offset temporary income losses of lower income groups (PA#2), (iii) the creation of a temporary 
unemployment insurance scheme to protect workers against effects of lay-offs or partial suspensions (PA#3), (iv) the 
strengthening of the institutional response to the expected rise of violence in the context of the COVID-19 quarantine 
(PA#4), and (v) the adoption of emergency measures to support access to finance for MSMEs (PA#5). In the 
presentation of these emergency measures, the Government emphasized their temporary and countercyclical nature 
and committed to rolling them back once the crisis will have passed.  

 

• Pillar 2 of this operation aims at laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The COVID-19 
outbreak brings to the fore how the deteriorating fiscal position over the past years has limited the scope of a 
countercyclical fiscal crisis response. The Government is committed to reversing the trend of rising fiscal deficits and 
debt levels by instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal and debt sustainability and allows for 
conducting countercyclical policies in times of economic downturns. This agenda is at the heart of the medium-term 
reform program, as reflected in the Urgent Reform Bill, and will be implemented in full once recovery sets in. The 
commitment to fiscal consolidation has already manifested itself by measures adopted soon after the Government 
started its mandate, such as the elimination of certain tax expenditures in VAT (as reflected under the PA#6). Pillar 2 
also reflects the Government’s commitment to continue advancing on structural reforms for private sector 
development and on institutional strengthening for better protection of the economy against climate-related shocks. 
Both agendas were initiated under the previous Government and have been endorsed by the current administration 
as critical foundations for a dynamic and sustainable recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government will 
pursue a broader reform effort aimed at improving Uruguay’s regulatory environment, such as by easing requirements 
and costs for firm registration (PA#7). Uruguay also needs to strengthen its capacity to shelter its economy against 
climate variability to avoid jeopardizing its recovery post-COVID. Addressing disaster and environmental risks is by 
nature a complex and multi-sectoral endeavor, transmitting through various channels to the entire economy, and 
requires differentiated yet coordinated interventions at various levels of government. In this sense, the operation 
supports the institutional strengthening of the emergency response system, with enhanced coordination (both 
horizontal and vertical) between public and private stakeholders (PA#8) as well as the transformation of the 
agriculture model that increases resilience to climate variability, while enhancing productivity (PA#9). 

 

E. Implementation  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

 
9. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will be the main responsible agency for the monitoring, evaluation, 
and results framework and will coordinate actions across relevant ministries and agencies involved in the operation. 
The agencies responsible for the implementation of the prior actions supported by the operation include: (i) Pillar 1: 
Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), Ministry of Labor and Social Security (MLSS), Ministry of Public Health (MPH), 
National Institute for Women (InMujeres) and MEF; (ii) Pillar 2: MEF, SINAE and Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MGAP). The World Bank will be monitoring the implementation of the DPF program through regular supervision 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 6 of 8  

     

missions. The World Bank will maintain close dialogue with counterparts throughout preparation and collaborate with 
MEF for the monitoring of indicators.  
 

F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 
10. The policy measures supported by this DPF series are aimed at mitigating the short-term social and economic 
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the most vulnerable, while implementing structural reforms aiming at building 
enhanced resilience to multiple shocks (sanitary, fiscal and environmental). As such, the overall reform package 
supported is expected to contribute to mitigating the effects of the pandemic shock on the poor, both directly through 
strengthening the social safety net, but also by facilitating a faster and more sustainable recovery. By strengthening the 
social protection systems, the policy program under the first pillar is expected to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 
shock on the most vulnerable by providing emergency relief as part of a time-bound countercyclical economic stimulus 
package. Policies supported under the second pillar of the operation are aimed at strengthening the foundations for a 
strong economic recovery with an emphasis placed on enhancing institutional capacities in reducing the country’s 
exposure to future shocks, which tend to affect disproportionally the most vulnerable groups of the society. 

 

Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 

11. The policies supported under Pillar 1 of this DPL are not likely to cause significant negative effects on the 
environment, forests, or other natural resources. The policies supported under the second pillar of this operation aim at 
strengthening the foundations for private sector development and are expected to increase overall economic activity. 
Spurring economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic does not imply a relaxation of environmental standards, given 
the strong environmental management framework in Uruguay. The adoption of a policy on emergency and disaster risk 
management and institutional strengthening of the National Emergency System-SINAE (PA#8) is expected to reduce 
adverse impact to the environment including degradation of natural resources and the human urban environment from 
exposure to disease and effects of infrastructure loss. The adoption of the national plan of adaptation to climate 
variability and climate change (PA#9) is expected to have significant positive environmental effects.  
 
12. Uruguay has a strong legislative and regulatory framework and relatively effective public-sector environmental 
agencies. The limited negative environmental effects that could result from the operation will be well managed and 
mitigated by the existing laws and regulations. Agencies such as the DINAMA and DINAGUA and DIGESA (under the 
Ministry of Health) provide oversight and regular monitoring of environmental indicators, especially pollution. 
Environmental impact assessment and licensing has been a requirement since 1994 (Ley 16,466) and is considered among 
the top ranked countries based on environmental performance.3 

 

G. Risks and Mitigation 
 

13. The overall risk to achieving the PDO is assessed as Moderate. Given the severe economic impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak around the globe, the macroeconomic risk is rated as Substantial: if the projected recovery path that foresees 
a return to positive growth rates at end-2020 does not materialize, the country may be stretched beyond its fiscal capacity 
to support the businesses and households affected by the crisis. The temporary COVID-19 response measures supported 
through this operation would help the economy withstand the shock, while the medium-term institutional and policy 
reforms also contained in the policy matrix will be critical for embarking as swiftly as possible on a sustained recovery 


trajectory. The risks related to Sector Strategies and Policies are rated Substantial because the timing of this operation, 
(prepared shortly after the new Government took up its mandate, as well as the enormous amount of personal and 
financial resources needed to respond to the COVID-19 crisis) may affect the ability to implement effectively the measures 
contained in the policy matrix and meet the result targets. These risks are however mitigated by supporting through this 
operation the reforms falling under the Government’s priority areas, as set by the COVID-19 response package and policy 
package put forward in the Urgent Reform Bill. The risk categories for the Technical Design of the Program, Institutional 
Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability and Stakeholders are rated as Moderate. In terms of technical design and 
institutional capacity, Uruguay has a strong track record in terms of implementing programs, and a long trajectory of 
successful DPL programs with the Bank and similar programs with other IFIs. On risks related to Stakeholders, the DPL 
series supports further strengthening of the policies underpinning this social contract, notably those captured under Pillar 
1.  . 
    

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC223395 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Nigeria P174114  NIGERIA: COVID-19 
Action Recovery and 
Economic Stimulus 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

AFRICA WEST 14-Sep-2020 15-Oct-2020 Yes 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

International Economic 
Relations Department of 
Federal Ministry of Finance 

Federal Project Support Unit Social Protection & 
Jobs 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic 
activity in all participating states across Nigeria 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 770.00 

Total Operation Cost 770.00 

Total Program Cost 750.00 

IPF Component 20.00 

Total Financing 750.00 

Financing Gap 20.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 750.00 

     World Bank Lending 750.00 
 


Concept Review Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

     
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. This program document outlines a proposed Program-for-Results (PforR) operation in the amount of US$750 
million to support the States of the Federal Government of Nigeria in their efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic on the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households and microenterprises in the country. The proposed 
PforR is an emergency operation designed to support budgeted program of expenditures and interventions at the State 
level targeting existing and newly vulnerable and poor households, agricultural value chains, and micro and small 
enterprises affected by the economic crisis. The operation provides financial support to the States to fulfill program 
objectives in four key results areas: (i) strengthening institutional support for coordination and delivery; (ii) increasing 
cash transfers and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; (iii) increasing food security and safe 
functioning of food supply chains for poor households; and (iv) preventing collapse and facilitating recovery of 
household/micro enterprises. It is fully aligned with the forthcoming World Bank 2020–24 Country Partnership 
Framework for Nigeria, as well as Nigeria’s Economic Reform and Growth Plan for 2017–20 and the National Economic 
Council’s COVID-19 action plan.1   
 
Country Context 
 

2. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, poverty and vulnerability levels were already high in Nigeria. Measured 

using the national poverty line, the poverty rate in 2018/19 was 40 percent nationally, with poverty rates significantly 

higher in rural areas (52 percent) compared to urban areas (18 percent).2 Geographically, all three Northern regions have 

higher poverty rates compared to the Southern regions. The poverty rate in the North East (70.2 percent) is more than 

seven times higher than in the South West (9.7 percent). In addition to 40 percent of the population who fall below the 

poverty line, additional 25 percent of Nigerians are vulnerable to falling back into poverty in 2018/19.3 In the North East 

and North West, most individuals are either poor or vulnerable. Besides monetary poverty, Nigeria ranked sixth lowest 

globally in the World Bank’s Human Capital Index in 2018, with one in every three children under the age of five suffering 

from chronic malnutrition. In 2018, 63 percent of children in the poorest quintile were stunted compared to 18 percent 

in the richest quintile and only 29 percent of primary school age children from the poorest quintile were in school 

(adjusting for attendance) compared to 89 percent from the richest quintile, starkly highlighting the fact that the human 

capital indicators were far worse for the poorest segment of the population compared to the averages. The COVID-19 

crisis strikes at a time when Nigerian youth were already facing severe lack of job opportunities, with overall 

unemployment increasing from 8 percent in 2015 to 23 percent in 2018.4  

 

3. COVID-19 is expected to negatively affect economic growth in Nigeria, primarily due to the steep fall in global 
oil prices. Nigeria enjoyed relatively high and stable economic growth from 2000-2014, before the country went into a 
recession following the oil-price shock in late-2014. Growth averaged 6.1 percent between 2000-2014 before dropping 
below 3 percent in 2015 and turning negative in 2016. Nigerian economy has been recovering slowly since with the uptick 
in oil prices, but growth has stayed below 3 percent in subsequent years. As Nigeria’s economy and the government’s 
finances are highly dependent on revenues from sales of crude oil, current projections estimate the Nigerian economy to 
contract by at least 3 percent in 2020, due to the fall in oil prices caused by COVID-19.5  It is further expected that 
consolidated government revenues will fall by US$ 12 billion (3 percent of GDP) or more, severely constraining the 
government’s ability to respond to the crisis and at a time when fiscal resources are urgently needed to protect the poor 
and vulnerable from the negative impact of COVID-19. 
 
4. While the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases have grown slowly in Nigeria compared to the West, it is already 
having a severe impact on the lives and livelihoods of Nigerians. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the Nigerian 
government had previously announced total lockdowns in urban centers in Lagos, Ogun, and Abuja. The prolonged month-
long lockdown severely impacted informal firms and workers in urban areas first before impacting rural areas, where many 
of Nigeria’s poor reside. An economic crisis such as the one caused by COVID-19 could push large segments of non-poor 
households back into poverty. With economic growth expected to decline by at least 3 percent in 2020, the poverty 
headcount rate is estimated to increase from 40.1 percent in 2019 to 42.5 percent in 2020 and will continue to rise absent 
any change in government policy. By 2022, the forecasts suggest that almost 100 million Nigerians will be below the 
poverty line, an additional 16.4 million poor people compared with today, which arises from both the rising poverty rate 
and natural population growth. While only 15.9 percent of the current poor are urban dwellers, 29.9 percent of the new 
poor in 2020 are predicted to be in urban areas. It is expected that consumption will fall across the distribution, leading 
to a rise in the poverty headcount rate and increase in the poverty gap index.  
 
5. The Government of Nigeria has taken important measures to stop the spread of COVID-19 and has put in place 
measures to cushion the poor and vulnerable against the negative impact of the crisis. A fiscal stimulus package in the 
form of a COVID-19 intervention fund of N500 billion (US$1.4 billion), has been approved by the President to support 
healthcare facilities, provide relief for taxpayers, and incentivize employers to retain and recruit staff during the downturn. 
Regulated fuel prices have been reduced, and an automatic fuel price formula introduced to ensure fuel subsidies are 
eliminated. The President also ordered an increase of the social register by 1 million households to 3.6 million to help 
cushion the effect of the lockdown. The Central Bank has instituted a N50 billion targeted credit facility for households 
and Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) that have been affected by COVID-19. The president also approved the 
establishment of a N500 billion COVID-19 crisis intervention fund while the restructuring of the Treasury Single Account 
(‘TSA’) is in progress to better mobilize cash donations from people and corporate bodies across the country. 
 

Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 
 

 
6. The proposed PforR is part of a broader emergency package offered by the World Bank Group, which is 

anchored by the key measures taken by the government, and complemented by support from other development 

partners, to put in place measures to respond to the pandemic. The Government of Nigeria is establishing a multi-

faceted economic, fiscal and health response to COVID-19 at the federal and state level and has requested a significant 

package of support from the World Bank. Based on request from the Federal Ministry of Finance, Budget and Planning, 

the World Bank is preparing a multi-pronged package of support of between USD 2.5 billion and USD 3 billion over the 

 

next six months, which includes the Nigeria CARES PforR. The broader support package includes programs designed to: 

(i) Contain the COVID-19 outbreak and prepare for a more severe outbreak (REDISSE); (ii) Immediate fiscal relief for the 

federal government (CoFFER) and funding to protect core government functions to the State level (SFTAS); and (iii) 

Support for protecting livelihoods, local economic activity, and enabling recovery (CARES and NAASP).  

 
 
7. Existing social safety nets programs can be leveraged to mitigate the effect of COVID-19 on vulnerable groups 
but the targeting mechanisms needs to be expanded and adapted to capture the people who will be vulnerable due to 
the COVID-19.  A total of more than 5.4 million Nigerians (adults and children) have benefited from existing social safety 
net interventions (Cash Transfer, Public Workfare, Special Grants to Vulnerable and Skills for Job). However, identification 
of the poor in Nigeria remains challenging due to the inadequacy of data. Multiple definitions of poverty and vulnerability 
and lack of clarity on welfare measures adds to existing challenges. In recent times, the State Social Registry and the 
National Social Registry of poor and vulnerable households have been established under the World Bank financed Youth 
Employment and Social Support Operation6 and National Social Safety Nets Project (NASSP)7 using a combined 
geographical and community-based identification and targeting system verified through proxy means testing to rank 
households. The state level registry that started in 2016 has limited coverage in many of the urban locations. There is a 
renewed effort to rapidly expand the coverage of the registries and use other objective criteria of vulnerability to capture 
the new poor especially in urban areas.  The newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and 
Social Development is planning to provide the appropriate platform for interagency collaboration. The new National Living 
Standard Survey 2018/19, provides an opportunity to validate and strengthen the social registries at State and National 
level and to ensure harmonization with other existing beneficiary registries.  
 
8. The Community and Social Development Project supports the empowerment of communities and vulnerable 
groups within communities to develop, implement, and monitor social infrastructure service micro-projects (such as in 
basic services – health, education, water, roads, skills centers, among others) and natural resource management 
interventions. It also strengthens the capacity of local government authorities, LGAs and sectoral public agencies to 
support communities and build a partnership between them. The CSDP is currently managed at the State level by State 
Agencies established by Law of the States. 30 States of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory are participating 
in the project. Kaduna State has just established its own Community and Social Development Agencies CSDA. Delta and 
Rivers has CDD/PIUs imbedded in relevant Ministries that operates like CSDAs and supported by SEEFOR -a World Bank 
assisted project in the Niger Delta.  Only Lagos, Kano and Jigawa are not participating in CSDP but do have community 
engagement agencies and departments. There is a Federal Project Support unit responsible for coordination, technical 
support, monitoring and evaluation and finance resources mobilization and management. A total of 4,600 Community 
Development plans and over 600 Group Development Plans are now approved and funded as of December 2019.  The 
North East States continued to improve on the number of CDPs and GDPs. Over 2 million people are benefiting from the 
CSDP interventions in the North East while across all the participating state, well over 7 million individuals are benefiting 
from CSDP as of December 2019.  
 

 
6 YESSO a State level Social Safety Net Operation started the State Social Registry in 2015 from a USD 400m IDA credit. It also supports 3 major 
interventions at the State level- Pubic workfare, Special Grants to the Internally Displaced persons in North East and the Aged and physically 
challenged, and Skills for Job. It is closing in June 2020. 
7 NASSP, through its exiting budget available from the IDA of USD 500 million and USD 321 million from the government through Abacha Restituted 
Fund, will be scaled up horizontally and vertically to support the existing 1 million poor and vulnerable households (over 5 million people) currently 
benefiting from CCT and will enroll additional 1 million poor and vulnerable households (5 million people) from the National Social Registry to 
receive Cash Transfer support for at least 1 year to cushion the impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable households.  



 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 6 of 11  

     

9. The National Fadama Development Project is a state-level intervention coordinated by the Federal 
Government. Beginning in 1990 with a pilot agricultural project (Fadama I) designed to bring basic irrigation and 
productive support to farmers in selected Nigerian states, the Fadama series have evolved through two subsequent 
innovative and adaptive pro-jects (Fadama II and III) that are now well established nationally. Fadama II, launched in 2003, 
introduced a groundbreaking Community-Driven Development (CDD) model to Nigeria’s rural areas and helped 
institutionalized local stakeholder engagement in community decision making. Since 2009 when Fadama III series 
commenced, it has contributed to the Government of Nigeria’s development objectives and policy in terms of gross 
domestic product, food security, rural development, and employment generation. Cassava farmers under Fadama III, and 
it’s two additional Financing Facilities realized more than N20.6 billion as revenue and a gross margin of N13 billion in 
2019. Similarly, rice, sorghum and tomato farmers realized gross margin of N104.4 billion, N60.9 billion and N19.2 billion 
respectively during the project’s life span. The project performance evaluation report showed that 100 percent of the 
beneficiaries have increased their real income by at least 40%. Yield rose from a baseline of 5.27t/ha to 25.34t/ha for 
cassava (380.83%), 2.83t/ha to 4.93t/ha for rice (74.2%), 1.54t/ha to 2.4t/ha for sorghum (55.84%), and 1.6t/ha to 
30.44t/ha for tomato (1,802.5%).  
 
10. The Fadama structure has been successfully deployed to provide solutions to national challenges, including 
delivering inputs and services to farmers, investing in various types of productive agricultural infrastructure and assets, 
improving food supply chains in underserved areas, and supporting programs to increase employment of graduate 
youths. Specifically, the project had, in 2017 competitively empowered 6,916 unemployed youth and women graduates 
who indicated interest in becoming agricultural entrepreneurs. Fadama project has proved to be a reliable platform for 
implementing rural based intervention and activities that could target the poor and the vulnerable with sufficient national 
spread and capacity. There is a National Fadama Coordinating Unit responsible for coordination, technical support, 
monitoring and evaluation to the State Level operation.  A total of 18,650 Business Plans have been prepared and over 
220,551 farmers across 19,469 production groups in 3,051 Production Clusters have received various trainings.  In the 
Conflict affected North East region, Fadama has helped to restore the livelihoods (crops, livestock, fisheries, and non-
agricultural enterprises) of 32,480 farming households with 950,400 man-days of work provided to the beneficiaries. Over 
1,218,824 people have benefited from the Fadama interventions across the country.  
 
11. In many of the States there are SME support Agencies of the State Government and also Ministries of Commerce 
and Industry as well as Ministries of Cooperatives with programs and initiatives on promotion and facilitation of 
household enterprises (micro and small). Some of the Ministry, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) provide small loans 
and grants to registered businesses. Registration and regulations of local firms and enterprises are also managed by the 
MDAs. At the Federal level there is the Government Enterprise and Empowerment Program (GEEP) initiative administered 
by the Bank of Industry exist in all 36 States of the Federation and FCT. The GEEP provides loans of between ₦10,000 ($28) 
and ₦300,000 ($835) to traders, artisans, enterprising youth, and farmers. The program commenced in 2016 and has 
empowered 2.2 million such micro-enterprises with interest-free loans to grow their businesses up to date, making it the 
largest public microcredit program. The majority of these micro-enterprises are in over 2,100 clusters and markets across 
all 36 states of Nigeria, and the capital. As of today, about 5 million GEEP candidates are connected to the Consolidated 
Beneficiary Register for the National Social Investment Program. The number is growing. Candidates can also be served 
on other programs i.e. school feeding, cash transfers, etc. The GEEP program has over 4,300 local agents nationwide to 
verify beneficiaries and perform credit check before loans are disbursed to the beneficiaries’ mobile wallet. Funds can be 
cashed out with minimal intermediation to reduce transaction costs and fraud. The program, in addition to provide quick 
financial intermediation to the needed enterprises, can also serve in more data capture.  Partnership between state MDAs 
supporting household enterprises (micro and small) and GEEP can be a veritable mechanism especially at this time when 
local economy is at the mercy of the health crisis and the economic downturn. 
 



Relationship to CAS/CPF 
 
12. The proposed PforR supports the World Bank Group’s Nigeria CPF for 2020-24 and is aligned with the framework 
of support proposed by the World Bank Africa region and the WBG Social Response Framework. The CPF reflects 
Nigeria’s aspiration for faster, more inclusive, and sustained economic growth in the next decade to help the government 
in its ambition to lift 100 million people out of poverty. This PforR directly supports the CPF’s Pillars on “Investing in human 
capital and social inclusion”, “Fostering Jobs and Economic Transformation”, and “Reducing fragility and building 
resilience”. More specifically, the PFORR: (i) enables the States to continue to build and expand their social protection 
systems to strengthen safety nets and basic services; (ii) prevents disruptions and job losses in agricultural supply chains 
by supporting linkages between farmers and markets; and (iii) helps micro and small enterprises wither the impact of the 
economic crisis by providing support in the form of credits and grants. The PFORR also addresses priorities outlined in the 
2019 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Nigeria by averting further erosion of human capital, supporting private firms and 
microenterprises to stay afloat, and continuing the provision of basic services to the most vulnerable groups. The PFORR 
is also fully aligned with the Africa region’s framework of protecting lives, livelihoods, and the future to address the 
pandemic and the multifaceted action plan proposed in the WBG Social Response Framework of saving lives, protecting 
the poor and vulnerable, securing jobs and the economy, and accelerating a resilient recovery. 
 
Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument 
 

13. The PforR instrument allows the States to access funds for budgeted programs of expenditures and comes at a 
time when the decline in revenues threatens the ability of the government to respond to the crisis. Unprecedented 
decline in oil prices (70 percent since the start of the crisis) has constrained the government’s ability to respond to the 
crisis. 80 percent of Nigeria’s exports, 30 percent of banking-sector credit, and 50 percent of general government revenues 
rely on sales of crude oil. Much of the nonoil industrial and services sectors also rely on foreign-exchange inflows 
generated by the oil industry. With the Nigerian economy expected to contract 5 percentage points below the pre-COVID 
19 economic growth forecast, States will require substantial funds to quickly and effectively respond to the crisis. Some 
of the ₦500 billion funds allocated as the federal government’s fiscal stimulus package will be implemented at the State 
level and would need to be reflected in the State government’s budget. As the PforR is designed for a 2-year emergency 
response, using and strengthening existing programs and platforms also has the added benefit of building capacity of 
those platforms to ensure sustainability beyond the duration of the program. The PforR aims to build strong coordination 
mechanisms between the Federal and State level of the government. Strong level of Federal oversight and support could 
help States lagging in capacity to implement programs to protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable 
households and facilitate recovery of local economic activities.  The PforR instrument also allows states to quickly access 
funds using existing government programs and systems, reducing the transaction processes. Finally, the program is 
designed to disburse against tangible results and provides flexibility to the States to achieve the results that are best suited 
to their needs.  
 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
Program Development Objective(s) 

 
To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic activity 
in all participating states across Nigeria 
 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 



14. To achieve the development objective, the proposed Program would include the following four result areas: 
  

a. Increased social transfers, basic services, and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; 
b. Increasing food security and safe functioning of food supply chains for poor households; 
c. Facilitating recovery and enhancing capabilities of micro and small enterprises (MSEs); 
d. Strengthened institutional support for coordination and delivery; 

 
Figure 1: Proposed Project Development Objective and Program Results Areas for CARES 

 
 
D. Program Description 

 
PforR Program Boundary 

 
15. Results Area 1 aims to address the immediate needs of poor and vulnerable households by providing income 

and consumption support and access to basic services.  Through this results area, the program will support existing 
platforms that provide social transfers to vulnerable groups including the aged, disabled, and chronically ill and support 
income generating opportunities of economically active poor and vulnerable households through cash transfers and labor-
intensive public works. Existing programs that provide services to poor and vulnerable communities through funding of 
basic social and economic infrastructure microprojects will also be eligible for funding support. Selected programs must 
provide clear and measurable criteria to evaluate results that contribute to improved consumption and welfare of poor 
and vulnerable households. 

 
results area, the P4R will support existing platforms that support poor and vulnerable households to increase production 
of food, maintain economic activities along food value chains, and enable safe access to food markets as buyers or sellers. 
The immediate needs to support agricultural livelihoods could include distribution of inputs, provision of services 
(extension, mechanization, animal services), farm agricultural assets, replacement of small ruminants, etc. Similarly, the 
future capacity to produce food could be supported through small-scale irrigation infrastructure, on-farm soil conservation 
measures, etc. Investments to increase food accessibility in future could be supported through sanitary infrastructure in 
wet markets, feeder roads to enable access to markets, increased capacity for small-scale processing, among others. The 
selected program areas must provide clear and measurable results that contribute to increasing food availability, 
accessibility and utilization and can be generated within the 18-24 months’ timeframe. 

 
17. Results Area 3 will support Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) intervention programs and initiatives at Sub-

National level in Nigeria. Leveraging existing State-level MSE platforms, the program will support initiatives that eases 
financial constraints on MSEs, provide financing to support operational expenses of existing MSEs to cover a portion of its 
operational cost including salaries of permanent staff and rental expenses, and invest in MSEs’ infrastructure and IT 
(digital) development. Existing platforms that support both formal and informal firms will be eligible. However, targeting 
mechanisms will be supported to identify vulnerable and viable firms with clear timeline to phase out in order to maximize 
the fungibility of the financing resources. 
 
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 
 

18. Based on current available information in terms of the scope of the Program, no high Environmental and Social 
risks are anticipated due to proposed program activities. In terms of potential environmental impacts, there could be 
risk of waste management, soil and ground water contamination, pest management, construction related risk and impacts 
including capacity to manage the grant component for MSMEs. There could be moderate risks and impacts posed due to 
small scale land acquisition causing resettlement during rehabilitation / construction of secondary / tertiary irrigation 
canals; rehabilitation of tertiary roads; rehabilitation / construction of agricultural warehouse; upgrading of sanitary 
infrastructures in wet markets. These infrastructure activities could also pose labor risks, GBV and community health risks 
when contractors/labor force are brought into remote areas for certain project activities including potential cumulative 
impacts. These will be further reviewed and assessed during the Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) 
that would be prepared prior to appraisal. This current rating would be adjusted accordingly as additional information 
becomes available and based on the outcomes of the ESSA assessment.   
 
 . . 
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60  

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component 
 




