























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 
 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 1 of 23  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA24795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P164297 CHAD Skills Development 
for Youth Employability 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 15-May-2019 20-Jun-2019 Education 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministere de l'Education 
Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, 
Ministere de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des 
Petits Metiers, Ministere 
de l'Economie et de la 
Planificatin du 
Developpement 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to (i) improve access to skills training and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries; and (ii) strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 

 
Components 

Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 
Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities 
Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 
Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 

          IDA Grant 50.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Chad is sparsely populated, with only 13 million people, and vast in size (being more than 1 million km²). 
It is a low-income country, with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of about US$823 in 2018, and, has 
among the lowest human development indicators in the world. The country is divided into 23 regions located in 
three main geographical zones: a desert zone in the north, an arid Sahelian belt in the center, and a more fertile 
Sudanese savanna zone in the south. It faces adverse climate conditions including prolonged droughts in some 
areas and yearly flows in others, as well as wind erosion, and desertification, leading to recurrent food crises, as 
well as population displacement. Combined with security risks due to political instability and transit through Chad 
by terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, and al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), as well as an uptick in 
migration, urban populations are projected to reach nearly 6 million by 2030, or 27 percent of the total population. 
Chad is home to an estimated 450,000 displaced people, the large majority of which are refugees1.  
 

2. The economy is largely dominated by agriculture and extractive industries, mainly oil. However, the 
recent fall in oil prices has had a dramatic impact on an economy in which oil accounted for 30 percent of total 
GDP and 70 percent of Government revenues in 2017. Almost half (47 percent) of the population was living under 
the national poverty line in 2011, the most recent year for which poverty numbers are available. The high level of 
poverty is accompanied by low human development, and Chad currently ranks 157 out of 157 in the recent World 
Bank Human Capital Index (HCI) with an index estimated at 0.29 meaning that Chad is losing 71 percent of its 
potential productivity. Life expectancy at birth is 51.9 years, expected years of schooling is 7.3 years, and mean 

                                                           
1 Based on the UNHCR definition refugees are people who are recognized as refugees under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, the 1969 Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of 
Refugee Problems in Africa, people recognized as refugees in accordance with the UNHCR statute, people granted refugee-like 
humanitarian status, and people provided temporary protection. Asylum seekers--people who have applied for asylum or refugee 
status and who have not yet received a decision or who are registered as asylum seekers--are excluded. Country of asylum is the 
country where an asylum claim was filed and granted. 



years of schooling stands at just 2.3 years. Education attainment is highly unequal with people in the wealthiest 
quintile having an average of 6.7 years of schooling, compared with 1.0 for those in the poorest quintile. 

 

3. Two thirds of the population are less than 25 years old and the proportion of young people will continue 
to increase dramatically in the coming years. Those under the age of 24 will continue to grow faster than the rest 
of the population through 2050 creating an even bigger “youth bulge.” The growing population and increasing 
dependency ratios are challenging for increasing employment, improving productivity, and adequately providing 
public services. The high population growth rate alone will result in extreme pressure on the health and education 
sectors, requiring a continuous increase in expenditures just to maintain coverage. The “youth bulge” will lead to 
a sharp rise in the number of young people seeking employment, and urbanization will push and increasing 
proportion of these youth to seek employment outside of the agricultural sector, though this increase is slow, and 
the majority will remain in informal work in agriculture.  

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Sector Context  

4. Low education and literacy levels are severe constraints to a productive labor force. The education 
system in Chad is subdivided into early childhood education (almost inexistent, gross enrolment rate (GER) of 2%), 
six years of primary education, four years of lower secondary education, three years of upper secondary 
education, and higher education. However, according to the DHS 2014-15, almost half (46 percent) of primary-
school-age children in Chad did not attend school. Stark gender and regional inequalities remain, with a gender 
parity rate at 0.75. For those who do attend school, low learning outcomes are a perennial challenge, with only 
15.7 percent of sixth graders equipped with sufficient competency in reading according to the 2014 PASEC results. 
The low supply of science and technology skills is particularly acute, with just 67 girls nationally enrolled in 
mathematics and science tracks in the last year of upper secondary – or 0.1 percent of the total baccalaureate 
candidates.  
 

5. While the unemployment rate for the working age population is low in Chad (as in other parts of SSA), 
the youth unemployment rate is notably higher. It was estimated at around 9 percent for both 2016 and 2017 
with young women more likely to be unemployed (at a rate of 10.6 percent). Comparatively, the working age 
population unemployment rate is estimated at 5.8 percent in 2017 up from 5.7 percent in 20162. Educated youth 
and youth in urban areas appear to be more likely to be unemployed, and if Chadians are working, the quality of 
their jobs tends to be low.  According to ECOSIT 3 data, more than 35 percent of the working age population is 
underemployed, especially in rural areas (36.4 percent, compared to 27.2 percent in urban areas). 

 

6. A high concentration of the labor force in self-employed informal and low-productivity operations. Most 
of the workers are in the informal sector which represents 95 percent of the workforce. Jobs in the informal sector 
are highly vulnerable, with low earnings, and low dependability. Even outside of agriculture, 60 percent of jobs 
are in the informal sector. Of the 400,000 informal establishments outside of agriculture, most are engaged in 
trade and repair of vehicles or equipment, followed by manufacturing of food and beverages.  As above, 
underemployment remains a major challenge. Within the informal sector 39.2 percent of the workers in the non-
agricultural sector are estimated to be underemployed vs. 40.2 percent for agricultural workers.  

 

                                                           
2 See World Development Indicators 2018.  

7. The agriculture sector employs 80 percent of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52 percent of 
GDP. It is also the second largest source of export income for the country after oil. The Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture with the aim of boosting exports to diversify the 
economy, but the sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather conditions3. Family 
farming often has low productivity and profitability and lacks resilience to shocks. While lack of equipment and 
technology contribute to low productivity and profitability, low education levels and lack of skills are also key 
determinants. Support for more productive self-employment and diversification of rural livelihoods is critical to 
supporting the high proportion of vulnerable rural Chadians.  

 

8. A multi-tier system of technical and vocational education and training (TVET) exists, with several 
institutions that focus on providing differing levels of skills but is complex and poorly coordinated. Students at 
the lower secondary level can seek a DFFTP (Diplôme de Fin de Formation Technique et Professionnelle) which is 
awarded after two years of vocational study at a technical college. Students who pass the exit examination at the 
end of the lower secondary cycle can also enroll in a three-year program taught in a lycée technique, leading to 
the degree of BT. Students who successfully complete middle school can also seek a BEP degree which can be 
obtained with two years of technical or vocational training in a college technique following successful completion 
of middle school. The technical and vocational education sector includes two industrial technical high schools, 
four industrial technical secondary schools, twenty-one high schools specialized in commerce. In addition to these 
institutions there are eighteen apprenticeship and training centers with varying levels of capacity, which tend to 
focus on shorter term training.  
 

9. Although TVET and skills development efforts are a critical pathway for improving the stock of skilled 
workers for market relevant jobs, the subsector has suffered from numerous challenges which undermine their 
potential. These include the following:    

 

(a) Unsustainable Funding.   Public technical and vocational training institutes receive funding from 
multiple resources, including a payroll tax on private businesses and a tax on foreign workers, but little 
coordination exists among these groups, and allocations do not rely on formal criteria related to needs or 
priorities. In many cases equipment, basic inputs such as electricity, raw materials, and ventilation are 
outdated or non-existent within centers. Further, centers lack autonomy, have no way to generate 
additional revenue, and lack basic governing procedures at the institutional level.  
(b) Low enrollment. TVET centers have extremely low absorptive capacity despite demand and do 
not make use of efficiency measures in scheduling and shifting to maximize space and enrollment. In the 
school year 2014 - 157,042 students were enrolled in technical colleges, and 1,039 in vocational schools. 
The majority of students (5,563 students or 78.3 percent) chose the technical commercial schools while 
the remaining 21.7 percent enrolled in the technical and industrial streams. Private institutions account 
for 27 percent of total enrollment. 
(c) Lack of diversity and access. Access is particularly limited for Chadians living in rural areas, as well 
as women both in rural and urban areas. Furthermore, inclusion measures for participants with 
disabilities, even very basic ones, do not exist within the centers. Just 1.5 percent of enrollment at the 
secondary level is occupied by rural Chadians, given that the centers are concentrated in major cities and 
there are few offerings focused on key sectors such as agriculture,4 and the female imbalance is acute 

                                                           
3 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) 2017.  
4 N’Djamena is home to 37 percent of the TVET institutions and 48 percent of the sector’s students. In Moundou, the country’s 
second largest city, these numbers stand at 9 percent and 18 percent respectively. 

(except for the commercial streams5. Girls accounted for only 5 percent of the total 2,518 enrollees in the 
industrial streams of the TVET institutions and there are extremely small numbers of female teachers and 
no female directors in any of the TVET institutions.6  
(d) Limited relevance and low quality. The key factors driving low quality are (i) program offerings 
do not appear to be driven by employment offerings and do not result in required skills for employment7; 
(ii) equipment is outdated or nonexistent, and hands-on application is often not possible; and (iii) poorly 
trained trainers and staff as well as outdated heavily theoretical curricula diminish the quality of training 
to students.   
(e) Lack of industry involvement. AFD is supporting development of standards which were previously 
non-existent or defunct, however there remains very little input from industry on training design. Further, 
for entrepreneurship and self-employment, even though these remain the main sources of employment. 

 

Institutional Context and Government Strategy  

 

10. The technical and vocational training sector is highly fragmented in terms of both service delivery and 
financing. At least seven ministries intervene in one way or another in the training sector. The three main 
ministries are (i) the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Commerce (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM); (ii) the Ministry of National Education and Civics Promotion 
(Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la Promotion Civique, MENPC); and (iii) the Ministry of Higher Education, 
Research and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche et de l’Innovation, MESRI). Each 
of these ministries manages training centers or schools which deliver diplomas or certificates to its graduates. 
However, many other ministries also manage training schools and centers in their specific sector without any 
relationship to the three major ministries. The Ministry of Civil Service, Labor, and Social Dialogue manages eight 
training centers and the Ministry of Agriculture has 35 centers. The Ministries of Health, Justice, Livestock, Post 
and Telecommunications, and Youth to name a few all manage technical and vocational centers.   
 

11. The National Development Plan (2017-2021), aims at developing Chad into an emerging regional 
country by 2030. It champions the four strategic objectives of (i) strengthening of national unity; (ii) strengthening 
good governance and the rule of law; (iii) the development of a diversified and competitive economy; and (iv) 
improving the quality of life of the Chadian population. As part of this approach, there is an emphasis on improved 
human capacity development and specifically improvement of technical and vocational education through 
Outcome 4.2.2 which stipulates that the actions planned to improve the sector are: (i) building the human and 
material capacities of institutes of technical education; (ii) improving governance of the sector; (iii) improving 
access to, and the fairness and quality of, technical training centers; and (iv) vocational training centers; and (v) 
building the capacities of human resources.  

 

12. President Idriss Deby, reiterated the importance of education and youth employment, following the 
new constitution, in a speech in May 2018, in which he presented the country’s commitment to human capital 
development. This includes significant education reforms which aim to connect education to the world of work, 

                                                           
5 Technical commercial streams graduate students in fields such as management, commerce, or business. 
6 According to 2017-18 institutional annual reports there was one female out of 26 teachers (or 3.8 percent) and 10 females out 

of 70 teachers (or 14.3 percent) in the TVET school of Moundou (CETIM) and N’Djamena (LETIN) respectively 

7 Opportunities in areas such as agriculture, forestry, and fishing, even though they are the main sub-sectors of employment are 
rarely offered.  

ensure that skills development of young people is responsive to the most pressing needs of the country especially 
in the critical sector of agriculture, and ensuring more and better job opportunities for young women and men.  

 

13. The specific policy objectives for Technical and Vocational training are further outlined in the 2017 
National Employment and Training Policy, and the 2014 Interim Strategy for TVET which is not yet validated. 
These strategic documents main objectives are to equip young and adult Chadians with the necessary skills to find 
decent jobs or create their own jobs in the growth sectors. To that end, the Government is cognizant of the 
necessity to reform the technical and vocational training sectors by improving its quality and creating stronger 
links with the private sector. The system will also need to improve its absorptive capacity to be able to train even 
a small share of the massive number of youths that will enter the labor market during the next decade, estimated 
at 2.5 million. Without comprehensive and profound reforms, the sector is very unlikely to be able to deliver the 
expected results. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve access to quality skills training; and labor market outcomes for 
project beneficiaries and to strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system in Chad 
 

Key Results 
 

Type Objective Indicator  

PDO Indicator 1 (core) Improve access to skills training for project 
beneficiaries  

Total beneficiaries of job focused 
intervetions (gender disaggregated)  

PDO Indicator 2  Improve labor market outcomes for project 
beneficiaries 

Share of beneficiaries of skills 
development programs who are 
employed within 6 months of 
completion 

PDO Indicator 3 Strengthen the technical and vocational 
education and training (TVET) system  

Number of CFTPs and TVET centers 
that have a functioning board of 
directors 

 
 
D. Project Description  

 
14. To improve skills, employability, employment prospects, and labor market outcomes for its youth Chad 
will need to adopt a multi-pronged strategy: (i) improve the quality of its general education especially the pre-
primary and primary cycles (PARSET2 is focused on primary education); (ii) improve the quality and relevance of 
its formal technical and professional skills formation system which will lead to higher quantity and better 
employability; and (iii) support the skills acquisition system for those in the informal sector or out-of-school. The 
project is designed to support these through four components. Component 1 will support the expansion of 
quality training opportunities by strengthening the public sector system, while Component 2 aims at improving 
the school to work transition for those in secondary technical or post-secondary education and bringing training 
opportunities to out-of-school youth and those living in rural areas. The main objective of Component 3 is to 


strengthen the governance of the TVET public system which will have medium to long term impacts on the 
system’s ability to deliver quality training and make quality improvements implemented by the project self-
sustaining. Lastly, component 4 will focus on the project management and instilling a culture of monitoring and 
evaluation.  

 

Component 1. Expanding Access to Skills through Improved Technical and Vocational Education 

(US$14.7 million) 

 

15. This component aims to improve access to training and improve the overall quality of vocational 
training to meet the needs of the of the Chadian economy in sectors with high labor potential. This objective 
will be achieved through two sub-components: i) creation of a new model Centre de Formation Technique et 
Professionnelle (Center of Technical and Professional Training -CFTP), including the construction of the CFTP and 
the development of new management and training methods; and (ii) the improvement of the quality and 
upgrading of existing technical and vocational secondary schools in the industrial stream (Collèges and Lycèes 
d’Enseignement Technique et Industriel, CETIN and LETIN). Youth aged 14-29 will be targeted who meet the 
qualifications for entry into the newly created and restructured institutions and will benefit at least 30 percent 
females.  
 

16. Component 1 will roll out a new institutional management and operations model which utilizes industry 
linkages and reorientation of the programs around labor insertion for graduates. This includes adopting sector 
specific curricula currently under development with support from AFD and in-depth training of school managers 
and trainers to upgrade quality of teaching and institutional management. To this end multi-year performance-
based contracts (PBCs) will be signed between the government and targeted institutions which incentivize 
improved relevance, quality, access, and employment outcomes. Greater autonomy of training institutions and 
several sector reforms are required to create an enabling environment for this results-based management and 
operations model, which will be supported under Component 3.  

 

Sub-component 1.1 Improving Access to Quality Skills through the Creation of a new CFTP and 

Expanded Opportunities through preexisting CFTPs (US$5.3 million) 

 

17. The construction of a new CFTP will be funded by the project. The new institution will incorporate the 
new pedagogical and management models including participation from the private sector. The site for the center 
will be X.  
 

18. The project will finance development of the PBC between the CFTP and Ministry which elaborate clear 
targets namely: (i) the establishment of a Board of Directors; (ii) a minimum private sector and civil society 
participation of 40 percent in the Board of Directors; (iii) number young people registered by specialty area; (iv) 
the share of girls enrolled; (v) the share of enrollees participating in dual-training programs; (vi) number of 
graduates certified ; (vii) monitoring of graduates’ insertion in the labor market; (viii) effective in-service training 
of trainers; and (ix) the implementation of a new financing model. The performance contracts will be monitored 
by the MFPPM and each CFTP through their own monitoring and evaluation systems. They will also be supported 
by PARSET2 monitoring and evaluation specialist. 

19. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the construction of a new CFTP and the following 
activities through the PBCs: (i) the development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula; 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment; (v) the purchasing of adapted 
textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; and (viii) governance reform and institutional financing. 

 

Sub-component 1.2 Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycees Techniques et Industriels (US$9.4 million) 

 

20. The project will support the reform and upgrading (modernization) of two to four collèges and lycées 
techniques et industriels through performance-based contracts to improve the quality of service delivery and 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the LETINs. These institutions currently offer courses in construction, 
electricity, and automotive, among others. The institutions are characterized by outdated equipment, limited 
hands-on and relevant training, heavily theory based teaching, and weak links with the private sector. The aim is 
to focus the course offerings, improve the management of the schools, strengthen practicum-based teaching and 
learning, introduce entrepreneurship and non-cognitive (socio-emotional) skills development8, and improve 
linkages with related industry to better prepare graduates for employability, in addition to upgrading of hardware. 

 

21. The project will provide support for the preparation of operational manuals regarding the management 
of TVET schools, performance monitoring, relationship with the private sector relations and the preparation of 
regulatory texts. Technical assistance will be recruited to support the teams responsible for the management of 
TVET schools and the ministerial directorates in charge of technical education and vocational training.  

 

22. Technical auditors will be recruited to conduct an external evaluation of each performance contract and 
certify the level of achievement of the expected results. The technical audit report will be used to determine the 
amount of funds to be allocated for the following year. 

 

23. Main activities: this sub-component will finance the following activities through the PBCs: (i) the 
development and implementation of new pedagogical models and curricula (in coordination with AFD programs); 
(ii) new administrative management involving the private sector; (iii) strengthening of the professional and 
teaching competencies of trainers; (iv) the provision of relevant equipment including for ICT; (v) the purchasing of 
adapted textbooks; (vi) rehabilitation of existing infrastructures and equipment; (vii) information and sensitization 
campaigns to attract more female students; (viii) governance reform and institutional financing; and (ix) study 
tours for all relevant actors especially at the central level, directors, and a select number of teachers. The sub-
component will also finance technical assistance to the TVET school to help them navigate through the 
institutional changes envisioned in the project and improve their financial management capacity. 

 

Component 2. Employment Support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship Opportunities (US$24.4 

million) 

     
24. This component seeks to provide first work experiences, and skills relevant to labor market demands, 
including entrepreneurship training, to youth. Targeted young people may have completed the full education 
cycle or dropped out of the school system prior to completion. The objective is to provide quality hands-on job 
training and entrepreneurship training, to improve employability, employment prospects, and ultimately 
livelihoods. This would include (a) internships for skilled graduates in their prospective professions; (b) 
apprenticeships; and (c) entrepreneurship for agricultural development. Apprenticeships and entrepreneurship 
approaches focus heavily on unskilled workers given that they are the most promising approaches to helping the 
large scale of low-skilled individuals within Chad transition into employment/self-employment.  

 

Table 1: Summary Overview of Sub-components 
Sub-component Beneficiaries Duration of Program Implementing Agency 

2.1 Internships to improve 
school-to-work 
transition 

6,000 youth aged 15 to 29 
registered in CFTPs, LETINs, 
or university 

6 to 12 months ONAPE and CNPT 

2.2 Expanding 
opportunities for 
apprenticeships 

7,500 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 with limited 
education and who are not 
in a wage job 

6 to 24 months 
depending on the trade 

FONAP, MFPDS 

2.3 Agricultural 
entrepreneurship 

8,000 out-of-school youth 
aged 15 to 39 living in rural 
areas and mostly engaged 
in the agriculture sector 
either wage worker or self-
employed 

Up to 6 months ONAPE and local NGOs 

 

Sub-component 2.1 Internships to Improve School-to-Work Transition (US$6.8 million) 

 

25. The internship program aims to improve the employment outcomes of graduates transitioning from 
secondary or post-secondary general education and TVET institutions into the labor market. Chad’s educational 
system does not have sufficiently strong linkages with the private sector to facilitate the immersion of young 
graduates in enterprises during their time at school or following their graduation. The subcomponent aims to 
address this practical skills gap of current graduates, while simultaneously reorienting the TVET institutional 
approach to focus on employment.  

 

26. Internships will last 6 months during which the internships are funded fully by the project. After the first 
6 months, the contract will be renewable for another 6 months, at which point the intern would be partially funded 
(50 percent) by the enterprise. Internships could for example include placements in hotels, healthcare, other 
service sectors, and construction firms which have been shown through data from ONAPE to recruit the highest 
numbers of workers. After one year, the intern then becomes eligible for recruitment, at which point the company 
would be wholly responsible for funding. The number of interns a company can hire over the course of the project 
and at any point in time will be limited (with optimal limit to be determined) to avoid abuse of the system by 
companies, as well as limits on the number of trainees a company can take without hiring any. The monthly 



 

The World Bank  
CHAD Skills Development for Youth Employment and Competitiveness Project (P164297) 

 

 

  
Apr 12, 2019 Page 11 of 23  

 

internship stipend amount will not exceed 60,000 XOF with girls receiving a higher stipend to cover for potential 
day care cost. 

 

27. Main activities: The sub-component will finance (i) employment and internships recruiting camps in 
technical schools, training centers, and universities jointly hosted by ONAPE and the private sector, (ii) 
communications campaigns and partnership building in private companies; (iii) internship payments that include 
stipends, accident and medical insurance coverage, and (iv) technical assistance to ONAPE to implement the 
program and setup a website and the support to its decentralized branches outside of the capital city. 

 

Sub-component 2.2 Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships (US$9.2 million).  

 

28. An apprenticeship scheme will be developed to facilitate improved labor market integration for youth 
through a dual apprenticeship program which combines adapted training programs with on-the job training 
opportunities with craftspeople and professionals. Dual training refers to a combination of practical, on the job 
training, and theoretical education to ensure an optimal blend of theory and practice. Training programs will 
combine practical training and theory with an emphasis on hands-on experiences in various types of workshops. 
Training in training institutions will constitute 25 percent of the program, with 75 percent focused on hands-on 
practical application, and will be targeting to youth with a minimum level of education. Additionally, training in 
functional literacy, numeracy and life skills will be coupled with the job specific training to improve employability. 
 
29. To encourage female participation the project will pay a higher stipend to girls especially those with 
children who need to pay for day care costs. The payment of the stipend will depend on attendance. The project 
will also encourage girls to join male-dominated trades which provide better employment prospects and higher 
earnings in the labor market through a targeted sensitization campaign. 

 

30. Main Activities: the sub-component will finance (i) training fees for the training providers and master 
craftsmen; (ii) stipends for the trainees paid via mobile money; (iii) training in functional literacy and numeracy 
and life skills by qualified training providers; (iv) a defined package of materials and equipment including all 
necessary protections, (v) accident and medical insurance coverage for apprentices; (vi) costs associated with 
training of trainers, upgrading of skills of apprentice instructors, (vii) costs associated with selection and placement 
of apprentices; (viii) development of new training guidelines and the design and implementation of the regulatory 
and operational framework for the apprenticeship program; and (ix) an institutional and organizational audit of 
FONAP as well as monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Sub-component 2.3 Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship (US$9.0 million) 

 

31. The sub-component will aim to provide entrepreneurship training to youth in rural communities to 
improve livelihoods. The goal is to provide necessary skills for addressing constraints related to (i) lack of 
entrepreneurship know-how (equipping small scale farmers with knowledge to diversify options and ideally 
transition out of subsistence farming); ii) community organizing along agro-value chains (i.e. building the value 
chain so that it is possible to grow, harvest, transform products, and get them to markets) and (iii) limited means 

of food processing (i.e. loss of mangos during mango season due to limited technical skills and small scale 
equipment which result in not being able to transform/conserve them).  The approach is consistent with the large 
numbers of youth who remain in rural communities in Chad, and the majority of workers who are engaged in 
informal employment in the agriculture sector.  

 

32. Linkages between producers and sources of financing will be critically important and will be facilitated 
by connecting promising small-scale agriculture entrepreneurs with micro-loans via ONAPE. ONAPE has prior 
experience providing micro-lending to agriculture entrepreneurs, thus the program will build on the current 
mechanism, improve capacity and scale the approach. 

 

33. Main Activities: The sub-component will finance (i) a campaign to promote training activities and 
agriculture as a viable livelihood; (ii) the development of the training modules; (iii) delivery of training sessions via 
contracted local NGOs; (iv) training of trainers; (v) agriculture micro-loans through the existing ONAPE financing 
mechanism; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation. 

 

Component 3. Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building (US$5.9 million) 

 

34. This component is designed to strengthen the TVET system which suffers from weak governance and 
chronic underfunding.  Given the relative neglect of the sub-sector, the sustainability of the project depends on 
the capacity of the collèges, lycées, and CFPT to self-finance their activities.  It is critical that the status of these 
schools is revised to provide them with more autonomy and allow them to generate revenue, and flexibility to 
spend it.  Thus, a new regulatory framework will be necessary as is improved institutional and management 
capacities of the ministries and institutions involved in project implementation and project execution.  
 

35. This component will also build the leadership and management capacity of CFTP and TVET school 
directors to improve service delivery and implement a new finance model. TVET schools have often very low 
teacher-student ratios and teachers are underutilized - working less than 12 hours per week on average. Re-
organizing school calendars, better planning the use of classrooms and workshops, and organizing dual-training 
could substantially increase the number of students the institutions receive without jeopardizing its quality. To 
provide more training opportunities to the youth restructuring the current  financing model which currently 
operates using several uncoordinated sources of funding is critical. Rethinking the highly fragmented nature the 
training fund and address the financing challenges and the fractured nature of the skills development sector in 
Chad in terms of both service delivery and financing is also necessary.  

 

36. Because the reforms envisioned in this component are necessary for the public sector TVET to perform, 
their effective implementation will condition disbursement for the activities in Component 1. As noted earlier, 
if the CETIN, LETIN, and CFTP continue to operate under the current model i.e. with no public financing, no 
possibility to generate own funds, no cooperation with the private sector, and an outdated governance structure 
with little accountability it is very unlikely that any investment in this system will be sustainable. New equipment 
will become old and rusty because of lack of maintenance funds, teachers will quickly revert to theory-only 
teaching because they would lack the necessary material for labs. 


37. Main Activities: this component will finance (i) TA to revisit the TVET national strategy and the national 
employment policy; (ii) roundtable and national consultations around the revised strategy; (iii) training of CFTP 
and TVET institutions’ staff; (iv) capacity building activities of selected training institutions, government 
departments, private sector associations, and employment agencies; (v) south-south exchanges through study 
tours; (vi) the revision of the national strategy of technical and vocational education and training, (vii) revision of 
the national employment policy; (viii) ONAPE’s capacity building to manage a website and generate databases to 
match supply and demand sides; (ix) national awareness campaigns that promote TVET and especially girls in 
TVET; (x) a study on the supply of training in Chad; and (xi) organizational and institutional audits of ONAPE, 
FONAP, and other important institutions. 

 

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.0 million) 

 

38. This component will support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), M&E activities, and capacity building 
activities associated with the implementation of the project. PARSET2’s PCU which has successfully managed 
several projects is retained to manage the project. The PCU will be responsible for overall coordination and 
implementation of project activities, as well as financial management (FM) and procurement. The project would 
finance the salaries of PCU staff, operational costs and the cost of equipment. Additionally, this component would 
cover specific technical assistance (TA) and capacity building needs for project implementation, and M&E 
(including third party validation, surveys, and impact evaluations). The proposed capacity building activities under 
this component could include: (i) trainings, study tours, and other initiatives to enhance the capacity of relevant 
ministry or agency staff to implement, coordinate, and monitor their programs; and (ii) capacity building of TVET 
institution administrators to increase their capacity to design surveys, conduct tracer studies and utilize the data 
for analysis and action.  

 

39. Assessment activities – including, impact evaluations and beneficiary surveys of interventions under 
component 2, as well as support to the Gender Innovation Lab which will work with local institutions to carry out 
statistical analysis/employment surveys/labor studies/etc. monitoring of youth and follow-up activities during 
internships, survey of youth after the completion of the internships, apprenticeships, and entrepreneurships. 
There will also be at least two impact evaluations embedded in the project. This includes working with the Gender 
Innovation Lab to evaluate the impact of the inclusion of socio-emotional in the skills training program on labor 
market outcomes such as likelihood of wage employment, self-employment, or net income. There will be a special 
focus on rural areas and girls. 

 

 

Project cost and financing  

Table 3: Project cost per component and financing source 

Components/Sub-components Project cost 
US$ million 

Percent IDA 
Financing 

Component 1 Expanding Skills Development through Improved Technical and 
Vocational Education 

14.7 100 

Sub-component 1.1: Creation of new CFTPs and Expanded Opportunities through 
preexisting centers 

5.3 100 

Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation and upgrading of Lycées Techniques et Industriels 9.4 100 

Component 2: Employment support for Youth and Improved Entrepreneurship 
Opportunites 

24.4 100 

Sub-component 2.1: Internships for improved school-to-work transition 6.8 100 

Sub-component 2.2: Expanding Opportunities for Apprenticeships 9.2 100 

Sub-component 2.3: Development of Agricultural Entrepreneurship 9.0 100 
 

  

Component 3: Improving TVET System Governance and Institutional Capacity Building 5.9 100 
   

Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 5.0 100 
   

Overall Project 50.0 100 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
40. The project will be implemented over a five-year period. The proposed closing date is October 31, 2024. 
The Ministry of National Education and the Promotion of Civics (Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la 
Promotion Civique, MENPC) and the Ministry of Vocational Training and Micro Works (Ministère de la Formation 
Professionnelle et des Petits Métiers, MFPPM) will be the main implementing agencies for the project. 
 
41. Steering Committee (SC). A system-wide Steering Committee (SC) will be established to provide 
guidance to the project on an annual basis. The representative of the MFPPM will be the President of the SC and 
the representative of the MENPC will assume the Vice-Presidency. The SC will have representatives of MEPD, the 
Ministry of Higher Education, Research, and Innovation (Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche 
et de l’Innovation, MESRI), the Ministry of Finance and Budget (Ministère des Finances et du Budget, MFB), the 
Ministry of Civil Service, Work, and Social Dialogue (Ministère de la Fonction Publique, du Travail et du Dialogue 
Social, MFPTDS), the Ministry of Youth Promotion, Sports, and Employment (Ministère de la Promotion des 
Jeunes, des Sports, et de l’Emploi, MPJSE), the Ministry of Production, Irrigation, and Agricultural Equipment 
(Ministère de la Production, de l’Irrigation et des Equipements Agricoles, MPIEA). It should also include 
representatives of civil society and private sector. 

 

42. At the annual meeting, the MENPC and MFPPM with support from the PCU will provide results for the 
year and will set out its intended results and necessary resources for the following year. The annual meeting 
will be done before the end of September of each year to ensure that the decisions taken by the Steering 
Committee are reflected in the budget submission for the following year. The first meeting of the Steering 
Committee is expected to take place in November 2019 (the second in September 2020) while the first annual 
work plan will be devised by the preparation team with the support of PARSET2. 

 

43. The PCU will be responsible for daily project coordination, as well as the administration of the financing: 
procurement, financial management, disbursement, monitoring, reporting and evaluation, environmental and 
social safeguards. The PCU is already staffed with a qualified Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, 
Financial Management Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and Accountant. PARSET will be 
required to hire a team of engineers who will help oversee the CFTP construction and the rehabilitation program 
of the lycées and collèges d’enseignement technique et industriel. In addition, the DPEF will add a full-time 
Safeguards Specialist to ensure that the environmental and social safeguards requirements are met. Technical 
implementation of the Project will be the responsibility of each concerned department within the MENPC, 


MFPPM, MFPTDS, and MEPD. Detailed project implementation mechanisms will be provided in the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be completed by effectiveness. 

 

44. The role of the Steering Committee is to provide guidance and advice for strategic direction of the 
project and approve annual budget and action plan. In those cases where specific action is needed to address 
issues that go beyond the scope of any single ministry, the president of the Steering Committee can bring together 
the relevant parties to find solutions to problems that are inter-ministerial in nature, which may be presented to 
the Steering Committee, if necessary. 

 

45. The following implementation arrangements will be established. No more than three months after 
project effectiveness, each relevant MENPC and MFPPM director will nominate focal points who will be heads of 
components and sub-components who will work with the PARSET2 coordinator and the M&E specialist to convene 
the appropriate Government officials to finalize the work plan for each component. These will be key contributions 
to the overall project work plan to be developed by the project coordinator under the guidance of the Steering 
Committee which will be discussed with MENPC and MFPPM and communicated to the Bank. Thereafter, once a 
quarter, the PCU will report on progress to the MENPC and MFPPM as well as key development partners within 
the LEG and will share the work plan for the following three months. 

 

46. Annual reviews will be held in November/December of each year, bringing together all key stakeholders 
in the system. At those reviews, the MENPC and MFPPM officials will provide updates on the status of the technical 
and vocational education and training sector, including information regarding the start of the school year 
(enrollments, recruitments, trainings, and so on). Each functional/central directorate will present its results, and 
each regional directorate will do the same. The arrangements will be formalized in the project implementation 
manual. More details on the project implementation arrangements can be found in Annex 1. 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kristyna Bishop, Social Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Specialist 
Mamadou Diedhiou, Social Specialist 
Aurelie Marie Simone Monique Rossignol, Environmental Specialist 


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Due to the civil works inherent to constructions 
and/or rehabilitation civil works activities of 
schools/centers, the potential social and 
environmental risks of the proposed project are 
expected to be moderate and mostly site-specific, 
with no significant or long-term negative risks and 
impacts, which are foreseen to be easily 
manageable; typical of category B projects. 
  
Since project’s physical footprint is presently 
unknown and would so be prior to appraisal, in 
compliance with OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare, consult upon and publicly disclose – both 
in-country and on the world Bank’s website, prior to 
appraisal, an environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to guide the way that potential 
negative environmental and social risks and impacts 
of future sub-projects will be identified and 
mitigated during project implementation.  If, during 
project preparation/implementation, any project 
specific site is known before appraisal, a site-specific 
an Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
(ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) will also be prepared, amply consulted upon 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and on the 
World Bank website prior to appraisal the physical 
start of civil works  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project comprises no activity which may induce 
the purchase and/or the use of pesticides or related 
chemicals. The project will not finance pesticides 
acquisition or distribution. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component 
1 – more precisely under sub-component 1.2 which 
might lead to the unearthing of such potential 
physical cultural resources (PCR).  Nevertheless, it is 


highly unlikely that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted; nonetheless, the existing a  
“Chance finds procedures” will be embedded in the 
ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken into 
account an adequate management of PSRs during 
project preparation and implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous People in project targeted areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project has triggered OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement) to enable the project to better tackle 
issues related to land acquisition, including 
economic and physical displacement. Since the 
project footprint is yet to be known, the Borrower 
will prepare project has updated the a Resettlement 
Policy Framework  (RPF) for each participating 
country. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, 
institutional arrangements, likely categories of 
affected people, eligibility criteria and categories, 
compensation rates, methods of valuing affected 
assets, community participation and information 
dissemination, Grievance Redress Mechanism and 
effective monitoring and evaluation. The RPF will be 
amply consulted upon, and once cleared by the Bank 
it will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at 
the WB’s external website prior to appraisal.  
 
 Further, when investment sites lead to land take 
that causes economic and/or physical displacement, 
the borrower will prepare a site-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Since the 
resettlement process is meant to be inclusive to 
encompass vulnerable social groups and guarantee 
that they receive fair and equitable treatment, the 
corresponding site-specific RAPs, wherever deemed 
necessary, will be consulted upon, cleared by the 
World Bank, and publicly disclosed both in-country 
and at the external WB’s website prior to the 
physical start of civil works  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
the construction of dams nor affect operations of 
existing dams or affiliated reservoirs 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The project will not affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No No activities are planned in any disputed areas. 


KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is focused on improving skills of the Chadian youth, with an emphasis on improving the public TVET 
system, instituting performance-based contracts, building capacity, improving the governance of TVET institutions, 
creating linkages with the private sector, improving monitoring and evaluation, etc. As such, these activities have little 
to no environmental impact. However, civil works will also be financed, such as the construction of technical and 
vocational training centers, and the extension and rehabilitation of secondary technical schools, within existing 
schools, the provision of fencing, access to clean water, adequate sanitation, and electricity for which the most cost-
effective and environment-friendly options (such as solar panels) will be given preference. Impacts from these 
activities could include work-related health and safety impacts; noise, dust, reduction of air and water quality; loss of 
tree/vegetation cover; etc. The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is 
expected to be largely beneficial. The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its 
intervention is mainly focused on existing secondary schools and vocational training centers except for the 
construction of one new model center. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The influx of male workers may increase the demand for sex. As a 
result, women in the project community may be subject to higher rates of violence. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Not applicable 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the impacts from Project activities on the environment are expected to be moderate, the Borrower will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will be used by the implementing agency as a 
defined procedure and guidelines to screen each activity as it is proposed for financing. The ESMF will be used to 
prepare site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) which will include impacts, mitigation 
measures, a responsible entity and a budget for each mitigation activity. Given the Recipient’s limited but growing 
experience with implementation of environmental and social safeguards instruments, close safeguards supervision 
and implementation support will be carried out during the early stage of project implementation until adequate 
safeguards experience is developed. The PARSET2 engineer, in collaboration with the relevant directorate and regional 
office of the MFPPM, will supervise the implementation of the safeguards instruments discussed above. IDA 
supervision will focus on: (i) providing regular implementation support; (ii) carrying out field reviews of safeguards 
implementation; and (iii) monitoring safeguards implementation based on periodic progress reports.  
 
The short, medium- and long-term socio-economic impact of the proposed project is expected to be largely beneficial. 
The project has a low probability of inducing physical or economic displacement. Its intervention is mainly focused on 
existing technical secondary schools and vocational training centers. However, the construction of a new vocational 
training center is planned in Sahr region. As there may be some unforeseen resettlement. Therefore, the project will 
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The construction to be realized in this project are not large and the 
works will be realized by the local companies. Thus, the influx of foreign labor will be very limited, or-existent. 
Nevertheless, the project will also set in place mechanisms to prevent Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and sexual based 
violence. The project will emphasize the importance of having internal prevention and response systems and policies 
(sexual harassment policies, anonymous reporting mechanisms) in place and building staff capacity to recognize and 
address these issues at the project level during implementation. Finally, a The GRM will be prepared, in consultation 
with stakeholders, including communities. A project level GRM is outlined in the RPF and ESMF. It is designed to be a 
mechanism that is trusted by all relevant partners including the project affected persons (PAPs), if it turns out that 
impacts happened in the implementation stage. It will facilitate the redress of any grievance and conflict that may 
arise from the Project. The PIU will be notified of any disputes in the project zone. Project field staff should work 
closely with the communities and the community leaders to clarify and resolve any misunderstanding that could give 
rise to conflicts. The PIU will develop a clear plan and procedures for the GRM, including complaint collection and 
processing procedures, reporting format, database/records specifications, and committee membership using 
guidelines provided in the RPF and ESMF. Public participation and consultation will be a key part of the process at all 
times to promote understanding and prevent unnecessary complaints and disputes.  
 
IDA supervision will be carried out by field-based Bank technical staff, complemented by specialist consultants as 
necessary, during regular biannual supervision missions and during interim technical safeguards missions that will 
respond to emerging issues. Monitoring will be based on ESMF activities. It will also be an occasion to discuss the 
project safeguard requirements with the Recipient, including management plan and reporting requirements. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESMF and RPF, the Borrower held consultation with several public TVET institutions and 
communities located in the regions that will be targeted by the project such as Moyen-Chari, Sahr, and Moundou as 
well as in N'Djamena. The Borrower met with TVET schools directors, teachers, and students. Further consultations 
will be held before appraisal and will specifically ensure that vulnerable groups, like women, refugees, etc. are 
included 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lesotho Second Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) (P165228) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2019 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Lesotho P165228 Second Phase Smallholder 
Agriculture Development 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 10-Apr-2019 30-May-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security (MAFS) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies 
in Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Scaling Up Climate Smart-Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services 
Improving Commercialization and Nutrition 
Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingency Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 57.00 

Total Financing 57.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 50.00 



 

          IDA Credit 50.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 5.00 

     Trust Funds 2.00 

          Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, mountainous, landlocked country in Southern Africa with a population of 
2.2 million. It is an open economy, traditionally centered on trade, with textiles, water, and diamonds as its 
main exports. Lesotho is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African 
Development Community, and the Common Monetary Area all of which create strong opportunities for regional 
trade. As a member of the Common Monetary Area, its currency is pegged to the South African Rand.   
 

2. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in the region, with high levels of poverty and inequality.  An estimated 
57 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty 
line. Income inequality is among the highest in the world. Rural areas, heavily dependent on subsistence and 
semi-subsistence agriculture, account for 70 percent of the population and 87 percent of all people living below 
the poverty line (SCD, 2015). A wide (30 percent) poverty gap, high rates of unemployment, wide prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS, and climate vulnerability further constrain the scope for inclusive growth and improvements in living 
standards. GDP per capita is estimated at US$1,181 (2017) and when adjusted by Purchasing Power Parity is 
equivalent to 16 percent of the world's average.    
  

3. Economic performance declined after 2012 as Lesotho’s growth drivers shifted from exports to high public 
expenditure and consumption. Real annual GDP growth was at a low 2.5 percent in 2016-2017 down from a 4.5 
percent average over the previous five years.  The sharp decline in SACU-related revenues over 2016-2017 and 
increase in public expenditures to 60 percent of GDP, fueled by wage and employment growth in the public 
sector, have resulted in a widening of the fiscal deficit and a difficult economic outlook for the country.  Output 
is estimated to have contracted by 1.6 percent in 2017 and is projected to remain subdued in the near term.       
 


4. Recognizing the inherent unsustainability of this economic model, Lesotho has endorsed a new template for 
development. The recently completed National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP)-II 2018/19 – 2022/23 seeks 
to pursue inclusive, sustainable growth and private sector-led employment creation.  The Government of 
Lesotho (GoL) has identified four productive sectors, viz. agriculture, manufacturing, tourism and creative 
industries and technology and innovation as potential sectors for job creation and inclusive economic growth 
under a new growth path led by the private sector.   

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. Agriculture plays a significant role in Lesotho’s economy.  Over 70 percent of the country’s population lives in 
rural areas and depends, directly or indirectly, on agriculture for employment and livelihood.  The sector has 
the highest potential to increase food security, reduce rural poverty, and generate both on- and off-farm 
employment opportunities.  Main crops include maize, sorghum and wheat which are planted as monocrops on 
85 percent of the country’s arable land which comprises 10 percent of Lesotho’s total land area.  Livestock 
contributes 75 percent of total agricultural output, including semi-intensive and intensive production of pigs 
and poultry, as well as extensive (free range) production of goats and sheep on rangelands in the foothills and 
highland areas (Johane, 2011). Sheep and goats, which dominate the livestock sector, are reared mainly for wool 
and mohair.  
 

6. Lesotho’s agricultural sector suffers from low levels of productivity and commercialization which has made 
the country heavily dependent on food imports to meet domestic consumption needs.  Despite 70 percent of 
the rural population engaged in some form of agricultural activity, the sector contributes less than 10 percent 
to the national gross domestic product (GDP). Most of the rural population is engaged in subsistence farming: 
rain-fed, undiversified farming (primarily cereal production) and extensive livestock grazing characterize the 
sector. Productivity challenges in the sector, include, inter alia, limited size of arable land1, unfavorable farm 
structures (average land holding of about 1.0 ha per family), outdated farm technologies and farm management 
practices, limited technical expertise, sub-optimal use of inputs, lack of an adequate irrigation and drainage 
system, weak rural infrastructure, a rudimentary rural advisory system, and limited access to credit and 
investment capital. In addition, the country has experienced severe land degradation.  Massive soil erosion and 
loss of scarce agricultural land have resulted in extremely low agricultural productivity levels: land productivity 
averaged about USD 70 per hectare per year compared to the regional average of about USD 120 per hectare 
per year for the period 2008-2013; cereal yields average less than 1,000 kg per hectare, failing to meet the SADC 
RISDP target of achieving at least 2,000 kg per hectare2. Consequently, marketable surplus remains low.  A 
nascent private sector further constrains commercialization. Private sector activity in Lesotho is dominated by 
micro-enterprises, with a marked absence of the small and medium-sized enterprises that drive economic 
growth and job creation in most countries.3  

                                                           
1 While the agricultural land area of 2.36 million ha accounts for 78 percent of total land area, only 357,000 ha (12 percent) 
is suitable for crop production. Most agricultural land is mountain pasture, suited to extensive livestock production – which 
accounts for 75 percent of the total value of agricultural output. FAOSTAT 
2 Charles Nhemachena, Greenwell Matchaya and Sibusiso Nhlengethwa.  Agricultural Growth Trends and Outlook in Lesotho. 2016 
3 A survey of registered business enterprises in 2015 shows that of 9,625 registered business enterprises, 75.6 percent were 
micro-enterprises (1-4 employees) and 37.5 percent had a turnover of less than one million maloti (approximately 
$US70,000). Only 15 percent of the enterprises surveyed were small to medium (5-50 employees), and only 4.3 percent had 
a gross revenue of 1-5 million maloti ($US 70,000-$350,000). This pattern is even more evident in agro-processing and agri-
business. Five large enterprises dominate the food and beverage sector3, with few medium- or micro-enterprises. 




 
7. Climate change poses major challenges to the development of Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  The Inter-

Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change.  The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics and 
experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds. The El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon particularly affects climate variation in Lesotho (MEMWA, 2013)4. High intra-
seasonal and inter-annual rainfall variability, with frequent droughts, has often resulted in delayed planting or 
farmers not planting at all, reduced seed germination due to hardened soil and lack of water, crops failures, 
deterioration of rangelands and pasture, water scarcity for livestock, and increased food prices of staple grains 
such as maize.5  Chronic droughts have also negatively impacted the livestock sector, resulting in rangeland 
degradation and limiting the carrying capacity of pastoral land. The drought of 2015-16 growing season was the 
most severe on record putting over 534,000 people at risk of food insecurity. The current rain-fed crop 
production system with its focus on maize at the expense of diversification to more drought-tolerant crops 
(sorghum, millet, cowpeas) increases vulnerability to climatic shocks. The crop production system also makes 
limited use of climate smart agricultural technologies such as new varieties, conservation agriculture, 
intercropping, integrated pest management and simple water harvesting technologies, all of which compromise 
productivity. The erratic and severe weather patterns and land degradation reinforce the need to mainstream 
climate resilience in Lesotho’s agricultural sector.  
 

8. Provision of irrigation is critical for addressing climatic risks in Lesotho’s agriculture; however, the subsector 
is beset with challenges. Despite the ready availability of water from the mountains, only 2,600 ha of arable 
land has been developed for irrigation.  Poor management and inadequate maintenance have reduced the area 
under irrigation, with only an estimated 1,200 ha under irrigation in 2014.  The modernization of national water 
resource management policies and institutions has been slow and physical infrastructure has deteriorated due 
to lack of public funds for maintenance. Many pump stations are no longer operational and existing headworks 
and reservoirs have silted up. On-farm irrigation systems have also deteriorated due to ill-defined property 
rights over infrastructure and weak local capacity for management. There are few effective community-based 
irrigation management systems and poor links between the existing institutions and the local public institutions 
responsible for water management. Combating the effects of climate change and increasing productivity 
towards food security and commercialization will require sustained efforts to provide adequate, reliable and 
timely delivery of irrigation to Lesotho’s crop and livestock farmers.    
 

9. Development of high value cash crops, such as fruits and vegetables and potatoes as well as dairy and small-
scale pig and poultry production offer opportunities for moving from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
production to a more diversified production base responsive to climatic risks.  Lesotho’s higher altitude, 
potential for early season production and access to cheap water and labor combine to create favorable 
conditions for the production and export of vegetables, fruit and seed potatoes. Regional demand for fruit and 
vegetables is increasing as urban populations grow, incomes rise, and the popularity of healthy diets increases. 
Higher production and sales of these high value crops would also deepen domestic agricultural markets, 
generate rural employment and improve nutrition. Diversification and commercialization need a much broader 
base than this however, as current commercial vegetable production currently ranges from 100-600 ha and 
commercial potatoes are less than 500 ha. Government and donor support for increased production and 

                                                           
4 World Bank, 2016. “Lesotho Water Security and Climate Change Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC. 

5 CIAT; World Bank; 2018, 201Climate-Smart Agriculture in Lesotho. CSA Country Profiles for Africa Series.  



 
commercialization of small-scale dairy, pig and poultry enterprises will also be necessary, in addition to 
continued support for mohair and fine wool.   
 

10. A more diversified production base, with greater emphasis on horticulture and livestock production also 
offers a means to increase dietary diversity and reduce child malnutrition. Lesotho’s high rates of child 
malnutrition are attributed to poverty, low dietary diversity and inadequate consumption of fruits and 
vegetables. Limited dietary diversity affects all children - only 23 percent of children have minimum dietary 
diversity and 11 percent have a minimum acceptable diet. Fruit and vegetable availability was estimated at 128 
grams in 2013, compared with the WHO recommended daily intake of 400 grams. Increased horticulture and 
livestock production would contribute to improved nutrition by (a) increasing the availability of fruits and 
vegetables as well as protein-rich foods; and (b) improving incomes and so access to a more diverse diet.   

 
11. Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Lesotho’s overall economic growth agenda, the Government 

of Lesotho (GoL) is undertaking critical measures to build a commercial and climate resilient agricultural sector.  
The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) II (2018/19-2022/23), which prioritizes the development of the 
agricultural sector, identifies three broad areas of strategic action: (i) sustainable commercialization and 
diversification of agriculture, (ii) a well-functioning agri-food system, and (iii) rehabilitation of range lands and 
wet lands. Priorities for action within these areas include: (i) improved technology and infrastructure (including 
irrigation and climate smart agriculture); (ii) increased production of high value crop and livestock products; (iii) 
the development of institutional frameworks for producer and industry organizations; (iv) building the capacity 
of farmers to benefit from these institutions; and (v) the development of value chains and agricultural markets. 
The NSDP II also calls for the need to scale up current nutrition systems towards strengthening human capital 
and expanding the use of water harvesting for irrigation. Gender and climate change are indicated as critical 
cross-cutting issues. Several policies and strategies, including Vision 2020, National Climate Change Policy (2017), 
Lesotho Food and Nutrition Policy (2016) and Lesotho Zero Hunger Strategic Review (LZHSR) accord high priority 
to scaling up climate-smart practices and actions to promote agricultural adaptation and increased food security, 
achieving zero hunger by 2030, access to adequate food and healthy diets all year round, ending malnutrition, 
doubling of smallholder productivity and incomes, and eliminating food loss and waste. The GoL has also initiated 
reform of the water sector to promote sustainable and productive use of Lesotho’s water resources.  
 

12. The Bank has provided substantial support to the development of Lesotho’s agriculture sector over the past 
decade. Through the ongoing Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP) as well as Private Sector 
Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project (PSCED) the Bank has provided financial and technical 
assistance  to improve commercialization and competitiveness in Lesotho’s agricultural sector. SADP is providing 
training and competitive grants to smallholder farmers for improving marketable surplus in several value chains, 
including horticulture (fruit and vegetable production), poultry, piggery and dairy.  The project is also supporting 
the development of an irrigation master plan to assist the government in its efforts of defining strategic priorities 
for improving the irrigation subsector in terms of alignment with agriculture growth potential, improving 
resource utilization, water delivery service, and institutional and financial sustainability and identify a pipeline of 
high priority irrigation investments for support from donors, government, private sector and other non-state 
actors. The PSCED is assisting in building an  enabling business environment, leveraging private investment 
support, providing access to finance to increase productivity and increasing market opportunities in Lesotho’s 
horticulture subsector.  The Bank has also supported the preparation of the Lesotho Climate Smart Agricultural 
Profile which provides an overview of the agricultural challenges in Lesotho and recommends country-specific 
climate smart agricultural practices that can help the country adapt to and mitigate climate change.  
 


13. The proposed Lesotho Climate Smart Agriculture Project (LCSAP) is being prepared at the request of the 
Government of Lesotho to contribute to its efforts in developing a climate smart agricultural sector.  The 
proposed project, an IDA credit in the amount of US$50 million and a Japanese Policy and Human Resources 
Development (PHRD) grant of US$2.0 million aims to harness the triple wins of CSA in Lesotho’s agri-food sector, 
i.e., improved productivity, increased adaptive capacity to climate risks and reduced greenhouse gas emissions.  
Through the provision of technical assistance and investment support, the proposed project would introduce and 
scale up best practices in CSA and sustainable land management thereby mainstreaming climate and 
environmental considerations into agriculture as well incentivize a shift from uncompetitive maize monocropping 
to high potential value chains, all of which are expected to result in positive outcomes of enhanced climate 
resilience, increased commercialization, food security, job creation, improved rural livelihoods and improved 
nutritional outcomes.  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is to support increased adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies in 
Lesotho's agriculture, enhanced commercialization and improved dietary diversity among targeted beneficiaries. 
 
 

Key Results 

• Land area brought under climate-smart agriculture and sustainable landscape management  

• Household Commercialization levels (value of produce sold as a % of value of produce 

• Farmers adopting improved agricultural practices 

• Households with increased dietary diversity (disaggregated by women and children) 
 
 
D. Project Description  

 
 

25. The project will build on the achievements and lessons learned under SADP as well as the Lesotho Climate 
Smart Investment Plan (CSIP).  Through a robust, multi-stakeholder process, the CSIP has developed a normative 
vision and CSA goals for Lesotho’s agriculture sector and pathways for achieving the vision and goals. It has 
prioritized key policy actions and investments towards building a productive, climate-resilient and low-
emissions agriculture sector in Lesotho.  The CSA goals, developed under the three pillars of CSA, call for, inter 
alia, increasing yields of major crops, reducing losses across agricultural value chains, including post-harvest 
losses, increasing arable land under stress-tolerant crops, conservation agriculture, and agroforestry as well as 
reduced livestock emissions.  Strategies for achieving these goals include measures reflected in project design, 
i.e. climate resilience and nutrition security (such as agricultural diversification, CSA practices at the farm level, 
stress tolerant crops); commercialization (agricultural value chain, market infrastructure development) and 
capacity development (knowledge development, integrate weather and market advisories using ICT).     
 
26. The following four components are envisaged under the project: (i) Promoting Climate-Resilient 
Agriculture; (ii) Improving Agricultural Commercialization and Nutrition; (iii) Project Management, Coordination 
and Monitroing and Evaluation; and (iv) Contingency Emergency Response.  


Component 1: Scaling Up Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices and Advisory Services (Total Cost: US$20.0 
million) 

27. This component aims at strengthening the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to adjust and modify 
their production systems to minimize the potential future impacts from climate variability. The overall goal is to 
enhance climate resilience through solutions that improve soil health, increase water use efficiency, and 
increase farm productivity and crop diversification. The component focuses on: (i) capacity building for scaling‐
up the adoption of climate‐smart agriculture technologies by farmers and enhancing farm management 
practices aimed at improving soil health, water‐use efficiency, crop diversification, and farm productivity; (ii) 
promoting a more efficient use of surface water accompanied with a more sustainable use of groundwater, 
leading to improved availability and quality of water at the farm level; and (iii) improving access to climate and 
market advisory services through ICT, thereby strengthening farmers’ adaptation and resilience.   
 
Component 2: Improving Agricultural Commecialization and Nutrition (US$30.0 million of which IDA 

US$23.0 million; PHRD Grant US$2.0 million; Beneficiary Contribution US$5.0 million) 

 
28. The objective of this component is to support the development of high potential value chains (VCs) in 
Lesotho’s agricultural sector by strengthening backward and forward linkages within selected VCs with overall 
aim of promoting diversification from uncompetitive maize monocropping to high value cash crops and 
sustainable livestock production animal husbandry, improving productivity, quality, value addition and market 
linkages towards increased agricultural commercialization and improved nutrition.   
 
29. Component interventions will foster the integration of a greater number of smallholder producers that 
dominate Lesotho’s rural landscape in potentially remunerative VCs, promote sustainable intensification of 
production through adoption of  CSA and environmentally friendly agricultural technologies supported under 
Component 1, incentivize contract farming, strengthen horizontal alliances and encourage farmers to establish 
producer groups, strengthen vertical alliances by building trusted commercial partnerships between farmers 
and private agri-businesses and drive enterprise operations towards more lucrative domestic and export 
markets.  Activities under the component are expected to result in the positive outcomes of job creation, 
improved beneficiary incomes, better nutritional outcomes and increased economic opportunities for women 
and youth in the rural sector.   
 
30. The component will finance services to support the formation of new as well as strengthen the existing 
(e.g., those established under SADP-1) farmer groups in Lesotho’s agriculture sector.  Special attention will be 
accorded to the need and interests of women and youth6.  Where feasible, the formation and strengthening of 
horizontal alliances will draw on the Smallholder Horticulture Empowerment Project (SHEP7) approach 
developed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).  This approach shifts smallholder thinking from 
subsistence farming to farming as a business by training farmers to conduct their own market surveys to identify 
local crops with potential for commercialization; training them to grow these crops profitably; organizing 
stakeholder forums to exchange information with other like-minded farmers, input suppliers and potential 
buyers; and by helping them to build good relations with these market agents.  


31. Two matching grant programs are envisaged under the component: grants up to US$30,000 for 
smallholder farmers for increased productivity and grants ranging from US$30,000 to US$100,000 to agri-
enterprises for post-harvest infrastructure and management.  All grants will require an equity contribution: 25 
percent for the smaller grants and 40 percent for the larger grants.  The procedures and selection criteria used 
for both matching grant programs will be detailed in a Grant Manual which will be prepared in a manner 
satisfactory to the Bank. The Grant Manual will specify implementation arrangements of the Matching Grant 
Programs and include appropriate technical, fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards provisions to ensure 
that the grant funds will be used for intended purposes only. It will also include the Bank’s Anti-Corruption 
Guidelines and consequences should the agreed commitments not be met. Any changes to the Grant Manual 
during project implementation will require prior Bank approval. The PMU will be responsible for administering 
the Grant Scheme. 
 
32. Towards improved nutrition, the project will support a broad advocacy campaign to increase the 
knowledge among the people of Lesotho of the benefits of dietary diversity. In addition to media campaigns, 
the project will finance the development of industry guidelines for sugar, salt, and fat content, nutrition 
fortification in food products, and labelling through stakeholder consultations. This work will be coordinated by 
the Food and Nutrition Coordination Office (FNCO) in collaboration with CGIAR and other partners. Activities to 
enhance knowledge on diets and nutrition will include nutrition education and demonstrations on production, 
processing, cooking demonstrations, food safety and storage.  The project will also provide grants to individuals 
for increasing household-level production and consumption of safe and nutritious foods. This activity will target 
women to increase their capacity to feed their families a diversified diet through the consumption of inter alia, 
a variety of fruits and vegetables as well as protein-rich food such as eggs and meat. Grants will be provided for 
cultivation of horticulture products as well as purchase and rearing of small livestock and ruminants.  Grants will 
also be provided for small-scale processing which will generate income opportunities for grant recipients.  Under 
this window, small grants in the size of USD 2,000-20,000 (up to 80 percent of total investment cost) will be 
available for production of nutritious foods and small-scale, nutrition-sensitive processing (e.g. purchase of 
small equipment such as dryers, canning). Women and youth will be given priority under this program.  
 
COMPONENT 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$7.0 million) 
 
33. This component will support project management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of 
project activities.  The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects (including audits); knowledge 
management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); grievance redress mechanism; citizen 
engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related measures. It will finance PMU staff 
related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental operating costs, 
assessments/analyses/studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other eligible expenses 
associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for social/results/impact surveys 
at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys will be supported to improve 
project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth participation. The monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of data collection, analysis, 
evaluation and reporting.  The capacity of the PMU will be enhanced by hiring additional technical and 
administrative staff as needed,  

 
COMPONENT 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0.0 MILLION) 


 
34. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation to partially cover emergency 
response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate agencies to respond to the emergency. The 
CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 
emergency. 
 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
35. Project oversight. The project will be implemented under the direct oversight of Principal Secretary 
MAFS. A Project Management Committee (PMC) that was established under SADP will be maintained given the 
multi-sectoral nature of project interventions. The PMC will include representatives from several ministries 
such as Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Development Planning (MoDP), Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Security (MAFS), Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation (MFLR), Ministry of Trade & Industry, Cooperatives 
and Marketing (MTICM), Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MoET), Ministry of Local Government and 
Chieftainship (MLGC). The PMC, which is an extension of the Technical Working Group formed during project 
preparation of the ongoing SADP will review all project reports and Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB). 
The PMC will meet quarterly with the Project Manager acting as the Secretary to the PMC. 

 
36. Project Implementation. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS)will be responsible for project implementation including fiduciary aspects 
(including audits); knowledge management/communication (including public awareness campaigns); 
grievance redress mechanism; citizen engagement; and monitoring the implementation of safeguard related 
measures. It will finance PMU staff related costs (training etc.), goods, equipment and vehicles, incremental 
operating costs, assessments / analyses / studies for preparation of future projects/operations, and other 
eligible expenses associated with overall project implementation. Support will also be provided for 
social/results/impact surveys at project mid-term as well as project completion. Additional periodic surveys 
will be supported to improve project implementation, for example to assess and improve women and youth 
participation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be strengthened to improve the efficiency of 
data collection, analysis, evaluation and reporting. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The Project will be undertaken in all the ten districts of Lesotho–Teyateyaneg, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, 
Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohale’s Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha’s Nek, Quthing and Thaba-Tseka. Lesotho is 
predominantly mountainous, with the highlands and mountain zones covering approximately 59 percent of 
the total land area. This land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile soil formations which are 
extensively degraded. The highlands cover approximately 15 percent of the country, while the lowlands and 
Senqu (Orange) River Valley make up approximately 17 percent and 9 percent of the country, respectively. 
The cultivable land is largely confined to the lowlands and highlands along the Western border and the 


Senqu River valley in the south, the latter being densely populated and resulting in much pressure on 
natural resources. Land degradation in various forms is a dominant landscape feature in the country, and 
inherent infertile soils affect the productivity of both arable and rangelands. Lesotho is highly susceptible to 
climate-related events such as frost, drought, strong winds, snow, hailstorms and floods, all of which have a 
devastating effect on agricultural productivity, including crop failure and increased incidences of invasive 
plants and infestation by pests. Specific geographical locations for the proposed sub-projects have not been 
identified yet but will be selected on a demand-driven basis during the implementation of the Project. Site-
specific environmental and social assessments will be carried out during implementation and biophysical 
characteristics comprehensively described. The designs of the sub-projects will also incorporate climate 
resilience engineering measures and take into consideration the various environmental conditions which 
could exacerbate impacts on the natural resource base. 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The environmental risks of the Project are moderate 
given the potential adverse but manageable impacts 
likely to be generated from the construction and 
operation of small-scale irrigation and drainage 
schemes. The project will finance minor 
rehabilitation works, the purchase and installation of 
on-farm pipeline systems and irrigation auxiliaries, 
irrigation canal and head work repair, provision of 
pressure pipes and network repairs. The project will 
also finance the rehabilitation of existing pump 
stations and construction of water harvesting and 
distribution reservoirs and where feasible also 
establishment and repair of existing vertical wells 
(boreholes). The total command area (hectares) for 
rehabilitation of the on-farm irrigation infrastructure 
is not known, but will be determined from the 
recommendations of the Irrigation Master Plan 



 

currently being developed with full participation of 
key stakeholders, including smallholder farmers who 
will directly benefit from the Project. Key 
environmental impacts associated with the 
construction and operation of irrigation schemes 
include (a) changes to the low flow regime of rivers 
which may have significant negative impacts on 
downstream users, (b) changing hydrological regime 
associated with irrigation schemes may alter the 
capacity of the environment to assimilate water 
soluble pollutants, (c) excessive use of both natural 
and chemical fertilizers may result in excess of 
nutrients which might have impacts on water bodies 
and human health, (d) areas with water tables that 
have a low hydraulic gradient are at risk from 
salinization, (e) reduction in low flows and flood 
flows may alter the river morphology, reducing the 
capacity to transport sediment and thereby causing 
a buildup of sediments in slower moving river 
reaches, (f) irrigation schemes may fail if the 
sediment load of water supply is higher than the 
capacity of the irrigation canals to transport 
sediment loads, (g) irrigation schemes may have 
ecological impacts, particularly in wetland areas 
affecting natural habitats. 
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to  guide the PMU in avoidance, 
minimization and mitigation of any potential 
resettlement impacts associated to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities related to 
commercialization of agricultural that will require 
land acquisition or restricted access to land and land 
use.The Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared to guide the preparation of Resettlement 
Action Plans 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered. Reduction in natural river 
flow and discharge of polluted return flows from 
irrigation schemes, have potential impacts to 
habitats both within and alongside rivers. Significant 
changes to low flows (+/-20%) will alter micro-
habitats particularly wetlands. 


Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will not support sub-projects located 
within forested areas or plantations as defined 
under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The Pest Management Policy is triggered as agro-
chemicals will be used for irrigation subprojects. 
Based on observations from the ongoing Smallholder 
Agriculture Development Project, the risk of 
pesticide use is considered low to moderate due to 
the small quantities of pesticides currently being 
used in the sub-projects. An Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared to 
provide guidance on the sustainable application of 
fertilizers and pesticides taking into consideration 
the soil type and slope to ensure protection of both 
surface and ground water. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the likelihood of chance 
finds in conjunction with earth works and/or an 
encounter of graveyard sites from the experience 
implementing infrastructure projects in Lesotho.The 
ESMF will include Physical Cultural Resources 
Management Plan (PCRMP) that includes measures 
for avoiding and mitigating any adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources as well as providing 
Chance Find Procedures (CFP).  The CFP will entail 
measures to screen for and manage potential 
impacts on cultural heritage or property that could 
be affected by project activities. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy will not be triggered as there are no 
indigenous peoples in Lesotho. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 will be triggered. The project will likely 
expand the irrigation service area; however, this will 
only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan 
has been prepared and investments to be supported 
under SADP-2 are identified for support during 
project implementation. At this stage while it is 
unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions 
as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to 
private or communal resources) related to 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
therefore Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is 
triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the 
exact location of these structures is not known, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared, 
consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. The 



 

Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the 
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU 
in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

This policy has been triggered as a precautionary 
measure. At this stage, Tthere is insufficient 
information to determine whether irrigation 
schemes and drainage canals would rely on water 
from existing dams or new small dams would need 
to be supported under the project. An exclusion 
clause will be included in the ESMF indicating that 
the project would not support activities that are high 
risk and trigger a full environmental assessment. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Exception notification to be sent to riparian states 
will be requested since the proposed small-scale 
irrigation schemes will not adversely change the 
quantity and quality of water flows to other riparian 
states.  In addition, the proposed schemes will not 
be adversely affected by the use of water 
downstream by the other riparian states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 

The project will not finance activities located in any 
known areas under territorial dispute as defined in 
OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 1: Support for Irrigation and Component 2: 
Agricultural Commercialization. The provision of grants may result in agricultural intensification and increased 
application of fertilizers and pesticides by grant recipients.  The grants will be awarded based on screening criteria set 
forth in the ESMF/ IPMP currently under preparation. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF will help to  
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case 
basis for the grants. The approach outlined in the ESMF/IPMP will apply to the matching grants, irrigation 
rehabilitation and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project or the subsequent AFs.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated 
through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, material sourcing) while the operational 
impacts can be mitigated through environmentally friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste 
disposal, emissions from food processing facilities, improved water resource use). 
Under Component 1rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes is foreseen to lead to better management of water 



resources. This activity will potentially entail minor construction related impacts that can be mitigated through a site-
specific ESMP.  The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having implications on 
pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the ESMF.   
 
The potential social issues are likely to be on restriction to land use and access and possible land acquisition for the 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and agricultural commercialization activities. The project will likely expand 
the irrigation service area; however, this will only be confirmed once the Irrigation Master Plan has been prepared and 
investments to be supported under SADP-2 are identified for support during project implementation. At this stage 
while it is unknown whether there will be any land acquisitions as a direct result of the project, there might be 
restricted access to resources (whether related to private or communal resources) related to rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure and activities under commercialization of agriculture, as a result Involuntary Resettlement OP 
4.12 is triggered to address any adverse impacts.  Since the exact scope of works for rehabilitation of irrigation 
infrastructure and commercialization of agriculture activities is not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared for the project. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the preparation of place specific Resettlement 
Action Plans. The Resettlement Policy Framework will guide the PMU in avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any 
potential resettlement impact. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential increase in agricultural 
production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  Integrated Pest Management Plan as 
prepared under the ESMF should apply. 
 
There are no long term adverse social impacts anticipated for the project, however, the project is expected to have 
significant positive effects on households, by improving dietary diversity in households, increasing climate resilience of 
farmers and promote adoption of climate smart agricultural technologies for enhanced agricultural commercialization. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
NA 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Lesotho has prepared an ESMF/IPMP and RFP.    
The project will be implemented by the Project Management Unit (PMU) under the MAFS that is currently 
implementing SADP.   The PMU has demonstrated limited capacity in assessing environmental and social (E&S) risks 
and impacts, developing appropriate mitigation measures and implementing and monitoring E&S aspects of the 
project. Currently, it does not have full-time and qualified E&S safeguards specialists to oversee the monitoring and 
implementation of safeguards. Before LCSAP appraisal, the PMU has prepared a comprehensive Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and carried out stakeholder 
consultations in line with both the Lesotho Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) law and regulations and the World 
Bank Safeguard Policies. The ESMF and RPF will provide clear procedures and methodologies for carrying out site-
specific E&S assessments, review, approval and implementations of physical investments (sub-projects) to be financed 
by LCSAP.  During implementation, the PMU will be responsible for carrying out site-specific E&S impacts assessment 
for each sub-project including the associated Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) according to procedures outlined in the ESMF and RPF. The site-specific ESMPs and RAPs will be 
included in the bidding documents for any civil works to be implemented. The PMU will ensure that all the mitigation 

 

measures recommended in the site-specific ESIAs and RAPs are implemented, monitored and reported in progress 
reports submitted to the Bank.  The Bank will also work with the PMU in recruiting full-time dedicated and qualified 
E&S specialists whose responsibilities will be to screen sub-projects, determine the level and degree of E&S risks and 
impacts, prepare site-specific ESMPs and RAPs, and ensure that mitigation and management measures are 
implemented, monitored and reported in progress reports. The E&S specialists would also train/re-train PMU staff and 
district agriculture officers in the implementation of appropriate mitigation measures for types of impacts expected. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Management Unit and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food Security (MAFS), farmers associations, entrepreneurs, local authorities, irrigation schemes, as well as the 
members of the local communities where the project will be implemented. The ESMF/IPMP, RPF have been subjected 
to public consultations and disclosure before appraisal while each of the subsequent ESMPs and RAPs prepared for 
each specific subproject will also be subjected to disclosure and public consultations. The ESMF/IPMP and RFP will be 
disclosed through the MAFS website and Bank's external website. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Serbia: Competitive Agriculture Project (CAP) (P167634) 

 
 

  
Jan 08, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC25635 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Serbia P167634  Serbia: Competitive 
Agriculture Project 
(SCAP) (P167634) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 02, 2019 Nov 21, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Improve market access for small and medium agricultural producers in Serbia 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 50.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
Other Decision (as needed) 

 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Following years of recession and slow growth, the Serbian economy expanded by 1.8 percent, on average, over 
the previous three years (2015–2017), while a stronger growth of 3.5 percent was estimated for 2018. Over the previous 
three years, growth started to recover on the back of higher investment (average annual growth of 8.3 percent) and strong 
growth of exports (up 10.7 percent annually in real terms). Consumption recovered as well, but at a slower pace (at 1 
percent annually in real terms). Growth of the industry and services sectors contributed most to the overall growth of the 
economy over the previous three years, while agriculture had a negative contribution to growth in 2015 and 2017. For 
2018, growth was broad-based with all three major sectors growing faster than last year. As a result, the growth in 2018 
reached 4.2 percent. The medium-term growth projections depend crucially on deeper and timelier structural reforms 
and progress with European Union (EU) accession. 
 
2. The Government of Serbia (GOS) has implemented a successful fiscal adjustment but economic vulnerabilities 
remain. In 2014, the GOS adopted an ambitious fiscal consolidation and structural reform program supported by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. In the short term, the program focused on the control of 
aggregate wage and pension expenditures, improvements in tax administration, and reductions in subsidies to state 
owned enterprises. The implementation of these measures led to the reduction of budget deficits in 2015–2016 and 
budget surplus of 1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 and 0.5 percent of GDP in 2018, underpinned by 
strong revenue collection and lower than planned public spending ensuing, among others, from the interest payment 
savings and under-execution of public investment. As a result of prudent fiscal policies, public debt continues to decline 
and stood at 54.3 percent of GDP (at the end of December 2018), and is expected to continue declining during 2019, albeit 
at a slower pace. However, the country remains vulnerable to spillovers from regional developments and market volatility, 
thus ensuring fiscal sustainability and supporting private sector development, growth, and formal employment are 
important for Serbia’s economic performance in the long term. 
 
3. Over this same period, the prospects for accession to the EU provided an impetus for a broad spectrum of 
reforms. In November 2007, Serbia initiated a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU. In 2012, it was granted 
an EU candidate status. Since the formal start of the accession negotiations in 2014, progress has evolved largely following 
its predicted trajectory. As of December 2018, Serbia opened 16 out of 35 chapters of the EU’s Acquis Communautaire, of 
which two are provisionally closed. 
 
4. Regional disparities of living standards are evident. There is a high degree of variability of living standards within 
the country, with 25 percent of the population of Serbia (close to 1.8 million people) being at risk of poverty. Municipalities 
in the Southern and Eastern part of Serbia have high poverty incidence as compared to the rest of the country, with risk 
of poverty rates ranging between 13 and 63 percent within these regions. Better understanding of these geographic 
disparities can help the Government of Serbia design and target policies and programs to support growth, jobs, poverty 
reduction and social inclusion.   
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context1 
 
5. Agriculture plays an important role in the economy of Serbia. Agriculture is the third largest sector, accounting 
for around 6 percent of GDP and 19 percent of formal employment, and the most important export sector, representing 
23 percent of total exports. The impressive growth of exports of both primary and processed food products provides 
evidence of the competitiveness of Serbian production in international markets and of significant potential to further 
leverage the sector’s growth to create jobs and income. From 2005 to 2016, the country’s exports of primary food and 
beverage products increased 148 percent and of processed food products increased 83 percent. In 2016, Serbia 
accumulated an agricultural trade surplus of US$650 million in primary products and of US$525 million in processed food 
and beverage products. 
 
6. Agriculture is undergoing a process of structural transformation towards a modern agri-food system. Primary 
agriculture, an important source of income and employment in the past, has diminished its contribution to the rapidly 
diversifying economy of Serbia. The declining share of primary agriculture in GDP and employment signals a process of 
transformation that provides ample opportunities for developing a modern, dynamic and more competitive agri-food 
system, able to generate better jobs up and downstream and improve income and livelihoods in the rural space. 
Improvements in labor and land productivity have contributed towards the expansion of agricultural output in Serbia. This 
is important as it leads to an increase in the supply of raw materials at lower costs to agri-processors, which in turn 
supports a much larger scale of operation, promotes horizontal integration, and reduces overall costs, all factors that 
increase the competitiveness of the whole agri-food system, as the country prepares for EU accession. Improving 
productivity is more than just raising yields and decreasing costs; it is also about raising food quality, moving into higher 
value products by using improved technology and practices2. 
 
7. Sector growth is geographically differentiated and narrow based in terms of composition of production. Growth 
patterns in agriculture are influenced by regional disparities in sector performance and composition, with a positive sector 
growth in the Northwestern parts of the country and contraction of production in Southeastern Serbia. The autonomous 
province of Vojvodina, in the North, is the key driver of agricultural output in Serbia, with 43 percent contribution to 
national agricultural GDP (in 2014) with large scale production of commodities. Between 2003 and 2013, crop output in 
Serbia expanded, mainly due to increased production in Vojvodina, as the other three regions recorded only a marginal 
expansion or even a decline (South and East Serbia). Livestock output declined over the same period, with all regions, 
except Vojvodina, recording contraction rates between 24 percent (Sumadija and West Serbia) and 33 percent (South and 
East Serbia). In the same period, livestock output in Vojvodina increased by around 13 percent.  
 
8. Despite regional comparative advantages, structural factors underpin the regional disparities. There are 
important structural limitations to agriculture in Serbia - very small and fragmented land holdings, ageing and declining 
farm labor force, low efficiency and productivity, low use of technology, high labor intensity, low financial liquidity and 
capital availability for investment (especially for smallholders) and outdated production management practices. Despite 
all of these, economic opportunities exist in rural areas. Cereals, vegetable oils and edible fruit have historically driven 
growth of agricultural production and exports, with Vojvodina’s larger producers benefiting the most. Only one percent 
of the farms in Serbia have 50 hectares or more of land and most of them are in Vojvodina3, while farmers who own less 

                                            
1 This section borrows from the World Bank Group Sector Study “New Opportunities and Old Constraints: The Context for Agriculture Sector 
Development in Serbia” by Garry Christensen (2016) as well as from a recently completed Agriculture Public Expenditure Review by Demetris 
Psaltopoulos and Svetlana Edmeades. 
2 World Bank. 2019. Harvesting Prosperity: Technology and productivity Growth in Agriculture”.  
3 Only one percent of farms in South Serbia cultivate more than 50ha of land, while in Vojvodina, 10 percent of farms cultivate more than 50ha of 
land.  



than 5 hectares of land account for 78 percent of all holdings and 25 percent of the total cultivated area in Serbia and are 
concentrated in the South and East Serbia.  
 
9. Broadening the scope for sector growth to include small and medium scale producers may be key to sector 
transformation. Although fragmented farm structures are often perceived as a challenge to scale economies and 
competitiveness, with high transaction costs preventing the many small producers from engaging in markets, in the case 
of Serbia, recent public expenditure analysis shows that smallholders4 are the most technically efficient producers in the 
country and hence, supporting their development can improve sector growth. Hence, consolidation at the product level, 
through aggregation and economic clusters, may hold the key to development, enabling the specialization of small 
efficient units and their integration into broader value chains. Middle size farms, which are often seen as the drivers of 
growth in the sector, are found to be the worst performers in terms of technical efficiency in Serbia, posing a question on 
the adequacy of the enabling environment for their agricultural development. These producer segments also specialize in 
agricultural products that are not scale intensive yet can hold important value proposition and drive the generation of 
jobs and growth in rural areas. Improving the enabling environment to support the productive inclusion of small and 
medium scale producers can drive the process of structural transformation of agri-food systems in Serbia.  
 
10. Rethinking and redirecting policy instruments and incentives can increase the speed of sector transformation. 
Agricultural budget support has been aligned with the EU budget support framework, and a Directorate for Agrarian 
Payments has been established to administer national direct payments (subsidies) and rural development investments 
(both national and EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) grants). Subsidies and 
transfers dominate agricultural spending (2011-2017) and, on average, account for 82 percent of sector expenditure. They 
are found to negatively affect sector productivity and efficiency and are thought to contribute towards freezing the current 
dual farm structure. Emphasis on area and headage payments5 reduce the incentives to increase productivity, preserve 
farm structures dominated by smaller farms and do not contribute to the acceleration of the structural transformation 
process6. Further, coupled output subsidies distort the allocation of productive resources. When the above are combined 
with the low (at least until 2017) level of funds dedicated to rural development, including the provision of public goods 
(agricultural infrastructure, R&D, advisory services, etc.), it creates a policy framework which constrains farm restructuring 
and the potential of smaller and medium-sized farms, that currently dominate Serbian agriculture, to increase their size, 
modernize production systems, benefit from expanding markets and contribute to a competitive agri-food sector and to 
a vibrant rural economy. 
 
11. Despite ample EU resources, productive investments, through rural development grants, are underutilized. 
IPARD funds in the amount of EUR230 million (including national co-financing) have been allocated to Serbia for the 
programming period of 2014-2020 in annual instalments. Serbia has received accreditation for 2 of the 11 IPARD 
measures7. Although the scope of these measures is broad, actual number of beneficiaries is limited, with most small and 
medium scale producers not being able to take advantage of this productive support due to the complex application 
process and the requirement for upfront financing. A key constraint in the uptake of IPARD grant support is the complexity 
of the application process, due to the numerous requirements which applicants often can’t fulfill, added to limited capacity 
in the Directorate for Agrarian Payments for review and approval. In addition, a limiting factor is the requirement of an 
upfront payment of the full grant amount by the applicant, which assumes availability of financial resources, with 

                                            
4 In the context of Serbia, small producers are those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size 
between 8,000 and 25,000 euros. 
5 Criticized for not relying on objective and valid baseline indicators, as well as the poor definition of eligibility criteria (Bogdanov et al., 2017) 
6 It is noted that leased agricultural land is excluded from farm support (Bogdanov, 2016). 
7 Accredited measures in 2018 are Investments in Physical Assets of Agricultural Holdings and Investments in Physical Assets for Processing and 
Marketing of Agriculture and Fisheries Products; 2 more are planned for accreditation in 2019 - Farm diversification and business development and 
Technical assistance; and 2 additional ones for 2020 – LIDER program for local development and organic production.  



reimbursement of 50 percent after all investment criteria have been fulfilled, ex post. This requirement alone makes IPARD 
grants difficult to access for the majority of small and medium scale producers in Serbia. 
 
12. National program resources can shift the sector equilibrium from low productivity to high value for small and 
medium scale producers in Serbia and encourage convergence of the National and EU programs over time. For rural 
development grants, boundaries are established between eligible beneficiaries of the national rural development program 
and those eligible to apply for IPARD support, based on either size or production potential. All producers not eligible for 
IPARD support, are eligible for national program support. Reaching out with national investment funds to the small and 
medium producers of Serbia, especially in the South and Southeast of Serbia, can improve these producers’ productive 
inclusion and competitiveness, and enable them to actively participate in the process of structural transformation of 
agriculture in Serbia and preparing them for EU accession.  
 
13. Improving financial inclusion for productive investments can stimulate broader private sector participation. 
While around two thirds of adults in rural areas in Serbia have accounts with financial institutions, only 14% of them have 
loans to operate, start or expand farm and small business activities. Most medium and larger farmers and medium/larger 
SMEs have access to finance as banks have the right expertise, systems and products to serve these agricultural segments 
profitably. However, smaller farmers have very limited access to bank financing and mostly rely on off takers and input 
suppliers to finance their inputs. This type of value chain financing does not cover longer term funding for equipment, 
machinery and is currently decreasing as these players try to re-focus on their core business. The long-term goal is the 
development of efficient, competitive markets, producing to EU standards which requires better inclusion of small-scale 
producers (among them women and youth) in modern supply chains, an increase in investments in machinery, equipment 
and knowledge as well as the modernization of processing and marketing. For this to be achieved, however, public funds 
are not sufficient resources and bank financing can play a catalyst role in the further development and competitiveness 
of the sector. 
 
14. A combination of targeted public incentives and private financing can improve sector productivity and 
competitiveness. A policy mix that focuses on the improvement of competitiveness and value addition capacity of the 
agri-food system in Serbia can have important sectoral and economy-wide growth effects by inducing positive spillovers 
to other economic sectors and contributing to employment, poverty reduction and economic prosperity of rural areas. 
The public expenditure analysis has shown that direct payments do not promote technical efficiency and productivity 
growth and slow down the structural transformation in Serbian agriculture. Reducing the direct payments envelope and 
significantly increasing the rural development one (including advisory and farm extension services and R&D) is therefore 
paramount for improving the performance of the sector. To enable that, a different set of financial mechanisms may be 
required, to enable small and medium scale producers to access finance and participate in productive decisions, such as 
matching grants8 and public guarantee funds that reduce the risk to producers and other financial institutions, hence 
stimulating financial and productive inclusion. At present, small farmers do not have financial records, do not have 
business plans, they find bank requirements challenging and, most importantly, they lack collateral. Matching grants and 
technical assistance (TA) can create the conditions for banks to finance investments of farmers that are not their typical 
clients. Matching grants can create the required equity for the banks and TA can ensure bankability of the business plan 

                                            
8 Matching grants are an instrument aimed at promoting private sector development which has been used extensively over the past years, in 
particular for agriculture development. A matching grant is defined as a one-off, non-reimbursable transfer to project beneficiaries, for a specific 
purpose, based on the condition that the recipient makes a contribution for the same purpose. These grants can be used for a variety of activities 
including technical assistance, investment in assets or financing of working capital. Total grant financing dedicated to agriculture reaches 650 million 
USD or almost twice the volume of those outside of agriculture. In addition, the proportion of matching grants projects supporting agriculture has 
significantly increased in the 2000s. Recent interest for this instrument to support agriculture might be due to growing concerns about other forms 
of support which distort financial markets such as interest rate subsidies, as well to the compatibility of such agricultural subsidies with World Trade 
Organization requirements.  




and prepare the client to approach the bank. Finally, if commercial banks require additional safeguards for their 
investments, they will be able to access credit guarantees to be soon provided by the Development Credit Authority 
(USAID Guarantee Program) and European Investment Fund (EIF) including risk sharing through a new IFC project. 
 
15. Greater resilience to climate and market risks can further boost the overall sector performance. The reliance on 
agricultural commodities increases Serbia’s exposure to price volatility, which added to the increasing number of extreme 
climatic events in Serbia (droughts and floods) further exacerbates agricultural growth volatility. Projected increases in 
temperatures and declines in precipitation will affect rainfed crops, which dominate Serbian agriculture. Production is 
concentrated in the north (Vojvodina), where crops are vulnerable to decreasing precipitation and increasing 
temperatures, primarily during the summer growing season. Rainfed maize may decline by as much as 58 percent due to 
reduced rainfall and higher temperatures in summer. Increases in temperature have already brought about increases in 
fungal diseases and pests that reduce crop production. Cereals and fruits are the most important agricultural products in 
terms of production area and economic output; fruit production is particularly vulnerable to spring frost, hail, extremely 
low winter temperatures, low precipitation and/or heavy rainfall events9. Hence, diversifying the sector base has 
important climate mitigation (reducing risks) and climate adaption (improving resilience) implications for the country.  
 
16. As Serbia advances in the process of sector transformation and alignment to EU acquis, the effectiveness of 
public service delivery becomes critical to improving sector performance. Serbia has committed to align its national 
agricultural policy to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is 
required to have all the necessary systems in place to manage and receive funds from the EU and to make payments to 
beneficiaries in Serbia in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and Control System 
(IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of support funds. Systems for 
monitoring results (and not only expenditures) will also be required by the reformed CAP, starting in 2020. EU membership 
unlocks significant financial assistance to farmers under the EU’s CAP, yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other 
trade-related requirements to agricultural production. Enhancements in digital approaches can improve targeting, 
efficiency of spending, food safety monitoring, as well as support the governance structure of the sector.  The innovation 
environment in Serbia would need to be strengthened and uptake of emerging digital technologies by farmers improved 
to help lower transaction costs and facilitate information access about best farming practices, inputs, prices, access to 
credit and markets. This will improve transparency, reduce innovation hurdles and support an enabling environment for 
productive and financial inclusion of agricultural producers in Serbia. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is consistent with the Serbia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period of FY16-
20. While the SCD identified agriculture as a priority sector for the twin goals, the CPF did not originally envisage an 
operation because of counterpart readiness. However, engagement with a new team at the MAFWM demonstrates a new 
strategic drive and opportunity to make an impact. Therefore, as part of the program update permitted under the PLR, 
the Bank decided to re-engage in this sector. Through productive investments targeting small and medium scale producers 
and strengthening the information systems of the agricultural sector, the project aims at increasing sector 
competitiveness, while providing economic opportunities in rural areas, as the country moves closer to EU membership. 
The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF identifies agriculture as one of the high priorities for the 
Government with an important dimension of shared prosperity. The project is also aligned with the strategic goals of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development (NARD) strategy for 2014-2024: i) growth of production and income stability; 
ii) growth of competitiveness with adjustments to domestic and foreign markets requirements and technical-technological 


promotion of the sector; iii) sustainable management of resources and environment protection; iv) promotion of quality 
of life in rural areas and poverty reduction; v) efficient management of public policies and promotion of institutional 
framework for development of agriculture and rural development. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
18. To improve access to markets and information systems for agricultural producers in Serbia.  
 
This will be achieved through a) improving productivity of small and medium scale farmers by strengthening advisory 
and technical support; b) supporting market access of small and medium scale farmers (including finance and business 
planning capacity); c) improving government systems to strengthen the enabling environment for all agricultural 
producers (including capacity building for the Ministry, information systems, data platform). 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

19. The project will achieve the following results: 
 

(i) Productivity10: Increase in gross value added per utilized agricultural area 
 

(ii) Competitiveness11: Increase in the share of production sold by project beneficiaries 
 

(iii) Financial inclusion12: Number of beneficiaries accessing commercial bank loans for their productive 
investments (disaggregated by gender)  
 

(iv) Use of information systems13: Number of unique users of the integrated information platform (disaggregated 
by gender) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
20. Scope: The project will support the Government of Serbia with the implementation of the National Agriculture 
and Rural Development Program. This will complement Serbia’s on-going efforts to align its national programs to the EU 
CAP programs. In particular, the project will provide financial and technical support to all productive investments in 
agriculture in Serbia through the national rural development program14 and will not participate in the financing of direct 
payments (subsidies). This delimits the scope of project interventions outside of all IPARD measures that the country has 
been accredited for or plans to be accredited for and puts it in the center of national rural development program.  
 

                                            
10 Improved on-farm productivity (use of better management practices, climate smart agriculture, etc.) 
11 Improved linkages between producers and buyers/markets (volume, quality and uniformity of production, value and volume of sales, market 
segmentation strategies, etc.; building entrepreneurial capacity of the production units) 
12 Improved access to finance to drive the process of value-addition on and off-farm (enable investments in equipment, small infrastructure, technical 
assistance, and other services that improve the competitiveness of the production units) 
13 Improved information systems for decision making at the level of the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) and 
information flow with agricultural producers 
14 In 2018, the program received 8,000 applications from small and medium scale producers.  

21. Beneficiaries: Small and medium scale agricultural production units (including producers, producer groups, 
agribusinesses/agro-processors that can provide direct link to smallholder farmers) that have or can have commercial 
focus and are not covered by accredited IPARD measures. Although large producers will not be directly targeted, the 
project will also benefit them with the enabling environment it will create through the improvements in information 
systems and the financial services provided. Small and medium size producers are defined by the economic size of holding 
expressed in euros of standard output. For the purposes of this project and the context of Serbia, small producers are 
those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size between 8,000 and 
25,000 euros. 
 

 
Description 
 
22. The project activities are structured into three Components. Component 1 will focus on improving the productive 
and entrepreneurial capacity of small and medium farmers by supporting business and financial planning for productive 
investments, as well as supporting market access and strengthening sector competitiveness. Component 2 will focus on 
improving the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to provide core public 
goods for improving sector performance. This includes establishing and information system aligned with EU CAP 
requirements to enable evidence-based policy making and monitoring of results, enhance market information for 
stakeholders and build capacity for regulatory roles aligned with EU CAP. Component 3 will focus on project management. 
 
23. By addressing sector needs at the level of producers (Component 1) and the MAFWM (Component 2), the project 
will support a broader policy reform process in the agriculture sector through: i) improved targeting of policy instruments 
to different typologies of producers, ii) strengthened enabling environment for investment for small and medium 
agricultural producers, by improving the delivery of services to these productive segments (advisory, financial, 
information, etc.), iii) improving the monitoring of public resources and their utilization, as well as sector performance. It 
is expected that this will bring about a significant shift in the utilization of public resources in agriculture from subsidies 
(direct payments) to rural development investments.  
 
 
Component 1: Improving the value-added of agriculture (US$35 million) 
 
24. The objective of this component is to improve the economic performance of small and medium agricultural 
producers in Serbia on- and off-farm. The component will support the building of entrepreneurial capacity of agricultural 
producers through the integration of production decisions with market requirements and technical and financial services. 
Activities will focus on improving land and labor productivity, broaden access to productive assets, technology, 
information, and credit, diversification of agricultural products, and access to markets, including traceability and 
differentiation strategies. Unlocking agricultural finance for productive investments, strengthening productive and 
entrepreneurial capacity of producers, developing short value chains and market linkages will stimulate economic 
activities in rural areas and can lead to the creation of jobs. It will also create capacity for better absorption of IPARD funds 
for improving the rural development of Serbia, while also strengthening alignment to EU CAP. 
 
25. The component is structured into two sub-components: (i) Improving entrepreneurial capacity – focusing on 
capacity building activities required to formulate business plans, investment decisions and financial support, from public 
and private sources; (ii) Improving productivity and competitiveness – comprising investments in equipment and technical 
assistance to support their implementation. The detailed description of the sub-components is provided below.  
 



Sub-component 1.1: Improving productive and entrepreneurial capacity (US$5 million) 
 
26. This sub-component will focus on technical assistance to producers, producer groups and agri-businesses for the 
formulation of business plans that normally bundle three key elements: i) investment in equipment, ii) working capital, 
and iii) technical assitance for productivity improvement and entrepreneurial capacity. The sub-component will finance 
the preparation and implementation of business plans for proposed investments, including: (i) business skills and 
organizational training for small-scale producers; (ii) preparation of subprojects, including information on financial cash 
flow as per bank requirements, including the formulation of matching grants15 for capital investments in equipment, 
machinery, processing units16, packaging, storage, etc., (iii) specific technical studies and consultancies that would 
contribute to the implementation and the execution of approved business plans; (iv) a communication strategy designed 
to raise awareness of and stimulate participation of the SME agribusinesses in the project; (v) support banks with 
developing methodologies suitable for assessing credit for the types of investments and beneficiaries of the project.  
 
27. The scope of the business plan will depend on the capacity of producers and the complexity of the sought 
investment. Activities will take place on- and off-farm. To enable greater participation of potential beneficiaries, emphasis 
will be placed on improving the entrepreneurial capacity of producers by providing technical assistance and seed capital 
for analysis of investment options. The business plans will also include public good/ compliance elemtns (environemntal 
and social aspects, food dafety compliance, etc.). Strict eligibility criteria will be set forth to enable the participation of 
small and medium producers. The selection and eligibility criteria and the governance and management aspects of the 
matching grants will be detailed in a Grant Operational Manual to be formulated during project prepration.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Improving productivity and competitiveness (US$30 million) 
 
28. This sub-component will focus on improving the productivity and competitiveness of project beneficiaries through 
specific investments, as defined in the business plans and implemented through matching grants (defined in Component 
1). The total cost of the business plan depends on the type of investment, the amount of working capital and the scope of 
the technical assistance. This cost also varies by the productive activity and the typology of the producers. For example, 
in Montenegro (under the MIDAS project), the total cost for agricultural producers ranges between 10,000 and 70,000 
euros, while for agricultural processors it ranges between 50,000 and 250,000 euros. In Kosovo, the range for producers 
ranges between 10,000 and 100,000 euros, while for processors it is between 30,000 and 400,000 euros. The project will 
finance only a share of this cost (through a marching grant of typically 50%), as a one time incentive to leverage private 
investment, including own resources and/or credit. 
 
29. The sub-component will finance i) the use of good environmental and agricultural practices to improve on-farm 
productivity, ii) in on-farm inputs and equipment required for the optimizatoin of production and/or diversification, as 
well as technical advice for the use inputs, technologies, alternatives, etc., iii) support digital agriculture approaches to 
improve productivity on-farm and enhance linkages between producers and markets, iv) support compliance with food 
safety standards, traceability, geographic denomination of origin and other market-related activities as part of the 
improvement of the competitive position of beneficiaries; v) carry out market demand assessments to identify differential 
market potential for products; vi) support beneficiary participation in trade fairs and other events; vii) support the 
commercialization of agricultural products by improving access to medium-term finance, providing start-up capital for 

                                            
15 There is a strong public good argument for using matching grants – stimulate cross compliance (improving enviornmental outcomes), stimulate 
use of innovations, new technologies, development of skills, modernization, horizontal integration, financial inclusion. Through the project, capacity 
for the use of matching grants will be improved in the sector, which can lead to a consecutive better absorption of IPARD grants. 
16 Under IPARD grants, investment grants for processing facilities is only provided for new structures; national rural development program can provide 
investments for rehabilitation and upgrade of existent facilities.  



     

small- and medium-sized farms involved in productive partnerships, and by ensuring the availability of financing for value 
chain support. Considering the high risk of lending to small producers, the project will support the enabling environment 
for de-risking by working with existent public credit guarantee funds. There are various guarantee schemes applicable to 
Serbian agriculture and, in particular, the EIF and DCA17, which the project seeks to leverage as a risk mitigating mechanism 
for crowing-in private investment through lending by commercial banks.  
 
 
Component 2: Improving the capacity of MAFWM to support modern agriculture (US$10 million) 
 
30. The objective of this component is to improve capacity of MAFWM and related agencies to facilitate the enabling 
environment for improved sector performance through evidence-based policy making and provision of public goods, such 
as information systems and open data platforms. A digital platform for decision making18 will benefit all agricultural 
producers of Serbia, whether they apply for support through IPARD or national program or don’t. A unique registry 
system19 would be required to support decision making and to also support pension reform efforts in the country.   
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improving information systems 
 
31. This sub-component will support the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to 
modernize its information systems and strengthen its decision-making capacity, through the improvement of hardware, 
software and human capacity for information support to the sector. Modernizing the information systems is critical in the 
process of alignment to EU CAP, including sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) delivery and monitoring, advisory information, 
land parceling (LPIS), paying agency data management, etc. In addition, the project will support a digital producer 
identification card (“one card”) to enable the better monitoring of the access to resources, support services and 
information by all farmers in the country. The project will finance the following: i) technical assistance to improve the 
coordination within and across existing information systems across Directorates and enhance delivery of information for 
decision making at different levels; ii) acquisition of hardware and software to improve the scope, functionality and 
compatibility of information systems and establish digital data collection and processing of current paper-based processes. 
 
32. The project will also assist the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) with technical 
assistance to develop capacity to assess the demand, structure, and modalities for agricultural Guarantee agency in Serbia, 
similar to these in other neighboring and EU countries, with the potential of establishing in the medium term such a 
guarantee agency (state-owned or PPP). Options to capitalize the guarantees would also be part of the assessment. 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Open data platform 
 
33. This sub-component will establish an open, public information platform where key information is accessible to all 
agriculture stakeholders. The project will finance the software, hardware and technical assistance required for the set-up 

                                            
17 Two public donor guarantee schemes with agricultural windows are expected to be available in early 2020 – European Investment Fund (EIF) 
(backed by EU funding) and the DCA (guarantee facility of USAID), still under negotiations with MAFWM – and can be tapped on by commercial banks 
in the first couple of years of project implementation. IFC is already engaged with the EIF. Although a public guarantee fund exists in Serbia (the 
Serbian Development Fund, SDF), it is weak and does not cater to agriculture. Hence, a capacity building (through a TA) activity may be warranted 
under the project to provide guidance on future needs by the public sector for unlocking private investment in agriculture. 
18 A PHRD grant on strengthening M&E capacity of MAFWM, implemented in parallel to this project, will support this platform thro ugh capacity 
building within the Ministry and technical assistance, as needed. 
19 For example, only farm household applying for IPARD grants are registered in the national farm registry (around 335,000), excluding a large number 
of agricultural producers. 


and functionality of the platform. Access to important production and market information, including weather variables, 
prices of key products, etc. is critical for on and off-farm decisions. This platform can also be a support system for advisory 
services in Serbia and can link to digital approaches on farm, ensuring a two-way communication on plan and animal 
health, and other risks that can constrain agricultural competitiveness. Maintaining the content and enabling public access 
to this platform is a key role that the Ministry can play in the enabling environment for agricultural sector transformation.  
 
34. A digital information platform can play an important role for the spatial tracking and connectivity of production 
and market demand, thus contributing to improved positioning of products, sales and overall competitiveness. In addition, 
by including weather and climate information modeling, the project could contribute to early warning systems, helping 
producers to better prepare and adapt to changing climatic conditions. The project will use existing digital agriculture tools 
and will collaborate with private sector IT companies for finetuning electronic delivery mechanisms for monitoring 
production, access to technical information, traceability of goods and identification of market opportunities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
35. This component will support the establishment of a project management team (PMT) in the Directorate of 
Agrarian Payments (DAP) and capacity needs related to project implementation, as well as project monitoring, including 
a comprehensive baseline, mid-term review and a final impact assessment of project investments.  
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project is classified as Moderate Risk taking in account the low risk nature of the interventions, the limitations on 
implementation capacity, the application of environmentally friendly practices and new technologies, and the difficulty 
of enforcing workers’ rights in multiple SME agribusinesses. No adverse impacts such as involuntary land acquisition, 
impacts on community health and safety, on cultural heritage, are expected. Some of the project funded activities may 
include support to small scale community agriculture that is undertaken within areas under some level of environmental 
protection. The project will introduce new technologies and support improvement of technical knowledge and skills of 
beneficiaries on, amongst other, water and energy efficiency, pollution prevention and best practice use of herbicides 
and pesticides. The project’s anticipated social impacts are predominantly positive, such as increased income and 
employment in the agricultural sector as well as protection from climate related economic losses for farmers through the 
introduction of an early warning system. As labor informality is prevalent in the agricultural sector, the Borrower will 
prepare Labor Management Procedures to manage risks related to workers’ rights in project supported agribusinesses. 
The environmental and social screening criteria developed for the agricultural grant schemes and the credit guarantee 
fund will screen for relevant risks and apply mitigation hierarchy. 

 

 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 
 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Benin P167678 Benin: Gazetted Forests 
Management Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 02-Apr-2019 31-May-2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy of the 
Republic of Benin 

Ministry of Environment 
and Sustainable 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve the integrated management of targeted GFs, to increase access of the main consumption cities to 
fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities 

 
Components 

 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Grant 75.00 

    



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 3 of 13  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

Benin is a coastal State in West Africa located in the tropical zone with a total surface area of 114,763 km². It is bordered 

by Togo (West), Nigeria (East), Burkina Faso and Niger (North), and the Atlantic Ocean (South).  In a politically stable 

and democratic regime for nearly 30 years, the Government of Benin (GoB) maintains a decentralized territorial 

administration comprising 77 municipalities (elected) in 12 departments. The population was estimated at 11.2 million in 

2017, of which 51 percent are women, 52 percent are 18 or younger, and 55 percent live in rural areas (national census, 

RGPH4). If the current growth rate of 3.2 percent per year is maintained, the population could reach 17.6 million by 2030. 

With a per capita income of just US$820 in 2016, Benin is among the poorest countries in the World.  The share of the 

population living below the national poverty rate was estimated at 40% in 2015, of which 63.5% earn less than a dollar/day 

(EMICov 2015).  Poverty rate is higher in rural areas (42%) than in urban areas (32%).  In 2014, youth (15-29 years old) 

unemployment rate was at 14.3% and the percentage of youth in the informal sector was 89.6% (ETVA 2014).  The 

country ranks 163 out of 189 on the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) 2017. 

In addition to transit trade with neighboring countries, especially Nigeria, Benin’s economy relies heavily on agriculture 

(cotton, in particular). The agriculture sector is the second largest contributor to GDP (25 percent) and employs around 

70 percent of the labor force (15-64 years old)1. Benin's agriculture—primarily extensive, slash-and-burn—is one of the 

major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation.  

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

The Benin's forest areas are divided into two categories: 

                                                           
1 The informal economy represents 65 percent of GDP, engaging 90 percent of the labor force and more than 95 percent of the female labor 
force. Services and agriculture, accounting for approximately 50 and 25 percent respectively of total value added, are both dominated by the 

informal sector. The large share of services reflects Benin’s role as a transit and trade hub for landlocked countries in the north, primarily Niger 

and Burkina Faso, but also the large amount of informal re-export trade and commerce with Nigeria, which amounts to some 20 percent of GDP 

and 25 percent of government revenue. (Source: Benin CPF 2018) 

 

 

a) the Classified Estate Domain (CED), a national heritage belonging to the Central State, is managed 
by the Directorate General of Water, Forests and Hunting (DGEFC: Direction Générale des Eaux 

et Forêts et Chasse), the National Office for Wood (ONAB: Office National du Bois), and the 

National Center for the Management of Wildlife (CENAGREF), all three entities being under the 

authority of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MCVDD: Ministère du 

Cadre de Vie et du Développement Durable). The CED includes: (i) 46 Gazetted Forests (GFs), of 

which 39 (as well as seven Reforestation Perimeters) are managed by the DGEFC and seven 

managed by ONAB mainly for timber production for export; and (ii) two National Parks (Pendjari 

and W) with three hunting zones managed by the CENAGREF. 

b) the Protected Estate Domain (PED), which comprises the rest of the forest areas in the Rural 
Domain. The PED forests, authorized for multiple usages, including agriculture, are under the 

territorial jurisdiction of the municipalities and managed by the mayors under the supervision of the 

DGEFC. 

 

The forest policy (law 93-009 of July 1993) that governs the forest regime in the Republic of Benin was 

revised in 2012.  It is currently being updated with funding from the European Union to incorporate new 

guidelines for sustainable forests management and is expected to be submitted to Parliament approval by 

mid-2019. A number of policy and strategy documents have also been produced to improve the 

management of forest and natural resources, including the: (i) National Program for Sustainable 

Management of Natural Resources (2008); (ii) National Strategy for Rural Wood Markets (2008); (iii) 

National Strategy and Action Plan on Biodiversity 2011-2020 (2011) and (iv) National Strategy for Climate 

Change mitigation and adaption (2018). In addition, Benin has also ratified several international 

conventions relating to the management and conservation of forest resources. 

Despite this institutional context for management of the sector, the decrease of Beninese forest cover, 

particularly over the decade from 2007-2016, is concerning:  Benin’s national forest cover, estimated at 

8.12 million hectares in 2007 (70.4% of the national territory), fell to 7.9 million hectares in 2016 (68.5% 

of the territory), a loss of over 215,000 ha. If the current deforestation rate is maintained, the per capita 

forest area, which more than halved from 1.63 ha in 1980 to 0.87 ha in 1995, will fall even further, to 0.29 

ha by 2025 (MEHU/DGFRN 2012).  

The root cause of deforestation and forest degradation in Benin is the weak capacity of the Forest 

Administration to ensure management operations in Gazetted Forests. The Administration has personnel in 

the field who, although technically competent, lack adequate operational means to monitor the GFs. This 

presence in the field is limited by serious shortcomings in physical assets, most glaringly in forest rangers 

living quarters, which are in poor condition (lacking in access to water, electricity, means of 

communication). With surveillance being carried out sporadically and in half-measure, Gazetted Forests 

have become the theater of: (i) expansion of clandestine farms, which rely on extensive slash-and-burn 

agriculture; (ii) transhumance or the settling of herds in GFs; (iii) unregulated removals of fuelwood; and 

(iv) establishment of human settlements in GFs. 

The indirect causes of deforestation include increasing demographic pressure and climate change, the latter 

of which is slowing down the forest cover regeneration process and reducing biomass in the GFs through 

faster drying up and silting of streams, more frequent flooding, and increased soil erosion. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  


To improve the integrated management of targeted gazette forests, to increase access of the main consumption cities 
to fuelwood produced sustainably, and to strengthen selected NTFP value chains for forest-dependent communities. 
 

Key Results 

PDO Level Indicators 
(i) Forest areas under sustainable management (ha); 
(ii) Sequestration of CO2 in target areas (in metric tons/CO2 eq.);  
(iii) Wood energy plantations established for supply to the three major consumption hubs (ha); 
(iv) Communities adjacent to targeted GFs with increased access to income sources through NTFP 

value chains (number). 

(v) Direct beneficiaries (of which women); 
(vi) Satisfaction of beneficiaries (level of engagement, by gender and age per target area). 

 
 
D. Project Description  

The project will consist of four components: 
1) Support to Forests Governance; 
2) Integretaed Management of Gazetted Forests; 
3) Development of Selected Non-Timber Forests Products Value Chains; 
4) Project Management. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

An Integrated Projects Management Unit (IPMU) will be responsible for the implementation of all WB-

financed environment, forestry and NRM projects, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment, 

and Sustainable Development, including West Africa Coast Areas (WACA), the GFM project and the 

upcoming Green Climate Fund (GCF) project.   

The current WACA PIU will be upgraded to an IPMU.  It will be composed of the following shared units 

by all projects under its responsibility: (i) Financial Management, (ii) Procurement, (iii) Safeguards, (iv) 

Monitoring & Evaluation, (v) Communication and (vi) administrative support, as well as a shared Steering 

Committee.  The shared Steering Committed will be in place before project effectiveness. These units will 

be strengthened as needed with fiduciary, safeguards, M&E and Communication staff to support the GFM 

project implementation.   

Each project under the IPMU will have a dedicated project coordinator and a Technical Assistant depending 

on the project workload. For the GFMP, the dedicated coordinator will be supported by an international 

top-notch forestry specialist. Both will be recruited competitively before project effectiveness.  

The Director General of DGEFC in his role as National Coordinator of the Government Forestry Program, 

will be the Director of the GFMP to mainly ensure synergies with that Program. The decentralized 

Technical Forests Management Units (CTAF) in the field will ensure technical execution of project 

activities.  The CTAF will report to the GFM project coordinator, who will in turn report to the General 

Director of DGEFC.  The headcount of CTAF employees has been increased by the Government to include 

personnel fully dedicated to project implementation, especially for timely implementation of production 

forests activities. 


F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be nationwide. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist 
Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance works for the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration 
of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks. 
The operation under preparation will also support 
the development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities(IGA)such as animal husbandry, vegetable 
gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) as 
well. Such activities are most of the time, associated 
with potential adverse impacts on environment even 
though these impacts are considered as being 
moderate. However, the locations of specific 
investments will not be known with certainty prior 
to board approval. Consequently, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was 
developed ,reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed 
both in Benin and on the Bank’s website on March 
12, 2019. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This policy is not triggered under this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Activities related to the physical demarcation of 
conservation areas, the restoration of selected 
urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, fuelwood 
production as well as the Income Generating 
Activities could impact negatively Natural Habitats if 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 7 of 13  

 

not well managed. The ESMF developed in line with 
OP4.01, includes a chapter related to Natural 
habitats  proper management during physical works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Some activities such as the agro-forestry, the 
physical demarcation of conservation areas, could 
also impact forests. In addition, the objective of the 
Government objective to increase the volume of 
timber produced annually from the current 65,000 
to 250 000 m3 through large-scale plantations in 
selected GFs (Alibori Supérieur, Ouémé Superieur, 
Dogo and Lama) in order to increase the sector 
contribution to the economy could lead to some 
forests overexploitation. A specific section focused 
on forest resources protection was developed and 
included in the ESMF. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support adoption of agricultural 
intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and 
regionally employed agroforestry methods and 
agricultural intensification techniques in order to 
recommend those practices most suitable to the 
project target zones. For that reason the O4.09 is 
triggered. Consequently, a Pest Management 
Plan(PMP) was developed and included in the ESMF 
to guide any potential use of chemical products as 
part of the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project intends to support the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas as well as IGA 
such  vegetable gardening. Such activities could 
induce excavations with potential cultural properties 
discoveries. In order to anticipate and to be sure 
that all the precautions were taken to protect and 
safeguard physical cultural resources, the ESMF 
includes a section on how to handle in a proper way 
chance finds of cultural assets within the project 
area. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous People as per the definition 
of the policy in the project areas. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

No involuntary resettlement is anticipated. 
However, the demarcation of conservation areas 
could lead to the limitation of access of resources. 
To anticipate any issue related to these aspects,  the 
project has prepared a Process Framework. Once 
prepared, that document was reviewed, consulted 



 

The World Bank  
Benin: Gazetted Forests Management Project (P167678) 

 

 

  
Feb 28, 2019 Page 8 of 13  

 

upon and disclosed in Benin and on the Bank's 
website on March 13, 2019. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the Benin-gazetted forests management project aims at safeguarding gazetted Forests as well as restoring 
degraded areas. Based on that, it will induce essentially positive impacts. However, some activities such as the physical 
demarcation of conservation areas, the restoration of selected urban GFs in major cities as urban parks, the 
development of timber production, the fuelwood production as well as the Income Generating Activities(IGA)such as 
animal husbandry, vegetable gardening and Non Timber Forest Products(NTFP) might produce potential adverse 
impacts. However,such adverse impacts are expected to be moderate, site specific and manageable at an acceptable 
level. That is why the project is rated as a category B. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The Benin-gazetted forests management project aims to protect the forests by limiting significantly their degradation. 
This measure could involve  a reduction of the agricultural productions' yield by stopping the itinerant agriculture. The 
impossibility to expand henceforth farming areas in conjunction with demographic explosion could exacerbate land 
disputes.  
However, the project will support adoption of agricultural intensification and agroforestry methods through a 
stocktaking of existing successful national and regionally employed agroforestry methods and agricultural 
intensification techniques in order to recommend those practices most suitable to the project target zones.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet determined with certainty, the Borrower 
has developed two environmental and social safeguards instruments, namely an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) including a Pest Management Plan,  in compliance with the triggering of  OP/BP 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.09 (Pest Management)  and a Process Framework(PF) as per OP/BP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) triggering. 
Further to that, the ESMF includes two chapters focusing on Natural Habitats and Forests safeguarding. Both chapters 
make the project fully in compliance with the OP4.04 and OP4.36. Additionally, a section related to a procedure of 


 

“chance find” was also included in the ESMF in line with the triggering of the OP4.11. 
The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation 
schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) 
procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social 
considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project 
activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical 
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities.  
 
The Pest management’s section deals with safeguard measures to be taken in the case of the use of pesticide to fight 
against agriculture predators. However, organic fertilizers and biological technics are supplies recommended to be use 
first. Moreover, that section sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim of protecting population health and 
environment integrity in promoting best practices. 
 
Specific ESIAs will be prepared for relevant activities before project implementation along with Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESIAs will provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result 
of the triggering of the above-mentioned safeguard policies. 
The Process Framework will guide new modalities of gazetted forest as well as restored areas access and use of their 
resources. 
Responsibility and oversight of the Project’s overall compliance with national legislation and Bank safeguard policies 
will rest with the environmental and social specialists in the PIU, as the main persons in charge of project 
implementation and monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close collaboration with the national 
entity responsible for ensuring the compliance of the project’s activities with the national legislation namely 
ABE(Beninese Environment Agency). That government’s body will conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance 
with proposed mitigation. It also receive guidance and technical support from bank’s environmental and social 
safeguard specialist during implementation support missions or through sessions of training. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The populations who will be impacted by the project activities are mainly the rural communities. They are the forest 
owners, the farmers, the hunters, the coalmen and forest loggers. During the  project preparation, these various socio-
professional layers have been consulted. In addition, these consultations have concerned the Civil Society 
Organizations (CSO) such as  the NGOs opening in the environmental management and the natural resources fields , 
producers organizations, associations, private operators, deputies, etc. These meetings are held in the form of 
workshops, of meetings, meetings of work.  
After the preparation of safeguard instruments, a validation workshop with the participation of the ABE  and all the 
above-mentioned stakeholders was held on February,2019. At this occasion, comments and suggestions from 
participants were taken in both documents. 
 
 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Benin 
  12-Mar-2019 

Comments 
 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 20-Feb-2019 08-Mar-2019 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

N/A 

 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
No   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
No   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 

 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25608 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Honduras P168385  Integrating Innovation 
for Rural 
Competitiveness in 
Honduras - COMRURAL 
II (P168385) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 22, 2019 May 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Honduras Inversion Estrategica - 
Honduras (INVEST-H) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 330.00 

Total Financing 330.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 150.00 

          IDA Credit 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 30.00 


          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 30.00 

     Commercial Financing 150.00 

          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing 150.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. High rates of poverty and inequality remain a persistent development challenge in Honduras. Poverty reduction 
in Honduras over the last decades has been slow compared to regional averages for Central and Latin America. Of 
Honduras’ national population of about 9.1 million people, 70 percent live at or below the national poverty line and about 
1 in 6 of the total population lives in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90 per day). Honduras’ rate of economic inequality 
is among the highest in Latin America, with a Gini Index of .50. World Bank data indicate that about 54 percent of income 
in Honduras is held by the highest-earning 20 percent of the population and only 3 percent of income is held by the 
lowest-earning 20 percent.  Unemployment in 2017 was estimated at 4.5 percent, with unemployment among youth at 
8.2 percent. 
 
2. The absence of a robust economic base for generating more and better jobs remains a central challenge for 
poverty and inequality reduction in Honduras.  Average earnings per worker vary widely across and within sectors in 
Honduras, with self-employment in agriculture as the least remunerative activity of all (average monthly earnings of  
L 2,404 per person in 2016, in contrast to formal wage work at an average of L 9,300). Informal work persists across all 
sectors (agriculture, industry, services) and in both urban and rural settings, and is characterized not only by low earnings 
but also by low quality and productivity, undermining GDP growth. Inclusive approaches to rural growth will require 
promoting diversification of rural incomes through combining formal and informal work, non-farm activities, and the 
intensification of agricultural activities.  
 
3. Honduras is considered significantly vulnerable to climate and weather events, with poorer populations in 
particular having a low capacity to cope and adapt. Honduras is seen as one of the countries most affected by extreme 
weather events and has increasingly felt the impacts of climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events that 
have affected landscapes and infrastructure (communications, housing, public health, etc.). In 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
generated economic damages estimated at around 81 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 2015 drought season affected 1.3 
million people and small-scale farmers had an average loss of agricultural production of about 80 percent. Several 
underlying factors limit capacity to cope with these impacts, including a lack of means to recuperate lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, and lack of basic support services.  
 


Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector continues to be a strong pillar of economic growth in Honduras.  Underpinned by 
favorable agro-ecological conditions, agriculture, forestry, and fishing together the sector grew by 10.7 percent in 2017, 
accounting for 12.9 percent of GDP (primary production only) and representing a 5-year peak in sector growth. This figure 
understates the importance of agriculture in the Honduran economy, however, as it does not reflect the many backward 
and forward linkages between primary agriculture and other sectors, both upstream and downstream. Based on 
experiences from other countries in the region, the contribution to Honduras’ GDP of its broader food and agriculture 
system would be about 1.5 times higher than that of primary agriculture alone. 
 
5. Notwithstanding strong agriculture sector performance in recent years, much more needs to be done given the 
scale of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity in rural areas. In Honduras, more than half of the poor, and two-thirds 
of the extreme poor, live in rural areas. Rural poverty is most heavily concentrated in the western and southern areas of 
the country, known as the “Dry Corridor” (Corredor Seco). The rural poor overwhelmingly rely on agriculture as their 
principal livelihood source, with an estimated 72 percent of agricultural families in Honduras engaged in semi-subsistence 
farming. This type of farming is typically characterized by low productivity and competitiveness, low revenue generation, 
and high vulnerability to shocks.  
 
6. Climate change and the increasingly frequent occurrences of extreme weather events are widely recognized as 
one of the most important risks affecting the Honduran agriculture sector. Honduras’ endowment of water, fertile soils, 
forests, and other natural capital is a central foundation for much of the country’s economic activity. However, the health 
of these resources is highly vulnerable to climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events, as well as to 
environmental mismanagement. These vulnerabilities exacerbate rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity.  
 
7. Investing in rural productivity, resilience, and innovation to boost export competitiveness will be a critical 
component of efforts in Honduras to reduce poverty and inequality. While the 2008 launching of the Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) has increased access to foreign markets, it has also exposed 
rural producers to new and increasingly competitive markets. Honduras benefits from strong comparative advantages in 
the agriculture sector: proximity to major regional and international markets, and agro-ecological conditions favorable 
to diverse agricultural value chains that are capable of meeting market quality demands. 

 
8. The COMRURAL project is currently GoH’s flagship project for promoting agricultural competitiveness and 
exports in Honduras. COMRURAL, approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors in 2008 and extended 
through an Additional Financing in 2017, is widely recognized throughout Honduras for its success in linking smallholder 
farmers to domestic and international markets. This success has been achieved through support to commercial 
production and post-harvest value addition structured under the “productive alliances” model.  

 
9. The decade-long implementation of COMRURAL has shown that Honduras needs to work on several fronts to 
enhance its business-enabling environment and promote agribusiness development.  Regulations and financial services 
that enable and incentivize entrepreneurship in the agriculture sector have not been a subject of sufficient public-sector 
attention. The modernization of critical public services is required for governance and the agricultural business climate 
to be stronger. The National Service for Agri-food Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym) and the Sanitary 
Regulation Agency (ARSA: Spanish acronym) are also in need of modernization. The public sector in Honduras can 
significantly improve its efficiency and the returns of agriculture public expenditures, and there is a general need to 
redefine the spaces for public-private coordination and partnerships in agribusiness, potentially by drawing on the 
concept of “Maximizing Financing for Development” (MFD). 



 
10. Poor agro-logistics has also shown to be a critical barrier to improving agricultural competitiveness in Honduras.  
Lack of adequate agro-logistics, both hard (infrastructure) and soft (services), is a major bottleneck. The 2018 World Bank 
Logistics Performance Index awarded Honduras an aggregate ranking (according to 6 dimensions of logistics over the 
period 2012 to 2018) of 106 out of 167 countries, based on evaluations by its international trading partners. Honduras 
ranked particularly low, including lower than the regional averages for Latin America, in terms of customs regulations 
and timeliness. Investing in the upgrading of agro-logistics infrastructure will be critical for enabling Honduran farmers 
to diversify into higher-value, often perishable agriculture products that cannot thrive under the country’s current agro-
logistics infrastructure. 

 
11. Harnessing recent innovations in technology and data collection will be critical for improving competitiveness 
and creating new employment opportunities. Developing countries around the world are improving the competitiveness 
of their products through well-established research programs as the basis to promote the use of innovation, big data 
analysis and the Internet of Things. Honduras ranks 129 on the information and communications technology (ICT) 
Development Index 2017 (out of 176 countries worldwide). According to the International Food Policy and Research 
Institute (IFPRI), the total agricultural research spending index is US$ 8.0 million and the spending as a share of 
agricultural GDP for Honduras is 0.17 percent, the lowest in LAC. Honduras’ rapidly growing Information Technology 
Services sector may position it well for developing similar agricultural “intelligence” services and other innovative 
platforms to modernize and innovate in the agriculture sector.  

 
12. The Government of Honduras (GoH) through the 2020 Plan has defined a new development strategy to promote 
the transformation and modernization of the agro-industrial and agribusiness sectors, showing a keen appreciation 
for needs on the ground as well as strong commitment to supporting agriculture sector development. A recent GoH 
exercise identified and prioritized value chains based on the commercial potential and the country’s comparative 
advantages, as well as their impact on the generation of new jobs and income for rural families. Primary value chains 
prioritized include: livestock (beef), avocado, soy, cocoa, coffee and specialty coffee, black and red beans, cashew, 
vegetables, pitahaya, tilapia, coconut and agro-forestry initiatives, which all together have a required investment 
program estimated at US$ 1,200 million. The development of these value chains requires a business model guided by 
private public initiatives, and GoH's vision for these value chains includes the generation of up to 120,000 new full-time 
jobs. 

 
13. GoH considers the continuation of the COMRURAL approach to be one of the pillars to support implementation 
of the 2020 Plan. As requested by GoH, the proposed project – informed by valuable lessons learned during 10 years of 
COMRURAL implementation – will help to fulfill the 2020 Plan objectives by expanding the “productive alliance” model 
to agribusiness initiatives in additional regions and value chains and deepening the participation of the private financial 
sector in financing small rural producers.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is in line with GoH’s vision and the with all the focus areas of the World Bank Group's 
Honduras Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF) Report No. 98367-HN, as discussed by the Executive 
Directors on December 15, 2015. The World Bank’s strategic engagement for reducing poverty and inequality in Honduras 
are structured into the following three pillars: (i) fostering inclusion; (ii) bolstering conditions for growth; and (iii) reducing 
vulnerabilities to enhance resilience. The proposed project will contribute to all three of these focus areas by supporting 
financial inclusion, technical assistance, and market access for small rural producers, improving the enabling conditions 



for agribusiness and rural entrepreneurship, and reducing agriculture sector resilience to climate change and other 
weather-related threats. 
 
15. The proposed Project is aligned with the IDA18 overarching theme, “Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, 
Resilience and Opportunity” and with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Project will contribute to 
implementing several themes prioritized by the World Bank Group: (i) Maximizing Finance for Development, (ii) climate 
change; (iii) gender; (iv) jobs and economic transformation; and, (v) governance and institutions, which present specific 
development challenges in the case of Honduras.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The achievement of the project development objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
 

• Number of beneficiaries (farmers and agri-entrepreneurs) adopting climate-smart practices promoted by the 
project, disaggregated by gender, youth, Indigenous, Afro-descendants (“climate-smart” indicator) 

• New jobs created under subprojects financed by the project (“economic inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage increase in the value of gross sales of agricultural enterprises based on implementation of the 
business plans approved in the first 3.5 years of project implementation (“access to markets” and “economic 
inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage of rural producer organizations (RPOs) working under a productive alliance approach 24 months 
after first disbursement (“sustainability” and “access to markets” indicator) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
Description 

 
16. The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA credit of US$ 150 million that 
is expected to leverage an expected additional US$ 150 million in private commercial finance and US$ 30 million in 
Rural Producer Organization (RPO) contributions. The proposed IPF will be implemented over an 8-year period and 
modeled on the well-established success of COMRURAL. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 330 million. 

17. The proposed project aims to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the 
economic inclusion of targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. Innovation, defined as approaches that 
are new and/or different for project beneficiaries, will play an important role in achieving this objective in the form inter 
alia of practices, technologies, and systems. Moving beyond a focus on specific value chain nodes or aspects, the project 
will promote competitive improvements along the full spectrum of backward and forward value chain linkages.  

 
Beneficiaries 
 


18. The proposed project will benefit farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the Honduran agriculture sector directly 
and indirectly. The direct beneficiaries will be: (i) members of the agricultural or agribusiness enterprises (formal groups, 
associations, or cooperatives of small/medium size producers and agri-entrepreneurs) participating in subprojects (about 
100,000 farmers and their families); and (ii) other agricultural enterprises (either other groups/cooperatives or private 
individual firms) participating as partners/allies in the proposed subprojects (as agro-processors, aggregators, 
wholesalers, traders, etc.) or providing essential services for their successful operation (e.g. the rental of agricultural or 
processing specialized equipment etc.) and receiving matching grant funds. The project will also have secondary 
beneficiaries: participating public sector agencies and their staff (the capacities of which will be strengthened and 
modernized by the project) and participating private commercial financiers (who will gain capacity through the project 
for engaging with the agriculture sector). The proposed project will also have indirect benefits for a much broader range 
of stakeholders in the agriculture sector through enhancing the overall agriculture sector business environment and 
through strengthening and modernizing the public entities that provide services to those engaged in the agriculture 
sector (nearly one million Hondurans). 

 
19. The project will be national in scope and will target select GoH-prioritized value chains. The institutional 
strengthening and business climate enhancing activities (as in Component 1) will have a national coverage. For 
Component 2, project interventions will be identified through a geospatial approach to prioritizing value chains and 
agribusiness initiatives by region. 

 

20. The PDO will be achieved through the following Components: 
 

21. Component 1: Support to the Modernization of Honduras’ Agribusiness Environment The purpose of this 
Component will be to contribute to the modernization and strengthening of select public sector services and institutional 
capacity to enable and promote competitiveness in the agriculture sector. This Component will finance works, goods, 
technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs to support: (i) institutional 
modernization of the Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG: Spanish acronym), National Service for Agri-food 
Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym), and Agency of Sanitary Regulation (ARSA: Spanish acronym) for the 
improved provision of public services and governance structures in the agricultural sector; (ii) operation of the National 
Agricultural Council and its technical unit, including for the provision and adoption of ICT and facilitate uptake of other 
innovative solutions for market intelligence, agro-climate systems, agro-finance, and agro-logistics to promote a better-
informed decision-making process for effective policy dialogue; and (iii) increasing the quantity and quality of the 
agricultural man-/woman-power required for enabling the agribusiness environment in project areas by supporting the 
modernization of agricultural technical training facilities, e-learning training programs, innovation labs and incubation 
centers, among others.  
 
22. Component 2: Support to enhance the competitiveness of agribusiness initiatives. The purpose of this 
Component is to support competitive agribusiness initiatives (“subprojects”) in prioritized agricultural value chains. This 
would be achieved through improving and expanding the productive alliances model, increasing complementarity 
between public and private investments, as well as expanding the participation of private commercial banks and micro 
finance institutions in financing small rural producers. Specifically, this Component would finance: (i) works, goods, 
technical assistance, and services for the selection, preparation, and implementation of selected subprojects by 
participating partners; (ii) incentives for the adoption of innovative agribusiness practices and technologies to improve 
productivity, market access, and climate resilience, and (iii) complementary investments in small-scale agro-logistics 
services and infrastructure. These subprojects will contribute to improved management of water resources in project 
activities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to ensure the viability and sustainability of the agribusinesses that they support. 
A minimum threshold for women and youth participation will be determined, and separate procedures to promote the 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 8 of 15  

     

inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities as beneficiaries in more favorable conditions, and adapted to 
their sociocultural reality, will be included. In addition, the proposed project will target a minimum number of small 
farmers with sufficient potential to exit PROSASUR (which focuses on the extreme poor in the Dry Corridor) as well as 
bring in poor farmers beneficiaries from the social protection program mainly known as Vida Mejor. 
 
23. Component 3: Project management support.  This Component will finance the overall project management, 
coordination, and implementation. 

 

24. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (CER). This Component will provide immediate response to 
eligible emergencies. As such, in the event of such an eligible emergency (as defined in the Contingency Emergency 
Response (CER) Operational Manual prepared and adopted by the GoH), this Component would finance emergency 
activities and expenditures through the reallocation of funds from the Project. 

 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be national in scope focusing on rural areas of Honduras. Priority agricultural products have been 

identified as coffee, cattle, cacao, avocado, cashew, leaf vegetables, fruit and non-traditional products, among others. 
The specific locations of the specific subprojects to be financed will not be known during the preparation of the project, 
but it is highly likely that indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities may be present in the area of influence of 
the project, particularly in areas such as La Esperanza and Copan. There is a significant incidence of crime and violence in 
the country. This project will include private sector funds contributing to the co-financed resources for the project. In that 
regard, the environmental and social requirements will apply to all the funds administered under the COMRURAL II. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The main agency involved in the implementation of the project, INVEST-H, has experience implementing safeguards 

policies and World Bank procedures because of their implementation of the COMRURAL I and its additional financing 
project since 2007 (P101209). COMRURAL I has a tracking system for the subprojects, and beneficiary organizations are 
required to have environmental management plans. The environmental and social management capacity of INVEST-H, 
however, will be assessed during project preparation, and it is expected that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
improved based on the results of the due diligence, strengthening their procedures and frameworks for monitoring 
environmental and social sustainability to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards 
instruments that will be developed. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Andrew Francis Drumm, Environmental Specialist 
Rodolfo Tello Abanto, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 


 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The aim of the project is to support the development 
of increased economic benefits for small farmers in 
particular, through the creation of strategic alliances 
with technical service providers, financial institutions 
and markets, and to increase agricultural productivity 
through capacity building and value chain integration. 
Component 1 activities are expected to mostly finance 
the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the 
acquisition of equipment for activities like the 
modernization public agricultural schools and public 
agricultural universities. Component 2 will fund 
agribusiness initiatives across the country, such as 
water harvesting and water storage, construction of 
small-scale irrigation and drainage schemes, on-farm 
irrigation technologies, low-cost pumping systems 
(including solar), the acquisition of agricultural 
machinery and vehicles the construction of modules to 
store agricultural products and the maintenance of 
vehicles, mounting structures, etc. The infrastructure 
to be funded is expected to be small-scale only. The 
overall impact of the project is expected to be positive 
and the foreseen activities are not expected to 
generate significant risk or irreversible adverse 
impacts. As such, based on the available information 
this project has been classified as Category B. 
 
Potential adverse environmental impacts include 
degradation of natural habitat, including forests, 
streams and rivers and health and safety of farmers 
through pesticide mismanagement. The main social 
impacts and risks of the project associated with OP 
4.01 are related to community health and safety, 
particularly in relation to health risks for local 
populations in areas surrounding the agricultural 
projects (including health impacts associated with the 
use of pesticides), as well as labor conditions, 
including those related to the working conditions of 
agricultural employees, including those in the supply 
chains, and the possibility of situations involving child 
and/or forced labor, migrant workers, and potential 
gender exclusion. 
 
To manage the impacts and risks of the project, the 
Borrower will prepare, prior to Appraisal, a Social 



Assessment (SA), with a strategic focus on the 
agricultural sector, with an emphasis on the issues 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and the 
identification of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
populations, with a gender, ethnic, and generationally 
sensitive approach. The SA will include potential risks 
related to threats to human security through the 
escalation of personal, communal or interstate 
conflict, crime or violence. The SA will build upon the 
SA prepared for the COMRURAL I project in 2007 
(P101209) and for its additional financing (2016). The 
SA will also identify and analyze the main social risks 
identified in the COMRURAL I project and its social 
management measures, incorporating the lessons 
learned in that operation. Agribusiness subproject 
allocation will be demand-driven and that subprojects 
will be selected during implementation. Since the 
specific locations and impacts of the subprojects 
cannot be clearly defined during project preparation, 
the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), in consultation with 
stakeholders, to identify, manage and mitigate 
potential adverse impacts during implementation, and 
guide the preparation of specific EAs, SAs, and ESMPs 
for each of the subprojects to be defined during 
project execution. The ESMF will guide the 
strengthening of elements like a Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, gender strategy, labor influx, and the 
system to track the environmental and social aspects 
in the subprojects. The ESMF will include guidelines 
for the development of labor management procedures 
(to prevent forced and child labor) and community 
health and safety plans for the subprojects. The ESMF 
will also include a screening mechanism to assess the 
environmental and social impacts of the subprojects, 
and will exclude from project funding subprojects 
likely to cause irreversible or significant environmental 
or social impacts (Category A), excluding activities that 
would impact protected areas, key biodiversity areas, 
and other terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. 
High-risk agribusiness activities, such as palm oil 
plantations, will be also excluded from the program. 
The ESMF will also incorporate criteria for the use of 
water resources, taking the analysis of watersheds in 
the analysis. The ESMF will also include a table of 
mitigation activities, implementation arrangements, 

     

capacity building plan, and a monitoring and 
evaluation framework as well. The ESMF will also 
include a specific section describing the requirements 
for preparing the safeguard aspects of the CERC 
(Component 4), describing the potential emergencies 
and the types of activities likely to be financed and 
providing a preliminary identification of potential risks 
and mitigation measures associated with them, taking 
into account the Bank Guidance on Contingent 
Emergency Response Components. The ESMF will 
include the WBG EHS General Guidelines, and the 
specific Guidelines on Annual Crop Production 
 
The project will also promote the participation of the 
local communities and other relevant stakeholders, 
preparing and implementing a Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), to guide the stakeholder 
engagement process throughout preparation and 
implementation, strengthening the existing 
Participation Plan. The SEP will build upon the Social 
Participation Plan prepared for COMRURAL I in 2007. 
The ESMF and SEP will be disclosed and consulted 
prior to appraisal. The disclosure arrangements will 
include virtual disclosure and availability of physical 
copies of such instruments in accessible locations. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project will not finance activities that are 
implemented by a private entity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project activities will not involve significant loss or 
degradation of natural habitats. In fact, prioritization 
of investments in organic production will enhance 
positive impacts on aquatic habitats, particularly in 
areas that currently have issues with pesticide and 
fertilizer runoff. 
 
Any investment funded under the project will be 
screened for its potential to cause negative impacts to 
natural habitats under the ESMF procedures, including 
critical natural habitats. Any activity likely to cause 
irreversible or significant damages to habitats will be 
excluded from project funding.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The ESMF will guide assessment of potential impacts 
of the planned productive investments upon forests. It 
will include a negative list of activities/impacts that 
could lead to degradation or conversion of forests to 
exclude them from financing. In general, the project 



promotes use of agroforestry and silvo-pastoral 
practices on already cleared land. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project finances agricultural activities expected to 
involve use of different types, quantities and 
management styles of agrochemicals or natural 
products/measures for pest management. The project 
will emphasize Integrated Pest/Crop Management 
through technical assistance. The ESMF will provide 
the necessary initial guidance for related screening 
and good practices. Procurement will screen any 
proposed purchases of agrochemicals to secure 
exclusion of red or yellow label chemicals and those 
prohibited by national regulations. During 
implementation, proposed business plans will be 
assessed in detail and managed based on good IPM 
practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will outline 
the various elements of and actions needed to be 
taken to adequately address concerns during project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project activities are not expected to involve any 
major civil works. No major movement of earth or 
excavation is anticipated, nor is it expected that 
natural features and landscapes with some level of 
cultural significance might be adversely impacted by 
the project. As such, it is unlikely that known physical 
cultural resources will be impacted. Nevertheless, as a 
precautionary measure, chance finds provisions will be 
included in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples such as 
Lenca, Maya- Chortis, Tolupan, Misquito, Pech, 
Tawakas o Sumos located in specific areas of the 
country, as well as afro-descendant communities, and 
considering that agribusiness subprojects will be 
demand-driven and will be selected during 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
descendants Planning Framework (IPAPF), which will 
be prepared and disclosed as a standalone document, 
will define the guidelines for the development of 
separate procedures to promote the inclusion of 
indigenous communities as beneficiaries of the project 
in more favorable conditions, adapted to their 
sociocultural reality and with provisions to reduce the 
potential impoverishment risks for the indigenous and 
afro-descendant beneficiaries. The IPAPF will build 
upon the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
prepared in 2007 for the COMRURAL I project 




(P101209) and for its additional financing prepared in 
2016. The SA to be prepared will include OP 4.10 
requirements specific for IPs and will to inform project 
design and preparation of the IPAPF. The IPAPF will 
define the criteria and procedures for the preparation 
of specific Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendent 
Plans (IPAP), through open, fair and culturally 
appropriate processes, including free, prior and 
informed consultation processes leading to broad 
community support for the sub-projects. The IPAPs 
will assess the potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples 
and define the necessary mitigation measures, as well 
as provide information on practical ways in which the 
Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendants can become 
project beneficiaries, and to ensure that they do so in 
a culturally appropriate manner. 
 
Gender considerations will also be addressed so that 
indigenous women and men are able to benefit from 
the project. The IPAPF and IPAPs will also identify 
culturally-specific mechanisms that can be adopted to 
address any grievances that may arise through project 
implementation, as part of the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism. The IPAPF will be prepared, 
disclosed and consulted with Indigenous Peoples 
Organizations at the national and regional levels prior 
to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Project activities are not likely to involve involuntary 
resettlement. Subproject allocation will be demand-
driven and that subprojects will be selected during 
implementation. Since project locations are not know 
yet, the project will include a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARAP) to address the cases of 
involuntary resettlement and land acquisition if they 
are identified during project execution. The RPF will be 
disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal as a 
standalone document, along with the ESMF 
consultation process. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Project activities will not involve dams and project 
activities will not rely on the performance of any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The locations of Project activities is not yet known so it 
cannot yet be determined if activities will  take place 
in 
international waterways. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
Project activities will not be located or take place in 
disputed areas. If an area were to be in dispute, it 
would not be eligible for financing under the project. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 15, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Some environmental and social safeguards related studies and management instruments will be prepared during the 

project preparation process (October 2018 - January 2019), while others will be prepared after project approval. The 
safeguards instruments to be prepared alongside the project, and disclosed and consulted before the project’s appraisal 
process has concluded, are the following ones: SA, ESMF, SEP, IPAPF, and RPF. The safeguard instruments to be prepared 
after project appraisal or approval, when the subprojects have been preliminarily defined but before finalizing their 
approval process, are the following ones: SAs and ESMPs for each of the specific subprojects, which will provide the 
necessary information to determine if additional social management instruments, such as PMPs, IPAPs, RAPs or ARAPs, 
will need to be prepared. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Transforming landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia (P164764) 

 
 

  
July 12, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23065 

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Zambia P164764  Transforming 
landscapes for 
resilience and 
development in Zambia 
(P164764) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 08, 2018 Mar 18, 2019 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of National 
Devleopment Planning 

Luapula Provincial 
Administrative office 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and in 
the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 75.00 

Total Financing 75.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 75.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 75.00 

          IDA Credit 75.00 

   
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
1. Zambia is a landlocked country in Southern Africa, surrounded by Malawi, Tanzania, Democratic Republic of Congo, 

Namibia, Angola, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It has a surface area of 752,614 km2 and population 

estimated at 17.6 million people that is growing at an annual rate of 3.2%. The country is endowed with rich natural 

resources including minerals, freshwater, forests, wildlife and fertile land. Nearly 56% or 42 million hectares of the 

total land area is arable. The country is also home to globally significant ecosystems and biodiversity. About 40% of 

freshwater resources in the southern African region are found in Zambia alone. Zambia is characterized as a service-

oriented economy with the tertiary sector at 53.7%; Mining (principally copper, emeralds, zinc, lead and cobalt) at 

12.9%; Agriculture; Forestry and Fisheries at 9.9%; and Manufacturing at 7.9%. The 2017 World Bank Zambia 

Economic Brief indicates that Zambia’s national economy experienced domestic pressures in 2015. Economic growth 

fell to 2.9 percent in 2015 and contributed to increased poverty in rural communities. Among the main factors are 

the reduction in the price of copper, El Nino induced lower seasonal harvest, political uncertainty and the power 

crisis which impacted local business operations of all sectors. Economic growth increased to 3.8 percent in 2016 and 

to 3.5 percent in 2017. Economic growth is expected to continue rising with a projected GDP growth of 4.1 percent 

in 2018 and 4.7 percent in 2019. 

 

2. Zambia's economy is heavily dependent on natural resources, particularly mining and increasingly forestry 

resources. Agriculture is largely rain-fed. Rural economies and livelihoods depend almost entirely on renewable 

natural resources i.e. biodiversity, forests, wetlands, fisheries, water, etc. The productive capacity of landscapes 

nation-wide is compromised by various drivers across agriculture, infrastructure development, unsustainable use of 

forest resources, land use, energy and mining activities. These drivers solely or in combination reduce productive 

capacity and resilience of landscapes and undermine ecosystem services, particularly due to the impacts of climate 

variability and climate change.  

 

3. Zambia is endowed with vast forests. These productive landscapes support rural livelihoods and investment 

opportunities that hold potential for national socio-economic development. About 65% of land is covered by 

forests, of which 40% constitutes miombo woodland. The country has an array of protected areas that include 20 

National Parks; 39 Game Management Areas; 432 Forest Reserve; 59 Botanical Reserves; 42 Important Bird Areas; 

and 2 Bird Sanctuaries. The forest lands, therefore, represent the life-line of rural economies and daily subsistence. 

For example, the forest sector currently contributes about 5.2% to the nation’s GDP, and provides formal and 

informal employment to about 1.1 million people in the country. The forest sector is also the greatest contributor to 

carbon emissions (61% of total emissions in 2011). It is a sector, therefore, that holds opportunity to contribute to 

national reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and for equitable sharing of both carbon and non-carbon benefits 

among stakeholders. However, the forest sector is under increasing pressure. From 2001 to 2017, Zambia lost 2.5 

million hectares or about 6% of total tree cover. This led to the release of 252Mt of carbon into the atmosphere1. 

According to FAO, current annual deforestation in Zambia is 160 000 hectares, which is approximately twice the size 

of New York City. Zambia is among the top ten deforested country’s in the world.  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

4. Zambia has been implementing the World Bank led Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) aimed at 

strengthening Zambia 's institutional framework for climate resilience (while) improving the adaptive capacity of 

vulnerable communities in selected sub-basins. Investments supported by the Zambia PPCR on the ground include 

participatory adaptation, climate-resilient infrastructure and strategic program support in agriculture, water, 

livestock, fisheries and natural resources and climate information services. Adaptation to climate change is one of 

the nation’s development priorities because the Zambian economy, particularly the rural economy, is highly 

vulnerable to the impacts and effects of climate change. This has become very important because the country has 

already been experiencing frequent droughts, extreme temperatures and dry spells in some parts, and seasonal and 

flash floods in others. Floods and droughts have increased in frequency over the past three decades, costing the 

nation an estimated 0.4% in annual economic growth. These trends are expected to intensify in the future. Based on 

records from 1960 to 2003, the mean annual temperature has increased by 1.3oC. This gives an average of 0.3oC per 

decade. Within the same period, mean rainfall has decreased by an average of 1.9mm/month (2.3%) per decade 

since 1960.  

 

5. Through different land and forest-related policies, the Government seeks to manage productive landscapes to 

enhance forest products and services for improved income generation, poverty reduction, job creation and 

protection and maintenance of biodiversity, and contribute to mitigation of climate change. In the Forest Act 2015, 

the Government has given direction on the new configurations of forests to increase people’s participation in the 

management of forests and forest resources and in their ownership of forest benefits at micro-level. This therefore, 

forms basis for a firm socio-economic and legal engagement in the collective management, including the private 

sector to transform landscapes for resilience and development in Zambia.  

 

6. Zambia is a Party to a number of global Multilateral Environmental Agreements. It is a Party to the three Rio 

Conventions: the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change; the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD); 

and the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). In 2015, Zambia joined the Paris Agreement and 

submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC). As a Party, Zambia is mandated to respond to the 

policy directions and obligations of these Conventions. In this regard, the Government continues to pursue 

development goals that complement efforts from other development partners for socio-economic and 

environmental benefits. To realize the international as well as national development priorities, the Government has 

continued to pursue efforts to establish conducive policy and legislative instruments as well as strategic plans to 

address climate change and other sectoral development challenges. Among the pieces of legislation, the following 


constitute a set of important policies that can anchor the development objective of TRALARD to increase the 

ecosystem resilience and productivity within vulnerable landscapes and enhance the disaster related preparedness 

of Zambia: Vision 2030; Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP, 2017); Second National Biodiversity Strategy and 

Action Plan (NBSAP2, 2015); National Policy on Environment (NPE, 2007); National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC, 

2017); National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2012); Zambia National Forest Policy (ZNFP, 2014) and 

Forest Act (2015); National Agriculture Policy (NAP, 2016); Environmental Management Act (EMA, 2011); and the 

National Energy Policy (NEP, 2008) 

 

Relationship to CPF 

 

7. The proposed TRALARD project is aligned with the draft Zambia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 

FY18-FY21 which puts forward an integrated World Bank, IFC, and MIGA strategy to support Zambia’s development 

through the Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP). The project contributes to the CPF Objective Two on 

Increased resilience to hydrological, climate and environmental shocks and to associated outcomes: a) Local level 

community infrastructure and natural resources management practices reduce impact of hydrological shocks 

(droughts, floods) on livelihoods; b) Climate adaptation support to communities harmonized, institutionalized and 

decentralized; and c) Institutions for environmental governance strengthened. 

 

8. The Government has embraced an integrated approach to development investments at landscape level. This project 

builds on this vision, the CPF and Bank’s experience on climate resilience, particularly through the implementation 

of projects on resilience and adaptation priorities, including i) Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase 

II); ii) Livestock Development Animal and Health Project (LDAHP); iii) Zambia Water Resources Development Project; 

iv) Irrigation Sector Development Project (ISDP); and v) Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

9. To improve natural resource management in the northern region of Zambia to support sustainable livelihoods, and 
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to the eligible crisis or 
emergency. 

 
10. The PDO will be achieved through activities under the following components: (a) Institutional Development and 

Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience, (b) Sustainable Landscape Management Practices, (c) 

Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access, and (d) Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring. 

Through these components, TRALARD will offer a selection of interrelated activities that can be tailored to the needs 

of participating areas. The project also includes standard Contingency Emergency Response component. 

 
Project beneficiaries and expected outcomes 

 

11. Project beneficiaries include communities increasingly reliant on the exploitation of natural resources due to the 

absence of alternative sources of livelihoods and energy, partially resulting from the lack of sound management and 

planning. Rural communities, including women and children, will have an opportunity to take advantage of diversified 
     

selection of livelihood options based on prudent, environmentally sound natural resource management. Local 

authorities will gain from strengthened institutions and policies and capacity to manage, plan, operate, and enforce 

regulations to achieve both environmental improvement and poverty reduction. Rural and urban communities will 

benefit from reliable and environmentally sound infrastructure that will improve market access and in a broader 

context will promote the creation of new economic opportunities for the region. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

12. Project activities will be designed to advance and develop three dimensions of the resilience capacity of the 

vulnerable communities: absorptive capacity, adaptive capacity, and transformative capacity. This approach will 

facilitate measuring resilience at project level with Results Framework (RF) indicators being connected to these three 

capacities. In addition, RF will include Predictive Proxy Indicators (PPI) to evaluate the effectiveness of forest related 

interventions, as suggested in the Forest Action Plan2.  

 
13. Key outcome indicators 

 

1. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (CRI) (ha) 

2. Forest area brought under management plans (CRI) (ha) (intermediate) 

3. Fisheries management plans implemented (CRI) (count of water bodies and/or area) 

4. Diversified livelihoods activities adopted by households (count), of which households headed by women (percent) 

5. Number of households using resilience infrastructure supported by the project (count) 

6. Small scale farmers/producers with improved market access (count), of which households headed by women 

(percent) 

7. Protected Areas approved management plans (count) (intermediate) 

 

Project level and intermediate indicators will be defined in the Project Appraisal Document. 

 

D. Concept Description 

 

14. In the 7th National Development Plan of Zambia for 2017-2021, the Government of Zambia recognizes the need to 

implement measures to reduce poverty through harnessing the potential of Luapula, Muchinga and Northern 

Province in agriculture, forestry, and tourism among other areas, and addressing the challenge of poor infrastructure. 

 

15. Given the complexity of socio-economic, environmental and climate change induced challenges facing the NRZ, 

TRALARD is proposed to bring the northern region to a new level of sustainable management of natural resources 

with expanded options for non natural resource based livelihoods and improved market access. The implementation 

of the program aims to trasform the region into a vibrant ecological and socio-economic system preserving the 

environment, resilient to climate change consequences, and offering communities broader development 

opportunities. 

       

16. TRALARD is focused on addressing the main drivers of environmental degradation, natural resource exploitation and 

persistent poverty. The project aims to contribute to improving the sustainability of poor rural community livelihoods 

in an environment already stressed by climate change impacts and rapid population growth. TRALARD will build on 

the lessons learnt from the successful PPCR currently under implementation in Zambia. For example, PPCR has 

worked with local structures and implementation partners to improve and mainstream climate risk into livelihood 

option decisions, local development planning, and implementation capacity and has gained experience in conducting 

microprojects in the intervention area. This experience informs the design of TRALARD.  

 

17. The examination of economic realities during the fact-finding mission to the NRZ reveals closely interconnected and 

mutually determined processes of natural resources degradation and deepening poverty. For example, declining fish 

stock in Lake Tanganyika and other water bodies forced some fisherman to switch to charcoal burning as an 

alternative source of income. While fish stock still continues to decline due to climate change impacts and increasing 

consumption by the growing population, forests are under increased pressure from the population whose economic 

options are severely limited and alternative sources of energy are absent. Unchecked access to natural resources and 

the lack of enforcement to protect them by authorities invite their unsustainable expolitation. As a result, the poverty 

level in the region is increasing while the natural resource base that those communities rely on is being destroyed.  

 

18. Funding and implementation capacity constraints mean that not all 26 districts will participate in TRALARD in the first 

phase. The selection criteria for districts that will be included in the first phase will include: (i) most vulnerable 

districts based on assessment of poverty and vulnerability maps; (ii) proximity to protected areas; (iii) districts 

bordering Lake Tanganyika; (iv) preparedness and commitment of districts and capacity of implementing 

stakeholders. The number of districts will be determined during preparation.  

 

19. TRALARD aims to improve value chains through greater community and private sector engagement, better market 

information and priority infrastructure. Sustainable resource management requires that environmental benefits are 

strongly linked to improved livelihoods and poverty reduction. The project design promotes greater community and 

private sector participation in sustainable natural resources management as the most direct path to fostering this 

linkage.  

 

20. Contributing to the sustainability aspect of the project, TRALARD intends to facilitate establishing robust mechanisms 

to monitor key environmental, climate and weather parameters, model longer-term challenges, including climate 

change and population growth, and develop measures to address issues in a long-term perspective. 

 

21. The project places emphasis on the adoption of advanced technologies in the natural resource management practices 

and in the measurement, monitoring, and reporting of project impacts. The application of innovative and disruptive 

technologies such as remote sensing, drones, mobile phone and online apps, biotech, water and energy saving 

technologies, will be examined during the preparation stage.  

 
22. The following areas of activities have been determined at the initial preparation stage of the project. These 

components are defined with a view of (a), (b) tackling immediate tasks of reversing degradation through adaptation 

and alternative livelihoods measures, and (c) improving infrastructure for resilience and facilitating creation of new 

opportunities through more developed market access. 

 

23. Component 1. Institutional Development and Capacity Building for Landscape Restoration and Resilience 

(indicative amount US$8 million) 

The aim of this component is to strengthen government institutions at the national, local and community level to 

develop and implement new approaches for sustainable natural resource management This will be achieved by 

reviewing and updating certain policies, providing better information, and improving the development planning and 

budget process by mainstreaming climate risk and environmental considerations into development plans. This 

component will finance policy and regulatory reviews, province, district and ward level development planning, 

technical assistance (TA), workshops, and trainings.  

 

1.1. Policy and Institutional strengthening and capacity building: This component will support the review of key 

natural resource policies and regulations relating to the forestry and fisheries sector. It will support the 

government to implement the Statutory Instrument NO 11 of 2018 which allows for community management 

for forests. In addition, this component will support policy analysis on the options and alternatives for charcoal 

production, enforcement, and government regulation to license charcoal production. The activities will also 

help development and disseminate a manual on community participatory co-management; as well as the 

establishment of effective interdepartmental structures to organize collaboration at the ecosystem level to 

enhance integrated approaches to natural resource management and coordinated land use planning and 

management. The outputs will focus on: integrated approaches for community mobilization, partnerships for 

sustainable forest landscape restoration (FLR), and targeted studies, for example, on models, resource 

mobilization for sustainable PA management. This will enhance the ability of the government to determine 

sectors that hold greater promise to transform landscapes for resilience and development and scale up 

interventions. 

 

1.2.  Advance the beneficial use of hydro-meteorological information: The project will finance the improvement of 

early warning systems and related institutional systems to improve the resilience of communities to climate 

change impacts. This will include technical assistance to develop a long term strategic plan to strengthen the 

institutions i.e. Zambia Meteorology Department (ZMD), Disaster Management and Mitigation unit(DMMU), 

Water Resources Management Authority (WARMA) etc. responsible for delivering meteorological and 

hydrological information, data management and forecasting systems. This sub-component will introduce the 

concept of using hydro-met information for better decision making and delivery that information to local 

governments and primary producers: (for water resources, landscape management, disaster management, 

agriculture, environment, hydropower utilities, PAs.); (c) priority infrastructure rehabilitation identified in the 

Hydromet Master Plan developed under the World Bank Water Resource project (including hydromet 

infrastructure and related office refurbishment and equipment); and (d) community training, awareness 

campaigns, knowledge on improved climate information use and disseminationto end-users nationaly, with 

specific focus in the Chambeshi-Luapula catchment area. 

24. Component 2. Sustainable Landscape Management Practices (indicative amount US$32.5 million) 

The component aims to improve the livelihoods and resilience of rural communities by improving the management 

of the rich natural resources base that rural communities are dependent upon through: (a) ecosystem based 

integrated natural resource management planning; (b) improved management of protected areas and protection of 

environmental services; and (c) diversification and increased sustainability of rural livelihoods.  

 

2.1. Invesment in ecosystem based Integrated Natural Resource Management Planning (INRMP): This activity will 

support the preparation and implementation of INRMP plans in the project targeted area. These plans will be 

based on the assessment of the available natural resources and their conditions, as well as the sustainable 

levels of production. The plans will be done in year one. They will be developed and implemented with the 

involvement of relevant stakeholders, including communities, cooperatives, and local government, and will 

be based on physical, ecological, and socio-economic baseline data. 

 

2.2. Improved Management of Protected Areas (PA) and Reserves: This activity will support the effective and 

sustainable development of the three PA systems in the northern region of Zambia – Lavushi Manda National 

Park, Lusenga Plain National Park and Nsumbu National Park – to preserve the biodiversity and ecosystem 

services for the well-being of people with focus on forest dependent communities and potenital to develop 

tourism opportunities. This support will include: (1) preparation of protected areas management plans; (2) 

capacity assessment of the staff and analysis of the financial resources required to fully protect the protected 

areas; (3) priority park infrastructure such as staff offices and housing nearer to the park; (4) equipment 

including vehicles, GPS, computers; disruptive technology for monitoring animal populations, poaching 

activities; (5) training.  

 

2.3 Strengthen opportunities for primary producers to transform their livelihoods into market based enterprises: 

The main aim of the activity is to identify key challenges, risks and opportunities for transforming livelihoods 

of producers into market based enterprises. The project will provide resources to conduct value chain studies 

(including secondary sources of information) to identify key challenges to market entry and design 

interventions to incentivize smallholder producers to initiate viable enterprises for increasing productivity, 

incomes and resilience to climate change. This component will draw from the lessons learnt during the pilot 

to support primary producers and small business operaters under the Zambia PPCR private sector approcah. 

 
2.4. Sustainable livelihoods: Rural populations in the north are dependent on subsistence agriculture and fishing, 

both of which have seen severe declines in productivity and have increased risk due to climate variablility. 

This activity aims to: increase smallholder production and productivity of diversified value chains; reduce 

farmers risk through insurance and prudent and informed risk taking strategies; improving access to markets; 

and diversifying into alternative livelihoods that are non resource based enterprises. This will be done through 

a program of support which encourages farmers to adopt conservation agriculture practices, promotes 

savings, provides technologies to reduce post harvest loss, establishes rural aggregation centers and linkages 

to buyers and advanced purchase contracts, and persue alternative livelihoods that are non natural resource 

based businesses. The alternative livelihood activities will target women and youths to lifting up the socio-

economic situation particularly of women who use natural resources with inferior financial value compared 


to men. The roster of alternative livelihoods will include increased rearing of livestock, agroforestry, 

agroprocessing, aqua culture, fingerlings production, fish processing, feed making for fisheries, bee keeping, 

caterpillars and mushrooms production, and other service industries such as tailoring, hair dressing etc.  

 

25. Component 3: Infrastructure for Resilience and Market Access (indicative amount US$27 million IDA) 

Activities under this component aim at supporting and improving NRZ infrastructure in vulnerable areas that suffers 

from the lack of investments and is additionally adversely impacted by climatic changes. Such impacts include drastic 

changes in rain patterns resulting in floods and droughts, shortages in water, changes in wind patterns, lack of 

passable roads and damaged bridges leaving entire communities cut off from the basic services and goods during 

floods where durations are becoming extended. This increases the likelihood of lack of water and nutrition, diseases, 

livestock loss etc. In addition, this component will help identify ways to improve market access for primary producers 

who often lack opportunities and/or knowledge on the ways to make their produce accessible to the market. 

 

3.1.  Investments in resilience strengthening infrastructure: identify in concert with stakeholders the most sensitive 

pieces of small-scale infrastructure in the most vulnerable areas that require prompt investments. 

Infrastructure is the backbone of well-being and safety of people and its reliability and even presence in such 

poorly serviced regions is central to communities’ resilience. Potentially, they include (a) feeder roads, 

bridges, culverts, (b) water harvesting structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, solar-powered 

irrigation), and (c) traditional and alternative energy sources.  

 

3.2. Examining opportunities for restoration of traditional canals: conduct feasibility study on possible restoration 

of traditional canals in the North. Traditional canals in Zambia play multiple roles: transportation, water body, 

fish harvesting, and traditional ceremonies. The canals in the North are in a state of disrepair after decades of 

no investment or maintenance, yet their potential for transportation and commerce remains high. This sub-

component will draw from the experience acquired from similar successful operations under the PPCR in the 

Barotse sub-region.  

 
3.3. Facilitated access to markets: determine ways and forms to support producers in establishing access to 

markets. Jointly with stakeholders, including producers, authorities, private companies and consumers, the 

project will examine constraints and bottlenecks in establishing connection between products and markets 

and suggest measures to address them. It is not an uncommon situation when farmers’ produce – mangos, 

oranges – goes to waste because farmers have no ability to deliver their products to potential consumers. This 

inability undermines income and negatively affects resilience of producers.  

 

26. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (Standardized)  

This contingency component can be triggered by a joint Government and World Bank agreement in case of an 

emergency. This component had been embedded in the project to finance early recovery and/or specific emergency 

works, goods, and services, in case of eligible emergencies/crises/disaster caused by natural or man-made hazard 

including public health crisis. The mechanism is designed to support enhancement of preparedness, early recovery 

activities, and provision of rapid response to disaster that can be implemented in a relatively short period. This 

component was considered necessary because of the inherent in Zambia’s current socioeconomic and climate related 
hazards (unexpected flooding or drought, an aggravation of the state of fragility, as a result of influx of large groups 

of displaced people ( cross boarder and internal displacements) could potentially shift priorities. Reallocation of funds 

to CERC can only be done when there is a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or society causing 

widespread human, economic, or environmental losses that exceed the ability of the affected community or society 

to cope using its own resources. Following such a disaster event where both the region and national resources cannot 

sufficiently and adequately address the situation, the Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) may trigger 

activation of CERC according to national law and subject to the World Bank’s activation policy.  

 

27. Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring (US$7.5 million IDA) 

This component will finance TA, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs to support the project’s day-to-day 

implementation and management, including procurement, FM, environmental and social safeguards, and 

preparation of annual work plans and organization of audit reports. The component also includes the design and 

implementation of a communication strategy to report on the project results and to raise awareness about land 

degradation, restoration and climate change impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation. It also supports the M&E system 

to report on the expected project’s results (disaggregating by gender, where appropriate) and systematizes the 

project’s lessons learned. The component also finances impact evaluation to assess project’s impacts on specific 

elements such as adopted livelihoods.  

  

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project covers the Northern region of Zambia (NRZ), which includes Luapula, Northern, and Muchinga provinces. This 

area has vast coverage of pristine Miombo forest, four national parks, four lakes, water falls and many rivers. They lie in 
the third agro ecological zone with the annual rainfall of about 1200 mm. NRZ encompasses over 35% of managed lands 
which contribute to protecting and maintaining large intact natural landscapes. The region is endowed with natural 
resources that include rich biodiversity and half of the wetlands of international importance listed under the Ramsar 
Convention. These wetlands contain habitats for several important fauna and flora species, are a natural flood controller 
and important for groundwater recharge. The natural resources in the area also represent a life-line for rural economies 
and daily subsistence.  
 
The provinces are home to over 3.5 million people with record high levels of poverty 81% (Luapula), 79% (Northern) and 

69% (Muchinga). The main economic stay for the people of this area is agriculture due to the availability of arable land, 
abundant water bodies and good annual rainfall. The area has experienced vulnerabilities due to climate variability and 
human related activities posing a challenge to conserving natural resources. Factors contributing to vulnerabilities include 
forest lands under threat from human encroachment for settlement and growing food insecurities due to population 
growth. Increased mining activities result in growing demand for energy met through heightened production of charcoal 
and logging. An estimated 16,000,000 hectares out of 21,423,600 hectares total land (75%) is under threat of degradation 
from these activities.. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The PPCR PIU under Ministry of National Planning and Development has implemented and monitored safeguard 
compliance in accordance with Bank policies. The project performance has been rated satisfactory, while the risk has 
been moderate. The PIU has a dedicated Safeguard Specialist who is supported by Community Adaptation Specialists in 
each district. The PIU has gained substantial experience with Bank funded projects through their active participation in 
the design and preparation of the Forest Investment Project, Displaced Person's and Border Communities, and the 
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (ZIFLP). The PIU played a pivotal role in setting up the ZIFLP PIU which is now 
operational. 
  
Given the PIU's involvement in design, preparation and implementation of climate resilient projects, the PIU is being 

transformed into a national coordinating unit that will assume a supervisory role in monitoring implementation of the 
TRALARD project at the national level.To fulfill  this new role, more experts (including Environmental and Social) will be 
recruited to strengthen their capacity to manage environmental and social risks.  
 
For the implementation of the TRALARD project, three PIUs will be established at provincial level (i.e. one for each target 

province). The staffing structure will include Environmental and Social experts as key personnel. These will collaborate 
with District officials that will be assigned to the project. Working through existing district structures will enhance project 
ownership and contribute to sustaining project investment. However, this being the initial engagement with Provincial 
and District counterparts in the 3 provinces, a capacity assessment will be undertaken as part of project preparation. 
Results on the assessment will feed into the a capacity building plan that will be developed for the project. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Tito Joel Kodiaga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Njavwa Namposya Chilufya, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The  policy on environmental assessment has been 
triggered as the proposed  TRALARD project will 
involve infrastructural works. The  infrastructural 
works are envisaged to be undertaken under 
component  2 and 3 of the project. Component 2: of 
the project will involve the promotion of sustainable 
landscape management practices and this will 
incorporate the improved management of protected 
areas  and reserves. Lavushi Manda , Lusenga Plain 
and Nsumbu National Parks and their buffer Game 
Management Areas (GMA's) have been identified as 
potential beneficiary parks. The project will support 
the construction and rehabilitation of  infrastructure 
such as, park structures, staff offices and their housing 
in the vicinity  of the parks. Component 3: of the 
project will involve the investment in infrastructure for 
resilience and market access. Investments will focus 
on the  sensitive pieces of small-scale infrastructure in 
the most vulnerable areas that require urgent 


attention. These will include  the periodic 
maintenance of  feeder roads (existing dirt or gravel 
roads) and support structures such as small access 
bridges and placement of culvert,  water harvesting 
structures (check and sand dams, earthen bunds, 
solar-powered irrigation), and the restoration of 
existing traditional canals.  
 
Since the project is at concept stage,  the scope and 
beneficiary areas have not yet been fully defined, an 
ESMF and  associated RPF is currently under 
preparation to assess potential safeguards 
risks/impacts associated with project activities and 
subprojects.In addition, line with the Bank's guidance 
on Contingent Emergency Response 
Components(CERC); Component 4 (CERC): This 
Component requires that the ESMF includes specific 
section (or a CERC-specific ESMF) describing the 
potential emergencies and the types of activities likely 
to be financed, and provide a preliminary evaluation 
of potential risks and mitigation measures associated 
with them. The ESMF will ensure to include a section 
addressing the CERC guideline. Once finalized, ESMF 
will be formally cleared by the Bank and disclosed at 
national level and on the Bank’s website.   
 
 
Furthermore, a Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA) covering 4 out of 10 provinces was 
conducted under a similar project,  PPCR in 2013. 
Since the  proposed TRALARD beneficiary areas were 
excluded in the initial assessment. The SESA will be 
updated to include Northern, Luapula and Muchinga 
provinces. For the benefit of future project, expanding 
the scope to cover the entire country will be 
considered. It is anticipated that TRALARD project will 
benefit from the findings of the SESA which will be 
incorporated in the development of INRM Plans and 
PA Management Plan.  
 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 
The policy on natural habitat has been triggered as the 
project will be implemented in ecologically sensitive 

areas and  habitats such as wetlands and national 
parks. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Bank policy on forest has been triggered as the 
TRALARD will involve afforestation activities to 
improve forest health.  The project will provide 
incentives to communities in beneficiary areas to 
protect vegetation cover in  the existing  forests and  
regenerate deforested areas 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy on pest management has been triggered as 
the project will involve livelihood activities that may 
directly or indirectly support the use of pesticides. A 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be included in the 
ESMF. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy on physical culture resources has been 
precautionary triggered as the project will be 
implemented across three provinces and the works 
may unearth artefacts of cultural and heritage value. A 
chance find procedure will be included in the ESMF to 
guide, should a chance find occur. It will further layout 
the process for notifying the National Heritage 
Conservation Commission (NHCC) in case of an 
occurrence.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy on Indigenous Peoples has not been 
triggered as the project will be implemented in 
Luapula, Northern and Muchinga Provinces where 
there is no presence of Indigenous Peoples as defined 
by Bank Policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Policy on Involuntary Resettlement has been 
triggered. This will apply to selected project activities 
which may result in land acquisition for the 
establishment of priority infrastructure to support 
local tourist operators. A RPF will be prepared in 
consultation with key stakeholders. The RPF will guide 
preparation of the RAP to address physical and 
economic impacts that may arise from project 
implementation. 
Luapula, Muchinga and Northern provinces are 
endowed with forests and national parks where 
communities derive natural resources for livelihood 
activities. Possible restrictions to natural resources 
arising from project implementation will be managed 
through preparation of a Process Framework. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
The policy on dam safety has been triggered as the 
project will  support the construction of small water 


harvesting structures such as check and sand dams 
and earthen bunds. These will be small dams as 
defined by Bank policy and a generic safety guidelines 
for small dams will be incorporated in the ESMF.  
 
In compliance with the requirements of the policy, 
generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF.”. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy has been triggered as it will be 
implemented in a catchment area that feeds into the 
Luapula River which falls within an international 
waterway. This will require the notification of riparian 
states in which the waterways falls. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy has not been triggered as it will not be 
implemented in any disputed area as defined  by Bank 
policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 01, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Studies launched September 30, 2017. Draft ESMF is currently being finalized. An RPF and PF are under preparation as 

part of the safeguards requirement. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25297 

P
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Paraguay P168153  Productive Alliances 
Project (P168153) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jun 03, 2019 Oct 08, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Paraguay Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock Production 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 120.00 

Total Financing 120.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 

          Municipalities of Borrowing Country 1.00 

          Local Farmer Organizations 19.00 

   


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Over the past decade, the expansion of export-oriented agriculture production has significantly contributed to 
GDP growth and poverty alleviation. During the period 2004 and 2016, Paraguay’s average growth was 4.7 percent per 
year, with high volatility. Key drivers of growth were the agriculture and hydroelectric power sectors. Crops alone 
contributed to one-quarter of total growth, with expanded agriculture (comprising backward and forward linkages) 
contributing a higher share to overall GDP growth. Agricultural products constitute the bulk of Paraguay’s exports. There 
is a strong duality in the sector with a significant share comprised of a lagging subsistence farming component, but in 
parallel there is a vibrant and substantial commercially-oriented agricultural industry segment (individuals, cooperatives 
and corporations), which engage in value chains such as soybean and meat. Capitalized agriculture uses about 70 
percent of the country’s productive area. Since 2003, the boom in export-oriented production has contributed to a 
significant fall of national poverty rates: 45 to 20 percent in urban areas, and 58 to 36 percent in rural areas. These 
prosperous years have also resulted in an increase in income for the bottom 40 percent and in the expansion of the 
middle class, which currently comprises 38 percent of Paraguay’s population.    
 
2. However, a large rural population accompanied by extensive rural poverty are among the salient features of 
Paraguay. In 2017 Paraguay’s population was estimated at 7 million inhabitants, with 40 percent of the population –
roughly 2.8 million-- living in rural areas. This represents the highest percentage of rural population of any country in 
South America, and among the highest in all of Latin America. About 97 percent of Paraguay’s population live in the 
Eastern Region, roughly 40 percent of the total territory, whereas only 3 percent of the population reside in the Western 
Region (Chaco). Most of the total poor live in rural areas, with a fair share engaging in agriculture-related activities, with 
informality as the hallmark.   
 
3. To build on the gains during the past decade in terms of growth and poverty alleviation, Paraguay must focus 
on creating sustainable economic opportunities for the poor and vulnerable population. Approximately 60 percent of 
Paraguay’s population are considered either poor or vulnerable, that is, they are at risk of falling back into poverty. 
Indigenous peoples, slightly under 116,000 inhabitants –a 2 percent of the total Paraguayan population, are one of the 
most vulnerable population groups. Indigenous peoples are essentially rural and have very limited access to basic 
infrastructure and services. For instance, not more than 6 percent of indigenous households are connected to a supply 
system of potable water. Among indigenous groups, monolingual Guaraní speakers are particularly disadvantaged. 
Another important vulnerable group is made up of subsistence producers and small or medium-sized producers in 
transition to commercial schemes. This group forms the end of a spectrum of farmers, which as noted above, at the 
other end, includes the highly capitalized farmers and corporations. This group of producers who are primarily poor and 
vulnerable, comprise at least 200,000 households; they are particularly affected by the lack of access to markets, 
finance, technology, land, human capital, and connectivity, and are harshly impacted by extreme weather events and 
the risks posed by climate change. They have not succeeded in keeping up with the pace of modernization of Paraguay’s 
agriculture, led by the large farmers and corporations. A third group that is considered vulnerable is the youth. Half of 
the young people that neither study nor work reside in rural areas, with many of them performing unpaid family labor in 
agriculture-based activities gender. Despite the progress made in Paraguay in recent years, creating economic 
opportunities for these groups is an unfinished agenda. Efforts must focus on improving incomes and reducing 
vulnerability through creating conditions to enable opportunities for self-employment and access to jobs, which are 
indispensable for reducing poverty in Paraguay.    
 
4. Paraguay enjoys many innate advantages which provide it with a great potential for driving pro-poor growth 
through the development of a resilient and responsible agro-industrial sector.  To do so however, it must overcome 
the inter-linked challenges of creating economic opportunities while conserving its natural endowments and 
improving resilience to climate change. Recent growth in Paraguay has taken a toll on its natural resource base. For 
example, logging and clearing land for crops, cattle ranching, and charcoal/biomass have resulted in extensive forest 
degradation and deforestation.  Combined with lack of planning around soil and water resources management, this is 
contributing to increasing the vulnerability to extreme weather events. It is critical that the expansion of agro-industrial 
productive activities and the creation of jobs go hand in hand with sound management of Paraguay’s rich natural capital 
comprising, fertile soils, abundant water, and pastures and forest resources; in addition, the enhancement of its capacity 
to develop and implement a strategy for integrated management of climate change risks are all keys to securing the 
basis of long term growth and development for the generations to come.      
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. The bulk of the rural poor and vulnerable population, a good part of which are indigenous peoples, rely on 
agriculture to make a living. In 2017, 76 percent of households in rural areas were engaged in family farming or small, 
informal agri-based activities, individually or in an organized way. If looking only at indigenous peoples, 71 percent of 
households rely on agriculture along with forestry, hunting and freshwater fishing. The impressive growth of capitalized 
agriculture has not translated into significant benefits for smallholders, who are left far behind in terms of per capita 
income and other socio-economic indicators, even when compared to rural households that do not rely on agriculture.  
Such subsistence and transition producers tend to combine agriculture with multiple sources of income such as off-farm 
labor, migration and remittances as a coping mechanism; but, on-farm production and associate income constitutes a 
key source of income which is critical for overall sustenance of these households. In addition, their capacity to mitigate 
against and adapt to climate risks is extremely limited. In 2011 agricultural households in rural areas were found to be 
more than twice as likely to report a negative shock than non-agricultural households. Exposure to climate or other 
shocks can push vulnerable households back to or further into poverty since the economic gains in years with good sales 
can be drawn down with just one season of severe drought .   
 
6. Global experience demonstrates that building resilience against natural disasters and climate change, 
integrating value addition opportunities and removal of barriers to accessing markets for agriculture creates 
economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable population. Recent evidence in Paraguay confirms that 
vulnerable rural inhabitants can lift themselves out of poverty and begin to prosper when they receive assistance in 
accessing markets and technology. It is the case of about 25,000 households who have benefited from the Sustainable 
Rural Development Project (PRODERS, P088799 ). By selling their surpluses in open-air markets or through farm-gate 


intermediaries, subsistence and transition producers have significantly enhanced their agricultural earnings and half of 
them were able to rise above the poverty threshold, according to the measurement of June 2018 in relation to the 
baseline.   
 
7. There is untapped potential to enhance outcomes through linkages with formal supply chains, to enable 
transition of subsistence and transition producers toward greater value addition. Paraguay’s food system has formal 
supply chains with larger potential, such as organic yerba mate for export, horticulture for supermarket, and nutrition-
rich grains and beans as inputs for processed foods. Empirical experience in Paraguay indicates, however, that multiple 
barriers prevent rural producers from becoming providers in more modern chains, especially due to the lack of critical 
assets, infrastructure, knowhow and/or organization. In this regard, women find it particularly difficult to access 
financial services and technology. Only 30 percent of the credits issued by the Enabling Agricultural Credit Office (in 
Spanish “Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación”) and 5 percent in the case of the Livestock Fund (in Spanish “Fondo 
Ganadero”) are assigned to women . It is almost universally challenging for smallholders to meet demand requirements, 
including supplying consistent quantities of quality goods that comply with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and are 
delivered on time.     
 
8. Fostering sustainable and inclusive value chain integration has become a priority for the current 
administration. The National Development Plan of Paraguay (2014-2030) seeks to shift the overarching orientation of 
the national economy towards a knowledge-based approach, with diversified and competitive sectors, and increased 
technology adoption. Creating opportunities for the most vulnerable population groups and reducing inequalities are 
essential elements of the Plan. Building on the same in 2016, Paraguay submitted its Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Paraguay’s INDC identifies 
agriculture, forestry, land use and land use change as strategic sectors for adaptation and mitigation actions. More 
recently, the administration of President Abdo, who took office in August 2018, has committed to take family farming to 
the next level. To do so, the Government is promoting technology adoption and long-lasting linkages with competitive 
markets, so that producers improve their income in the short and medium-term and acquire economic and climate 
resilience in the long term.   
 
9. The sectoral agenda is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production in partnerships with its 
decentralized institutions. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production (MAL) focuses on producers, for whom 
agriculture represents a critical source of income (see beneficiaries for a more specific classification). It is responsible for 
the sectorial policy and is at the helm of a set of decentralized sectoral institutions such as the Paraguayan Institute for 
Agricultural Technology (IPTA,: in Spanish “Instituto Paraguayo de Tecnología Agraria”), the National Service for Quality 
and Safety in Vegetables and Seeds (SENAVE: in Spanish “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Sanidad Vegetal y de Semillas”), 
and  National Service for Animal Quality and Health (SENACSA, for “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal”), and 
the aforementioned Enabling Agricultural Credit Office. To fulfill its mandate, the MAL not only formulates the national 
policy, but also carries out projects at the grassroot level with finance of the International Fund for Agriculture and the 
Interamerican Bank for Development.   
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
 
10. The Concept Note has been drafted at the time of preparation of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 
the period FY19-23. By appraisal of the project, the CPF will have been approved by the World Bank Board of Directors. 
 
11. The Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) completed in June 2018 flagged the following three structural challenges 
for Paraguay: (i) concentration of inputs, production, exports, income and political influence; (ii) informality of 
production, labor, land and trade; and (iii) inefficient provision of public services. To address them in the CPF, the SCD 
proposed four policy priority areas: (i) accountable institutions, the rule of law, and business environment; (ii) quality of 
public services; (iii) natural wealth management; and (iv) human capital. The proposed project is mainly aligned with 
policy areas (i) and (ii). 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

Increase in the volume of sales of project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, youth, and Indigenous (“access to 
market indicator”); 
 
Percentage of project beneficiaries (producers, cooperatives and agro-enterprises) in operation 1 year after the 
completion of the investment subproject (“sustainable access to market indicator”);  
 
Number of beneficiaries adopting climate smart practices promoted by the project, disaggregated by, among others, 
gender, youth, and ethnicity (“access to climate risk management approaches indicator”). 
 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
12. The project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable 
population by applying a two-fold approach: i) intervene at the grass-roots level via capacity building and subprojects 
(components 1a and 2a/b) focused on improving access to markets and resilience to extreme weather events and 
climate change; and ii) improve critical institutions, systems, and infrastructure (component 1b and 2c). In the short and 
medium term, the project will put into operation an inclusive agribusiness model: productive alliances. Producers will 
enhance their income-generating capacity by becoming more engaged in business activities, while incorporating more 
climate resilient technologies and approaches. In the long term the project will spark the creation of both on-farm and 
off-farms jobs and strengthen resilience.    
 
13. The project will have national coverage. Because Paraguay is a diverse country, activities will be tailored to fit 
the diverse ecological and productive contexts. Prioritization criteria for specific activities will be determined.  
 
14. Project beneficiaries will include the following categories:  
- rural indigenous communities; afro-descendants. Participation by women and youth will also be prioritized 
- organized rural smallholder producers from any of the following categories used for family farming policies in 
Paraguay: subsistence, transitional or capitalized producers, 
- producer cooperatives, small- and medium-sized agro-entrepreneurs, and other partner institutions; 
- and selected public institutions.  
Based on the experience of comparable interventions in Paraguay and other countries and counting a household as a 


single beneficiary once it receives any type of support, the project will benefit over 30,000 poor and vulnerable rural 
households, with the target figures for both women-headed households and young producers to be determined later. 
Beneficiaries of investment support will be selected on a competitive basis (see component 2) and using screening 
mechanisms that ensure that the benefits reach the poor and vulnerable groups. This operation will adopt a customized 
approach to targeting indigenous peoples and afro-descendants, drawing upon the experience of PRODERS. 
Beneficiaries of PRODERS will be eligible for this project, provided they meet the specific criteria for each type of 
support.  
 
15. Four critical changes will distinguish this project from PRODERS: (i) promoting activities that ultimately help the 
beneficiaries profit from business opportunities –this project will take up where PRODERS left off in terms of promoting 
market access ; (ii) including calls for proposals and co-financing schemes (with counterpart contributions mainly in cash) 
for subproject investments to strengthen ‘buy in’ and sustainability of investments; (iii) capitalizing on the capacity and 
engagement of a larger spectrum of partners (alliances at various levels); and (iv) integrating a risk management 
approach across the board in order to minimize the shocks of extreme climate events, while investing in resilience 
against climate change and enhance the sustainability of project outcomes.  
 
16. The project will address the gender gaps that are critical to attaining the PDO, namely (i) increasing women’s 
access to resources and technology; (ii) strengthening the earning-generating capacity of women; and (iii) fostering the 
participation of women in critical institutions.   
 
17. The project will mobilize private capital in multiple ways in line with the Maximizing-Finance-for-
Development Agenda. Besides the inclusion of counterpart co-financing in all types of subprojects, the project will 
promote access to credit for smallholder producers by providing technical assistance to beneficiaries and financial 
institutions. Credit to small agricultural businesses is often considered risky and poorly profitable for financial 
institutions. By linking productive alliances that have been successfully implemented to commercial banks that can 
continue financing their business plans, the project will contribute to reducing the risk exposure of private financial 
institutions. With this experience, conditions can be put in place to removing barriers to crowding in private sector 
finance for small rural entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 1: Capacity building (approximately US$ 20 million IBRD loan) 
 
18. This component will address the need to build both human capital of targeted communities and producer 
organizations (1a), and to improve critical factors (1b), in order to facilitate access to markets and integration with 
formal and lucrative value chains. It will fund workshops, courses, field days, study trips, and public events. In addition, 
the subcomponent will finance the provision of expert assistance, as needed, such as lawyers and the preparation and 
dissemination of printed and audiovisual education material. 
 
1a Strengthening human capital of targeted communities and strengthening producer organizations  
19. This subcomponent will help remove barriers that prevent potential beneficiaries, in particular indigenous 
peoples and Afro-descendants, from taking advantage of investment opportunities. Furthermore, it will strengthen 
organizations that have already made investments, so that they are more sustainable. 
 
20. Assistance will cover areas such as legal issues during the formalization of land titles in indigenous communities 
or pending formal registration of the organization, technical and operational know how around select value chains, as 
well as management capabilities such as financial literacy, with an emphasis on understanding barriers to credit access 
notably for women and women’s organizations; creating and administering revolving funds; and monitoring and 


assessing results of investments.   
 
21. Moreover, under this subcomponent, the project will disseminate calls for proposals among potential 
beneficiaries and provide technical assistance to the organizations for preparing the detailed proposals for investments, 
as described in component 2.    
 
1b Strengthening critical institutions and systems  
 
22. This subcomponent will focus on strengthening the institutions and systems that are pivotal to promoting access 
to markets, including a risk management and sustainability perspective as well as a gender angle. By doing so, the 
project will contribute to creating a conducive environment for improved partnerships between organized producers 
and firms. 
 
23. Attention will be paid to improving the capabilities of the MAL to provide the sector with updated risk-related 
information and services that mitigate and/or transfer risk. This includes existing climate information services, forecast 
models, and weather insurance, which will cover both indemnity-based and parametric/index-based insurance. The 
ministerial Risk Management Unit will lead these activities.   
 
24. Furthermore, the MAL and its dependent institutions will improve their ability to support productive integration 
in strategic value chains; for instance, studies and technical assistance will be undertaken to identify key constraints as 
well as policy and systems reforms and financing requirements to enhance Paraguay’s capabilities in terms of 
strengthened traceability systems and food quality governance for select (prioritized) value chains will be undertaken.  
Actionable roadmaps for implementing the salient recommendations would be developed under the project.   
 
25. In addition, the component will strengthen the existing ministerial centers that serve to collect, store, and sell 
products for associated farmers (CECOPROA: its name in Spanish “Centros de Comercialización para Productores 
Asociados”), and replicate the model in at least two additional locations. In this regard, alternatives for crowding-in 
private financing for building and managing the centers will be analyzed. 
 
26. Finally, the subcomponent will provide support to private firms, with a focus on small- and medium-sized 
enterprises, to put Supplier Development Programs into operation. These efforts will be complemented by advisory 
services provided by the International Finance Corporation to its client firms in selected value chains. The project will 
also examine the possibility to work with select private commercial banks in understanding and where feasible, helping 
address barriers to formal financing by producers (especially, women, subsistence, small or even medium-sized entities).   
 
Component 2: Investments to foster market access (approximately US$ 70 million IBRD loan, US$ 20 million 
counterpart funding from communities, organizations, and municipalities) 
 
27. Component 2 will provide matching grants to beneficiaries (organizations and institutions) to carry out 
investment subprojects (productive partnerships, 2a)) complemented by two sets of investments in innovation 
subprojects and small infrastructure works, 2b and 2c.  
 
28. Investment support under component 2 will be mainly granted on a competitive basis following calls for 
proposals. Special focus will be paid to promoting access to matching grants for afro-descendants, women farmers and 
young people. Clear beneficiary profiles and categories, as well as the criteria and process for selection will be 
elaborated during preparation.  A key consideration will be households and individuals that benefit under component 1 


in terms of capacity building and technical assistance will be able to apply for investments under component 2.  
Different levels of counterpart contribution will be established based on categories of beneficiaries. The experience in 
multiple alliance projects in the region shows that providing counterpart co-financing in cash can help generate buy-in 
and ownership and contribute to more sustainable outcomes.  This finding will be applied appropriately during project 
design.  
29. The project will stimulate the access to financial services that can provide funds for subproject implementation 
and/or continue supporting the alliances once the project ends. To narrow the gender gap regarding access to credit for 
women, the project will include tailored training for women and provide additional support for women-led businesses.  
Similar attention will also be paid to participating afro-descendants and youth.    
 
2a Productive partnerships 
 
30. Indigenous and afro-descendent communities and producer organizations will be supported in establishing 
partnerships with purchasers and preparing business plans that aim to meet the purchasers’ requirements in terms of 
product type, quantity, and quality. These business plans will determine the investments needed either on-farm or off-
farm as collective assets, as well as the technical or administrative assistance.  
 
31. Since the project aims for all subprojects to incorporate climate-smart features to enhance their resilience to 
natural disasters and climate change, beneficiaries will be encouraged to incorporate climate risk management 
practices, such as small-scale water harvesting and irrigation schemes, soil management or other improved on- and off-
farm practices into their business plans, and adopt technologies that, besides boosting yields, are climate-smart and 
environmentally sound.  
 
32. Purchasers will include the following domestic public and private and potentially international actors: public 
institutions, such as schools, the military and hospitals, and businesses, such as supermarkets or agri-processors, with a 
focus on formal supply chains in dynamic markets. 
 
33. The scheme will finance subprojects with agricultural and livestock products, forestry products, such as yerba 
mate, aquaculture, and rural and ecosystem-based services, including agritourism. It will also support partnerships for 
both primary and processed products. The subcomponent will promote the participation of women in the organizations 
and provide customized assistance to women-led alliances. Attention will also be paid to Afro-descendants and youth.  
 
2b Complementary innovation subprojects 
 
34. Indigenous communities and producer organizations will partner with public or private institutions to carry out 
investment subprojects that aim to pilot, disseminate and adopt innovative technologies, and also to move downstream 
along value chains by piloting new processing techniques, products/product development and agro-industry based 
services. These investments seek to stimulate the sector to go beyond traditional agricultural schemes and introduce 
new products, concepts and activities that can translate into better access to lucrative markets and higher economic 
benefits in the medium term. Groups of alliances supported under subcomponent 2a will be eligible to this type of 
support to expand the adoption of technologies such as improved genetic plant varieties at a more regional level.  
 
35. Technologies and practices refer, for instance, to innovative integrated landscape approaches for agricultural 
products, drought-tolerant and disease-resistant plant varieties, integrated agro-forestry or pastoral-forestry systems, 
information and communication technologies, and new (green) business models, all of them with either promising or 
demonstrated benefits. Incentives will be provided for subprojects led by women, afro-descendants and young 
producers.  
 
2c Complementary small infrastructure subprojects 
 
36. Municipalities will partner with the MAL to carry out small infrastructure works that are critical to facilitating 
agro-logistics and access to markets for communities and organizations, such as basic market/fair structures and spaces 
and storage facilities. The project will support analytical work to examine the opportunity to establish more 
sophisticated public-private investments in needed infrastructure such as wholesale markets, cold chains and processing 
plants.  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately US$ 10 million IBRD loan) 
 
37. This component will provide support to the MAL for project coordination and management; monitoring, results 
evaluation, and assessment of project activities; project fiduciary administration, internal controls, and audits; project 
environmental and social risk management following the new Environment and Social Framework; a citizen engagement 
mechanism and a grievance redress mechanism; and project-related studies. In addition, this component will finance the 
strengthening of cross-cutting areas in the MAL, such as financial management and results-based monitoring. It will fund 
consultants, goods and services need to perform the activities. 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

A baseline environmental and social risks and impacts assessment (ESA) will be conducted under ESS1 at a 
framework level to verify the necessary scope of addressing ESS2-8. ESS2-4 and 6 will require close attention, 
given several related and critical challenges that include e.g. securing sound labor conditions and considering 
potential use of child labor, efficient use of living natural resources and all materials, consideration adaptation 
to increased climate variability and change and minimizing GHG emissions, sustained provision of ecosystem 
services, prevention of further expansion of the agricultural frontier, contamination and/or overexploitation 
of water resources, and promotion of biodiversity-friendly productive systems. ESS7 will require careful 
consideration during project preparation and implementation since the prevalence of indigenous and afro-
descendant communities will be a substantial criterion for the selection of subprojects. Based on the lessons 
learned in PRODERS, the project will adopt a customized approach to targeting Indigenous Peoples (IP, see 
ESS7 for more details) and the approach will be broadened to afro-descendant communities. ESS9 is the only 
ESS that is not expected to have relevance for the project, yet the institutional arrangements for matching 
grants/revolving funds remain to be determined. Due implementation of ESS10 will be critical to promote 
broad and transparent participation of project-affected and other interested parties and to prevent elite 
capture. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Chad Second Programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience Grant (P168606) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 6  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  06-Dec-2018| Report No: PIDC26196 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P168606 Chad Second Programmatic 
Economic Recovery and 
Resilience Grant (P168606) 

P163424 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA Jul 31, 2019 Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Ministry of Economy and 
Development Planning 

Ministry of Finance and Budget 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Program Development Objectives and pillars of the proposed series are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; 
(2) improve oil revenue transparency and management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key 
real sectors; and (4) increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 40.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 40.00 

     World Bank Lending 40.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The collapse of global oil prices caused a fiscal and economic crisis in 2016 and 2017. Low oil prices left Chad’s 
external debt unsustainable and threw the economy into deep recession. Falling revenues, together with the obligation 

to service an oil collateralized commercial loan, rendered the government illiquid. In fact, more than 80 percent of oil 
revenues were used to directly service debt owed to Glencore, with only about 15 percent entering treasury accounts in 


cash terms. Real GDP contracted by 6.3 percent in 2016 and 3 percent in 2017, opening a large negative output gap. This 
was reflected in a sharp drop in CPI inflation from 3.7 percent in 2015 to -1.1. percent in 2016, and 0.2 percent in 2017.  

2. In response to the oil price shock, the government had to pursue severe fiscal consolidation. In early 2016, the 
authorities introduced cash-based budgeting and adopted an Emergency Fiscal Plan aimed at mitigating the short-term 
impact of the crisis. Significant expenditure cuts led to a fall in the non-oil primary deficit from 9.7 percent of non-oil GDP 
at end-2015 to 3.8 percent at end-2017, while the overall fiscal deficit (cash basis) was contained at 2.5 percent of non-oil 
GDP in 2017. In 2018, the overall fiscal balance is estimated to be at -0.6 percent of non-oil GDP. Domestically financed 
public investment took a major hit and dropped from 9.8 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to 0.7 percent in 2017, while 
recurrent spending dropped from 16.6 percent to 13.7 percent and arrears accumulated. 

3. To return to fiscal and debt sustainability, commercial debt restructuring as well as strong external budget support 
were necessary. An important challenge has been to close an original financing gap of US$1.222 billion in 2017 and 2018. 
Following almost a year of negotiation, Chad and Glencore signed a final debt restructuring agreement in June 2018, notably 
linking debt service to oil revenues through a dynamic cash sweep mechanism. This arrangement reduces the debt service 
to revenue ratio, mitigates the fiscal risk of oil price volatility, reduces the financing gap and returns Chad to a sustainable 
debt path. Furthermore, authorities have financed part of the deficit by issuing bonds in the regional market, however, banks 
have approached their regulatory limits on Chadian Government securities. Ultimately, Chad’s development partners have 
provided budget support requiring the Government to adhere to the rules and mechanisms as agreed for the restructuring 
of its commercial debt while further rationalizing public financial management (PFM) and tightening expenditure controls. 

4. Despite fiscal stabilization translating into gradual recovery, years of recession and austerity have constrained 
social welfare and poverty-reduction.1   Real GDP expected to grow at an estimated 2.6 percent in 2018, largely supported 
by increases in oil prices and oil production. In the non-oil economy, favorable weather conditions and the privatization 
of the cotton public enterprise are expected to improve the agriculture sector’s contribution to (non-oil) GDP growth. 
However, in the absence of a well-targeted and effective social safety net (SSN), the poor and vulnerable have been deeply 
affected by the crisis. During the oil boom, poverty rates declined (from 55 percent in 2003 to 47 percent in 2011), 
however, the absolute number of poor increased from 4.9 million to 5.6 million due to population growth. Progress on 
non-monetary poverty also presents a mixed picture. Since 2014 and up until 2018, dwindling fiscal resources and poor 
social spending execution have disrupted vital public services despite efforts to protect priority social and productive 
spending 

Relationship to CPF 
 

5. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-FY202 is based on three engagement themes: (i) 
strengthening management of public resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) 
building human capital and reducing vulnerability. The program supported by the proposed second Development Policy 
Grant is closely aligned with the three pillars of the CPF and designed to leverage World Bank investment lending projects 
and Technical Assistance activities across the four pillars, notably in the areas of domestic resource mobilization, tax policy 
and administration, SOE management, oil sector capacity building, agriculture value chain support and productivity 
enhancement, and social safety nets development. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Program Development Objectives and pillars of the proposed operation are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; 
(2) improve oil revenue transparency and management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key real 
sectors; and (4) increase social protection for the poor and vulnerable. 
 
Key Results  
 

6. This second programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience (ERR) DPO will support Chad in building resilience 
and consolidating transition to a sustainable, structural growth path. Building on the First Economic Recovery and 
Resilience DPO (P163424), this second grant in a series of two solidifies the shift of World Bank support towards a 
structural resilience and growth agenda. The authorities aim at sustaining recovery, fostering economic diversification, 
and developing coping mechanisms for the poor and vulnerable. Four intertwined pillars combine structural measures to 
enhance fiscal risk management with boosting economic diversification and social resilience. Improved debt, Public 
Financial and oil revenue management are complemented by increased productivity in agriculture and competitive, open 
access information and communication technologies (ICT). Finally, putting in place a well-targeted and fully operational 
social protection system adds an explicit micro layer of resilience. 

 

D. Concept Description 
 

7. The proposed operation supports structural policy reform to improve debt and oil revenue management, 
increase productivity in agriculture and ICT telecom sectors and build a well targeted social safety net.  The operation 
is programmed under IDA18 with a total amount of US$40 million. It follows the First Programmatic Economic Recovery 
and Resilience DPO that passed Board in September 2018, as well as a 2017 standalone Emergency Fiscal Stabilization 
Operation that was conceived as a first stage supporting Chad in its stabilization effort while preparing the ground for the 
second stage, i.e. structural measures to build resilience and start sustainable recovery in the context of this programmatic 
DPO series. 

8. The main policy pillars are to (1) enhance fiscal risk management; (2) improve oil revenue transparency and 
management; (3) promote resilience and economic diversification in key real sectors; and (4) increase social protection 
for the poor and vulnerable. First, this programmatic series aims at enhancing fiscal risk management through (a) 
improved debt management; (b) rationalization of tax expenditures; (c) streamlining the payroll for enhanced fiscal space; 
and (d) improved oversight and transparency in the management of SOEs. Second, to improve the contribution of the oil 
sector to fiscal sustainability and economic resilience it promotes (i) a functional oil revenue management mechanism; (ii) 
transparency in the financial performance of the SHT; and (iii) improved control over oil production costs. Third, to 
increase diversification and resilience of Chad’s population in face of economic and climatic shocks, the operation (a) 
contributes to greater agricultural productivity for more sustainable and inclusive growth; and (b) strengthens the 
contribution of the ICT sector to inclusive growth through enhanced affordability and coverage of services, as well as 
improved transparency for public and private service delivery. Fourth, it increases social protection for the poor and most 
vulnerable groups including refugees, by developing an effective and well-targeted SSN system, and implementing cash 
transfers.  

9. The operation is well aligned with the strategic objectives of the 2017-2021 National Development Plan (NDP). 
It focuses on three of the four strategic Pillars of the government’s program, including Pillar 2, strengthening good 
governance and the rule of law, Pillar 3, development of a robust and competitive economy, and Pillar 4, improving the 
quality of life of the Chadian population.  

10. This second programmatic DPO will also help catalyze private investment through improving the investment 
climate and creating opportunities in key sectors of the economy. Maximizing the impact of development financing is a 
central medium-term objective. The importance of concessional finance in supporting inclusive economic growth should 
be gradually reduced and compensated by private sector activity and investment: 1) Improved debt management and SOE 
oversight will reduce fiscal risk and create fiscal space for effective public investment able to crowd in private investment; 
2) at the same time, enabling competitive input markets in agriculture (here through effective agricultural extension 
services and high-quality seeds) and telecommunication (here through a competitive, open access fiber optics 
infrastructure) will not only break power of inefficient SOEs, but also lower entry and business costs across the economy. 
In the medium-term, it creates permanent opportunity for competition and innovation as well as significant consumer 
welfare gains. 

 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
11. The proposed programmatic Development Policy Grant is expected to have a positive impact on poverty 
reduction in the medium- and long- term. Actions supported by this operation are expected to help decrease poverty in 
the medium- and long-term through the promotion of inclusive growth in agriculture, and the development of more 
affordable ICT services and broader coverage in underserved areas. In addition, a properly targeted expansion of the 
Social Safety Net system has the potential to have a significant impact on allowing households to move out of poverty 
and strengthen household resilience to shocks.  
 
Environmental Impacts 
 

12. The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have significant negative 
effects on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. All the actions are policy-oriented; they do 
not support direct investment in environmentally impactful projects or involve policy actions with significant 
environmental consequences. The assessment of potential impacts related to actions supported by the DPO will rely on 
the existing national legal and regulatory framework and will be monitored and addressed through the national 
procedures in place in Chad. Environmental Assessment (EA) is a legal requirement in Chad and is widely applied to all 
developmental projects. The EA process is based on Presidential Decree No. 630/PR/PM/MEERH/2010 on EA regulations 
and the ministerial decision No. 039/PR/PM/MERH/SG/DGE/DEELCPN/2012 with respect to the general guidelines and 
procedures for EA. The department of EA and pollution control in the Ministry of Environment and Fisheries is 
institutionally charged with reviewing and clearing environmental impact assessment (EIA) documents. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Groundnut Competitiveness and Agriculture Diversification Project (P164967) 

 
 

  
Jun 18, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDC153189 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Senegal P164967  Groundnut 
Competitiveness and 
Agriculture 
Diversification Program 
For Results 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

AFRICA 18-Mar-2019 14-Feb-2019 No 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

Ministry of Finance, 
Economy and Planning 

Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Equipment 

Agriculture 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

to improve the competitiveness of the groundnut value chain and to increase the resilience to climate and market risks 
of farmers and herders  in the Groundnut Basin. 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 700.00 

Total Operation Cost 225.00 

Total Program Cost 225.00 

Total Financing 225.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 150.00 

     World Bank Lending 150.00 
 


 

Total Government Contribution 75.00 

     
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. After decades of slow growth, past reform initiatives have cumulatively strengthened structural 
competitiveness and positioned Senegal among the fastest-growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) in recent 
years. Driven by progressively resurgent exports, the Senegalese economy has been expanding at almost 7 percent 
annually since 2015, when external conditions have also become more supportive, as global oil, commodities and food 
prices declined. Growth decomposition highlights the critical role of more competitive and diversified exports not only in 
the past three years, but starting from 2010, when the country reversed a historic trend of declining international 
competitiveness, although this positive effect was initially offset by large negative external shocks. The recent progress 
contrasts starkly with decades of paradoxically modest economic development, when Senegal’s per capita GDP, almost 
uniquely in Sub-Saharan Africa, remained below its level at Independence, as the economy was persistently stifled by high 
vulnerability to shocks, weak productivity and omnipresent informality.  

2. Wide-based accelerated growth since 2015 has been driven by expanding exports, fueled by economic reforms 
and a robust external demand. GDP growth accelerated from 6.5% in 2015 to 6.7% in 2016, positioning Senegal among 
the fastest growing economies in the African continent. All sectors of the economy contributed significantly to growth in 
2016 with services being the sector that contributed the most due to its large size as a share of GDP. Other demand 
components performed well, but their role as growth drivers were not as strong as exports. Total investment grew by 
8.8% in 2016 (up from 6.3% in 2015) as a result of the investment program adopted as part of the Plan Senegal Emergent 
(PSE-2014-2035, and its ongoing 5-year Priority Action Plan 2014-2018), as well as policy interventions in specific sectors, 
including agriculture. While the strong import component of investments reduces their short-term impact on growth, the 
increase in both public and private investments bodes well for future growth, particularly if the efficiency of public 
investment can be enhanced. Private consumption accelerated also as its growth rate increased from 5% in 2015 to 5.3% 
in 2016 thanks to higher income and optimistic expectations about the future of the Senegalese economy.  

3. The recent structural turnaround is anchored in prudent macro fiscal policies and supported by a favorable 
environment. On the fiscal side, the balance has improved significantly with the fiscal deficit reduced to 4.2% of GDP in 
2016 (from 4.8% in 2015) as a result of rationalized current spending stemming from the current fiscal consolidation efforts 
and higher revenues driven by better collection of custom taxes. According to the latest IMF-World Bank (WB) debt 
sustainability analysis, public debt in Senegal (60.6% of GDP in 2016) remains at a low risk of distress, but indicators are 
showing emergent strains with respect to sustainability. Also, inflation has remained under control and below the 2% 
target set by the regional central bank, thanks to the prudent regional monetary policy, exchange rate stability and 
ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts.  

4. Higher growth has resulted in an estimated drop in poverty incidence by 4 to 7 percentage points since 2011 
(from 47 percent, to 38 percent based on the international poverty line). Agriculture appears to have been one of the 
main drivers of this reduction, as it has registered low, but positive growth with two exceptionally good years in 2015 and 
2016. At the same time, rural areas have witnessed some job reallocation out of the primary sector, as households have 
diversified their livelihoods, tapping into a growing rural non-farm economy. Moreover, moderate improvements in 
general value added per agricultural worker have reversed a negative trend of more than a decade, pointing to signs of 



nascent structural transformation. In urban areas, labor income among the poor has been boosted by growth in labor-
intensive sectors, such as construction.  

5. However persistent spatial disparities are evidenced, with rural areas- particularly the Groundnut Basin (GNB)- 
lagging behind their urban counterparts on a wide range of non-monetary indicators. In 2011, nearly 70 percent of the 
poor and 84 percent of the extreme poor lived in rural areas, accounting for 57 percent of the total population and 
suggesting rural poverty to be deeper and more severe. Female-headed households were less likely to be poor, as women 
tend to head smaller households, and are more likely to receive cash and in-kind transfer1. The poorest communes are 
located in the center of the country known as the Groundnut Basin (particularly in the region of Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack 
and Kaffrine), and in the Kolda (south) and the eastern part of Tambacounda (south-east), which is also part of the 
extended groundnut basin. The poverty profile constructed using the DHS wealth indicators for 2015 suggests that the 
characteristics of the poor have largely remained unchanged since 2011 in terms of geographic distribution, households’ 
size and education levels. The extended Groundnut Basin is the country’s bread basket, supplying key staples (mostly 
millet, sorghum, and maize) and fodder from groundnuts and cowpeas. Those areas have the highest population density 
(100-120 people/km2) after the capital city area. 

6. Agriculture employs the largest share of the poor, particularly in the Groundnut Basin. Indeed, 62 percent of 
the rural population depend on agriculture, which employs more than 36 percent of the total labor force of the country, 
according to the 2015 Labor Force Survey, and poverty incidence among farmers is the highest. In rural areas, nearly 80 
percent of paid workers in the bottom quintile of the distribution of consumption worked in agriculture, while the more 
prosperous are engaged in largely informal services. Among the poorest are the farmers growing rain-fed crops particularly 
in the Groundnut Basin. Households having animal production as a main source of livelihood are also among the poorest. 
On the other hand, poverty is at its lowest rates among horticulture farmers, mainly based in the Niayes, on the coast 
between Saint-Louis and Dakar, or rice producers along the Senegal River valley. Groundnut farming is a primary source 
of income for a vast majority of family farms, accounting for about half of the total cropped area in the country and 
employing two-thirds of the rural population, mostly below the official poverty line. In fact, groundnuts are grown by 27 
percent of all households in Senegal, and by 52 percent of households in extreme poverty (ANSD, 2011). Moreover, 
supporting labor-intensive activities down the value chain, such as transportation, storage, and processing, remains an 
important source of non-farm employment in both formal and informal sectors.  

7. While the economic prospects are good with a projected real GDP growth at 7.0% in 2019, much more needs to 
be done in implementing the Government’s longer-term strategy (PSE) to transform the rural economy and reduce 
poverty and spatial imbalances. Supported by robust macroeconomic fundamentals, Senegal is expected to remain one 
of West Africa’s top growth performers, if the current internal and external conditions continue supporting this trend. 
Indeed, higher exports from the agriculture, fishery and extractives sectors would continue to drive economic growth. 
However, external shocks, delayed critical reforms to remove bottlenecks to competitiveness of key sectors and increase 
private investments, insufficient funding and/or delays in implementation major PSE programs, poor quality of public 
spending, uncertainties or slow pace of critical reforms to address key bottlenecks due to non-technical motivations are 
major risks to growth expectations. In particular and despite recent improvements in competitiveness and diversification, 
the agriculture sector would continue to be adversely exposed to volatile climatic conditions, particularly if adequate 
reforms are not implemented and substantial investments not made to reduce agricultural dependency on rainfed 
cropping systems, to adapt the groundnut value chain to changing markets, and to improve the overall resilience of the 
crops and livestock production systems to worsening climate conditions in the poorest regions, particularly the groundnut 
basin. 

                                            
1 Moreover, due to self-selection women, heading their households, may represent a sub-sample of women with different preferences, norms, and 

characteristics. 


 

B. Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 

8. The agriculture sector has played a critical role in the Senegalese economy, but remains vulnerable to external 
shocks, which are likely to intensify with greater openness of the economy and climate change. The agriculture sector 
grew at an average rate of 3.2 percent between 2000 and 2016, but volatility around that average was large. The big 
swings in agriculture growth, which are highly correlated to large changes in the Senegalese economy’s growth rates, are 
mainly the result of weather and climatic hazards which heavily impact pastoralism and rain-fed crops such as groundnut, 
millet and other cereals that have traditionally dominated the sector. This suggests that for Senegal to maintain the high 
output growth attained since 2015, more efforts are needed to protect the agriculture sector against climatic variability 
and enhance the resilience of livelihoods in rural areas. Deteriorating climatic conditions in areas surrounding cities are 
likely to increase human migration into cities, further increasing already high urbanization rates. If left unmanaged, urban 
sprawl may worsen or even cause natural hazard events.   

9. Recent improvements in agriculture output in the past few years have been driven by expansion of cropped 
areas and an increase in the use of inputs encouraged by public policies, with limited impact on productivity and job 
creation. The Senegalese government has adopted several policies to modernize and develop the agriculture sector over 
the past few years. These policies, such as developing the skills and financial capabilities of farmers, subsidizing of high 
quality seeds, and supporting agricultural mechanization, have helped boost agriculture yields and production, in cereals, 
horticulture and pulses. The main crops that have benefited are those tagged as priority value chains under PRACAS (rice, 
onions and groundnuts, with steady increases by 160%, 74%, and 108% respectively between 2013 and 2017). Continued 
public support for rice over the last two decades - by increasing investments and implementing reforms in the irrigation 
management systems and expanding low land (and rainfed) cropping systems - is paying off with higher rice yields, 
surpassing the African average and closing the gap with the World average. The private sector has contributed to the 
improvement in agriculture productivity due to the modern processing units that were developed along the Senegal River 
Valley. However labor productivity did not improve over time - and even decreased for certain crops - mainly due to a 
decreasing land-to-labor ratio. In fact, the increase in agriculture output was largely due to an expansion of input use per 
unit of land, and to a much lesser degree to overall improvements in Total Factor Productivity (TFP), through innovation 
and better skills. Therefore, to achieve the objective of poverty reduction - poverty remains prevalent in rural areas - and 
to drive the agricultural transformation agenda, total factor productivity, and labor productivity in particular, should 
significantly increase. This requires creating more jobs for the rural workforce ('move-out' track), while supporting farmers 
to modernize and better connect to downstream segments of value chains and with the rest of the economy ('move-up' 
track) 

10. Low productivity, a weak land regime and underdeveloped infrastructure and logistics limit the potential of 
agriculture to reduce poverty. Despite the importance attributed by the Government to the agricultural sector in the Plan 
Senegal Emergent, agriculture still has the lowest productivity among all sectors, the average farmer being more than six 
times less productive than his average counterpart in the rest of the economy. This result is not surprising if one thinks 
that only 3 percent of cultivated land is irrigated; the production system is still archaic; harvest losses span between 10 
and 30 percent and access to inputs is problematic. Productivity is particularly low among the poor for whom these 
problems are exacerbated by the lack of access to productive assets and financing for farm operations. The recent success 
recorded in the subsectors of horticulture and rice, where productivity increased significantly during the last 10 years, was 
made possible by addressing some of those constraints, including through improved water management particularly in 
the Senegal River Valley, increased access to inputs (seeds, fertilizers) and machinery, and better connectivity.  

11. Addressing the overreliance of the agriculture and livestock production systems on rainfall in the Groundnut 
Basin is critical to secure agricultural growth and sustainable development. The World Bank Disaster and Risk Climate 
portal recorded the following extreme events in the past years, which have certainly influenced performance of the 
agriculture sector : (i) statistically significant decrease in wet season rainfall between 1960 and 2006, with the 500 mm 
isohyets regressing about 100 kilometers (km) to the south; (ii) high variability on inter-annual and inter-decadal 



timescales, which can make long-term trends difficult to identify ; (iii) a period of particularly high rainfall in the early 
1960s, whilst the early 1980s were particularly dry; (iv) some unusually high rainfalls have occurred in the dry season in 
very recent years (2000-2006), but this has not been part of a consistent trend; (v) increased mean annual temperature 
by 0.9°C since 1960, an average rate of 0.20°C per decade. Recent projections indicate that those phenomenon are likely 
to amplify with : (i) mean annual temperatures projected to increase by 1.1 to 3.1°C by the 2060s, and 1.7 to 4.9°C by the 
2090s, with projected rates of warming faster in the interior than in those areas closer to the coast; (ii) substantial 
increases in the frequency of days and nights that are considered ‘hot’ in the current climate, with such increases occurring 
more rapidly in the south and east of the country; (iii) decreases in the frequency of days and nights considered ‘cold’ in 
the current climate; (iv) a wide range of changes in the mean annual rainfall averaged over the country, from -41 to +48% 
by the 2090s—but more models show decreases. While it is difficult to draw robust conclusions of changes in precipitation, 
it is likely however that a greater proportion of precipitation will occur in heavy rainfall events, so it is important to 
incorporate scenarios of both precipitation increases (which will further fuel soil erosion) and decreases (amplifying 
drought frequency) in future planning.  

12. The production systems in the Groundnut Basin, both for crops and livestock, are overwhelmingly rainfed and 
driven by small farmers with holdings of less than 5 ha per households. Unlike other major agroecological areas of the 
country (Senegal river valley which concentrates major irrigation investments, Costal Niayes which is the traditional 
horticultural region, and Casamance with significant water resources both from rainfall and surface water), the natural 
resource base in the Groundnut basin is poorly endowed and fragile. The majority of the area is composed of poor quality 
sandy-low organic matter content of tropical ferruginous, with allomorphic brown soils located on low lands (Badiane et 
al., 2001). Rainfall regime is increasingly erratic (600 to 900mm per year) while water quality (salinization and high 
presence of chlorine) is a major constraint to use of surface and superficial groundwater around the Sine and Saloum river 
system. Good quality and productive deep water for agriculture is available in significant amount in the deep groundwater 
tables (the Miocene and Maestrichien) in the eastern part of the Groundnut Basin but requires important investments 
well beyond the capabilities of small-scale farmers.  

13. Demographic pressure and high exposure of production systems to climate risks have led to unsustainable 
short-term coping strategies, e.g. overgrazing, extension of cultivated area, which further contribute to accelerating the 
depletion of the agricultural resource base in the Groundnut Basin. Whilst land degradation has become a genuine issue 
across the country, with 64% of the country’s 3.8 million hectares of arable land affected, the Groundnut Basin alone 
carries the heaviest burden with 47% of the total degraded land. Negative impacts of land degradation include stagnant 
or decreasing agricultural productivity, imbalanced ecosystems, which threatens waterways and the viability of wildlife 
habitats. Continuous land degradation and recurrent droughts in the Groundnut Basin increases the volatility of 
agricultural production, resulting in increased poverty and vulnerability, with a strong rate of rural and international 
migration.  These migratory flows are also at the origin of land conflicts, particularly in the Senegal River valley and in 
Casamance. 

14. Delayed adjustments to global markets trends and inefficient policies in the groundnut value chains have 
trapped groundnut farmers into a vicious cycle of low productivity-low-income-poverty loop. The global groundnut 
trade has gradually shifted from oil and meal to whole nuts, and Asia has become the major producer. Indeed, shifts in 
relative transport costs and in consumer preferences have led to a decline in global trade in groundnut products and 
significant increases in the export of whole nuts. As a result, even highly industrialized exporters tend to produce cake and 
oil only for domestic consumption, while exporting the rest as whole nuts that now dominate global trade flows2.  
Furthermore, high public spending on the groundnut value chain through various subsidies schemes (46% on seed 
subsidies, 30% on price subsidies directed to oil industries, 13% on fertilizers subsidies) accounted for around 50% of total 
public expenditures on agriculture but resulted in less than proportional impact on the added value created in the 

                                            
2 World Bank- Senegal Groundnut Competitiveness Report, 2017. 


economy. Completing the longstanding reforms in the groundnut value chain and establishing a stable and credible policy 
framework for whole nut exports would unleash the economic potential of the groundnut value chain and accelerate the 
modernization and realignment of the groundnut sector to the international markets trends. The government could also 
reorient its agricultural spending from less productive fertilizer subsidies, which were found to play little or no role in 
substantially boosting productivity across several Asian countries, to productivity-enhancing input factors such as 
agricultural R&D, climate resilient technologies and advanced irrigation techniques. This could be paired with well targeted 
social protection mechanisms to support the poorest rural households. 

15. Young men and women are subject to considerable social pressures and norms in general, and more so in rural 
areas. Key gender-based constraints facing women in the agriculture and economic growth sector are: limited access to 
and control over land because of discriminatory inheritance and land allocation practices; social beliefs about women’s 
primary roles as mothers and wives; limited access to credit and/or cash that constraints purchase of agricultural inputs; 
limited literacy and numeracy skills among rural women; and limited opportunities for business development training or 
access to agricultural extension. Finally, social norms limit youth empowerment, particularly their occupational choices or 
access to productive inputs3. School drop- out is high among young girls to marry early with limited time left for productive 
activities. Young men are encouraged to start working early, before getting married, and / or to take over the family 
business. Furthermore, access to key assets, such as land, is largely determined by customary inheritance practices4. When 
active in business, women face different challenges depending on their profiles. Those in the processing Economic Interest 
Group (EIG) are faced with the challenge of growing their operation from a semi-domestic processing unit to a high-density 
industrial production. Access to energy, growth markets, and financing are decisive factors for the expansion of their 
business. Women group may have much more complex challenges, as they have to migrate from an organizational model 
of individualized work to a collective model under a group form, with access to training and to management of group 
project, access to production inputs (fertilizers, seeds) and access to land amongst the key challenges they have to face5. 

16. The proposed Program for Results would support the Government’s Development Plan for Economic 
Emergence (Plan Senegal Emergent- PSE- 2010-2035) and its Agriculture Chapters (the Accelerated Agricultural Growth 
Program- PRACAS6, and the National Livestock Development Plan- PNDE7). The strategic objectives of PSE are to: (i) 
stimulate structural transformation of the economy to support a sustainable and dynamic growth; (ii) facilitate broad 
access to social services while preserving conditions for sustainable development, and (iii) meet requirements for good 
governance through strengthening the country’s institutions and the promotion of peace, security and regional 
integration. The PSE specific objective for the agricultural sector- understood in its broader scope (e.g. including livestock, 
fisheries and agroindustry) which is meant to spearhead the structural transformation of the economy are to : (i) 
strengthen the country’s food security to reduce the food import bill; (ii) develop competitive, high-value added and 
integrated value chains; and (iii) preserve socio-economic balance and reinvigorate the rural economy. This will be driven 
by the development of commercial agriculture as detailed in the sector operational Program (PRACAS).   

17. Implementation of the first phase of PRACAS in the period 2014-2017 has yielded significant results and 
contributing to redressing the overall performance of the agriculture sector and to the country’s economic 
performance. In the groundnut sector in particular, the Government's performance targets under PRACAS were met or 
exceeded by 2016, both in terms of seed capital renewal with 55,000 metric tons (mt) of certified seeds produced against 
a target of 40,000 mt, and in terms of total output with 1,050,000 metric tons of groundnut produced against a target of 
1,000,000 mt for 2017. Furthermore, the government has taken significant steps to eliminate monopsony around the 

                                            
3 Deborah Robin, Oumoul Khairy Niang-Mbodj – Senegal Gender Assessment. USAID, 2010 
4 The World Bank. Senegal Strategic Country Diagnostic, Draft for Decision meeting, January 2018 
5 World Food Program. Gender, markets and Agricultural Organizations in Senegal. VAM Gender & Markets Study #6. WFP, USAID, 2016-2017. 
6 Programme d’accélération de la cadence de l’agriculture sénégalaise, with the first phase covering the period 2014-2017, and second phase under 
preparation. 
7 Senegal Ministère de l’Elevage et des Ressources Animales - Programme National de Développement de l’Elevage (PNDE 2017-2021) 


supply chain of oil mills, SONACOS in particular, and to improve competition for the collection and marketing of 
groundnuts in the region. The government has encouraged the entry of new operators in the collection, processing and 
export of groundnut oils and seeds, and took over SONACOS from the main shareholder for its next privatization. In 
addition, the government has also launched initiatives to encourage the diversification of cropping systems in the 
groundnut basin, with expansion of rain-fed and low-land rice cropping systems, sesame and horticulture in addition to 
livestock. 

18. Deepening the reforms in the groundnut sector, including a stable policy framework for private investments in 
the value chains and mitigating climate risks and price volatility will lay the foundation for agricultural transformation 
in the Groundnut Basin (GNB). Reforms undertaken by the government since 2014 to liberalize the groundnut market 
have started to yield results, with larger exports of nuts and new investments in the value chain (storage, deshelling 
facilities, with significant potential in term of off-farm employments). However, distortive policies to keep alive the less 
profitable segment of processing of crude oils have prevented farmers from getting the full value of expanding to global 
whole nuts markets. Within that context, developing a new value chain centered on producing high quality groundnuts 
for whole nuts exports and for the confectionery industry is needed. This requires establishing a level playing field for the 
private sector to invest and innovate in the processing and marketing segments. A key step in this direction would be to 
privatize SONACOS. At the farmers’ level reforms should address the issue of revenues volatility, including safety net 
mechanisms when both international prices and domestic production are low. 

19. The proposed Program will support the adaptation of the groundnut value chain to evolving climate and 
markets conditions and accelerate the diversification of the agricultural production systems in the Groundnut Basin for 
greater resilience to external shocks. To seize emerging market opportunities, Senegal would need to substantially 
increase and stabilize groundnut yields (actually 60% of the world average yield, compared to 200% for China), tackle the 
protracted issue of aflatoxins to meet the requirements of the high quality confectionery nuts export market, improve 
competition along the value chain and particularly in the inputs and processing segment, while accelerating the 
diversification of production systems and scaling up the adoption of climate smart-agriculture in the groundnut basin.  
This will require implementing several  adaptation measures including the wide adoption of agro-forestry techniques and 
crop diversification; the use of short-cycle varieties and that of varieties tolerant to salinity; improved collection and water 
storage (i.e. dams, retention basins, anti-salt structures, windbreaks); the expansion of community woodlots; the 
prevention of bush fires; the dissemination of fertilization techniques; the establishment of an early warning system in 
rural areas, and preventing and tackling  pest infestations, such as the West Africa Desert Locust and fruit flies which are 
major threats to expanding the lucrative business of mangoes exports from the groundnut basin 

Relationship to CAS/CPF 

20. The World Bank Group’s Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Senegal identifies four main constraint areas to 
inclusive growth and equity, three major constraints to the sustainability of this inclusive growth and two underlying 
institutional constraints (see diagram). Summing up, the constraints and solution areas identified by the SCD delineate 
three main pathways to poverty reduction and increased shared prosperity in Senegal.  

• Boosting Senegal’s Competitiveness to ensure a dynamic private-sector led growth and capitalize on the growing 
young urban population by focusing on reforms of the fiscal and monetary frameworks and improvements of the business 
environment as well as measures aimed at an increased and equitable availability of productive inputs, such as skills and 
land, and improved critical infrastructure, including energy and ICT.  

• Enhancing Equity and Resilience unlocking the economic potential of non-extractive natural resources, including 
agriculture and livestock, from which most of the poor still derive their livelihoods, while enhancing the ability of the 
population in rural areas to engage in the growth process and cope with shocks through appropriate government support 
allowing for the accumulation and protection of their asset base.  


• Managing Risks Associated with Natural Resources by addressing the perils inherent in the nascent oil and gas 
sector, particularly the ‘resource curse’ and potential erosion of the competitiveness of labor-intensive exports, as well as 
diverse impacts of the climate change, threatening to erase years of progress in poverty reduction.  

21. The proposed Program aligns well with the three pathways outlined in the SCD and the World Bank Groups’ 
Africa Region’s Climate Change Business Plan, in particular the one on ‘Enhancing Equity and Resilience’. While the 
Country Partnership Framework is being developed, it is likely that it will be consistent with the proposed pathways which 
all echo the priority areas of the proposed Program. By fusing its intervention on climate change adaptation, the Program 
also   contributes to the Region’s climate change business plan. 

 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 

 
Program Development Objective(s) 

22. The Development Objectives of the proposed Program are to improve the competitiveness of the groundnut 
value chain and to increase the resilience to climate and market risks of farmers and herders in the Groundnut Basin.  

    PDO Level Results Indicators 
 

23. At PDO-level the following indicators are proposed to assess the Program’s results: 

(i) Number of farmers/herders reached with climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies (e.g. drought 
resistant varieties, new seeds/feedstocks for crop diversification; soil and land management practices and 
technologies); 

(ii) Increase in yields of groundnuts and selected crops; 
(iii) Increased exports of high value crops (shelled groundnuts and horticultural produce); 
(iv) Reduced variability in production of groundnuts and selected crops. 

 
D. Program Description 

 
PforR Program Boundary 

1. Government program objectives and results 

24. The objective of the Government’s updated agriculture program as set in the LPDSA is “to develop a performant, 
competitive, diverse and sustainable agriculture that provides stable income to farmers and promotes economic and social 
development”.  This is further broken down into four specific objectives, five programs and 15 lines of activities:  

(i) Increased agricultural production and productivity with the following activities. This objective aims to 
sustainably increase agricultural production and productivity through diversified and qualitative products, able to 
meet the consumption needs of the population, to provide raw materials for the domestic processing industry 
and to be competitive in international and regional markets;  
(ii) Diversified agricultural production systems. This objective aims at developing diversified agricultural value-
chains, taking full advantage of the various agro-ecological zones of the country, in order to give rural populations 
more income opportunities, in particular through increased support to high added-value agricultural value-chains;  
(iii) Strengthened agricultural services framework. This objective aims at developing agricultural and rural 
research, training and advice, facilitate farmers’ access to finance and creating a regulatory environment 
conducive to private sector investments;  

(iv) Improved agriculture sector governance facilitating the dialogue between all relevant stakeholders to ensure 
an efficient implementation of the sector’s development policies 

2. Proposed Program for Results operation context 

25. The proposed Program will contribute to the government’s programs addressing the volatility of agricultural 
production and farmers revenues, while positively impacting longer term productivity in the Groundnut Basin, and is 
anchored within PSE’s vision regarding the development of the agriculture sector, and its sectoral program’s (PRACAS) 
objectives. In agreement with the GoS, the proposed Program would focus mainly on the Groundnut Basin, the traditional 
area for peanut production that is lagging behind in terms of development. The proposed Program will focus on areas of 
intervention identified in Senegal’s agriculture development strategy that are key to addressing the high vulnerability of 
farmers to climate and market risks and improving the competitiveness of the groundnut value chain.   

26. The proposed Program will support the economic transformation of agricultural households, in particular through 
the supply, through public and private entities, of quality agricultural services. Two different trajectories have been 
identified to achieve that purpose: (i) the diversification of family farms through increased technologies adoption and 
digitalization and (ii) the creation of jobs opportunities along agri-food value-chains of high commercial potential. 

27. The approach will consist in putting the private sector8 at the heart of the proposed Program’s interventions. For 
that purpose, the proposed Program would support the GoS’s efforts in establishing a favorable environment for the 
development of private sector, via the pursuit of reforms initiated in the agri-food sector, the institutional strengthening 
of dedicated organizations and targeted public investments to improve the factors of competitiveness (e.g. productive 
and market infrastructures, research and development, agricultural extension, quality management…). 

28. Given the vulnerability of the country’s agricultural sector to climate change, particularly in the targeted areas of 
intervention (Groundnut Basin), the proposed Program would carry-out several activities to achieve climate Co-Benefits. 
The proposed Program aims at enhancing the adaptation of production systems to climate change (mainly increase in 
temperatures and reduction in rainfall) and to strengthen the resilience of farmers to climate shocks. This will be achieved 
through better management of water resources with improved irrigation systems, the adoption of climate-smart 
technologies and climate-resilient crops, and higher integration of agriculture and livestock production systems. The 
proposed Program also aims at achieving climate Co-Benefits by reducing GHG emissions. It will promote climate-smart 
agricultural and husbandry practices, favor restoration of soil to allows greater carbon absorption, and reduce food losses 
and waste through increased connectivity of farms to markets and improved storage and processing capacity.  

Results areas 

29. To achieve its development objective, the proposed Program would focus on three results areas: (i) increased 
productivity and diversification to strengthen resilience, (ii) increased market access, and (iii) sector governance, 
coordination and programs management private sector development. Those results areas have strong synergies and are 
mutually supportive. 

30. Result area 1: Increased productivity and diversification to strengthen resilience. The proposed Program would 
aim at developing solutions to mitigate the risks that farmers face in the targeted areas of the Program, in particular 
market and climate-related risks.  

• Development of the agricultural resource base in the Groundnut Basin. The Program would aim at strengthening 
the sustainable use of natural resources the agricultural sector relies on. In particular, the Ministry of Agriculture 

                                            
8 In the context of the Program “private sector” includes all type of entrepreneurial activities, from smallholder’s farms, to cooperatives, small and 

medium agri-business enterprises, national and multinational agri-food industries…
 

and Rural Equipment (MAER) and the Ministry of Livestock and Animal Resources (MERA) would closely 
coordinate with the Ministry of Water on ongoing assessments of water resources for an integrated and 
sustainable use of existing resources, in order to scale up efficient water and soil management programs in the 
Groundnut Basin. Those would include use of existing water infrastructure or the development - where 
conditions for sustainability so allow - of small scale water infrastructure to expand efficient irrigated systems in 
the Groundnut Basin, improvement of livestock watering points, the rehabilitation of degraded land/soil through 
investments and building capacity of farmers and herders on water and soil management infrastructure and 
techniques. The proposed Program would also enhance knowledge management on the state of these natural 
resources (water, soil, climate) in the Groundnut Basin.  

• Strengthening family farms’ productivity and resilience. The proposed Program would support the 
transformation at scale of part of the rainfed dependent family farms to more resilient, irrigation-based 
diversified farming systems. Both the development of irrigation and the diversification of production systems in 
the Groundnut Basin would allow farmers to reach higher labor productivity and full employment all year long. 
Furthermore, better water management through access to irrigation as well as adoption of climate-smart 
technologies would improve the resilience of farmers to climate-related risks, reducing their exposure to 
droughts. Based on ongoing analysis of the agricultural and livestock resources base in the Groundnut Basin, 
MAER and MERA will assess during the Program’s preparation, value-chains, business models and business 
alliances, which the proposed Program will help expand, through technical assistance, training, and investments. 

• Facilitating access to improved seeds. Access to adapted and productive panting material is a prerequisite for 
successful development of modern farms. This result would be achieved through increased availably of breeder 
and foundation seeds from the research system and efficient seed multiplication system. The Program would 
support development of a market-driven, private-sector-led seed multiplication system to disseminate quality 
seeds adapted to climate change, notably the new breeds recently released in Senegal and West Africa under 
the West Africa Productivity Program (WAAPP). The national agronomic research institute (ISRA) and public 
institutions (e.g. MAER’s Division of Seed control) would be strengthened in their role on breeder seed 
production and seed quality control.  

• Insuring commercial herders and farmers against shocks. The Program would support the expansion of the 
ongoing agricultural index-based-insurance scheme9 to address residual production risk and reduce the 
incidence of systematic shock on farmers’ and herders’ revenues. The insurance program would be part of a 
package of support to project beneficiaries aimed at accelerating uptake of improved technologies and adoption 
of good farm management practices, and de-risking access to credit. The Program’s support on insurance could 
be coupled with ongoing social protection programs such as the Government “Bourses Familiales” and upcoming 
World Bank Social Protection program to ensure that poorest and non-insurable households in the Groundnut 
Basin are provided with the adequate instrument to emerge from climate related disasters, with emergency 
relief and the provision of assets to re-start production cycles. 

31. Result area 2: Increased market integration. The proposed Program aims at strengthening the links between 
agricultural production and other segments of the value-chain, promoting inclusive business alliances, removing critical 
impediments (physical impediments as well as capacity building) to promote the development of private-sector-led 
services and agro-industries along the value chains.   

                                            
9 Index based Insurance was been introduced in Senegal with WBG support since 2009, but its development has been very slow until recently with 

increased interest from the private sector and contract farming in the groundnuts value chain. See more on the design of the product in “The World 

Bank : Index-based Crop Insurance in Senegal – Promoting Access of Agricultural Insurance for Small Farmers. Sustainable Department-Africa Region, 

and Finance and Private Sector Department, March 2009 



• Structuring farmers associations and promoting contractual farming. This result area would focus on the 
improvement of storage, processing and marketing of agri-food products so as to improve the connection of 
production systems to the agro-industry and markets in general. The proposed Program would (i) identify and 
support business models strengthening the links between producers and agro-industries, (ii) support the 
development of farmgate small scale crops and animal feed/fodder storage facilities, as village aggregation 
centers and cottage processing center within the production areas to facilitate linkages with off-takers;  

• Increasing control of aflatoxins and fruit flies. The proposed Program would tackle these major hurdles to access 
to markets for key produces which could otherwise develop rapidly in the Groundnut basin, such as 
confectionery groundnuts, maize for animal feed, and exportable mangoes10. The Program would support (i) the 
dissemination of appropriates technologies to control aflatoxins on groundnuts and maize along the value chain; 
(ii) the Department of Plant protection (DPV) to extend the coverage of areas infested by the fruit flies; (iii) the 
strengthening of the quality control system for agri-food products on aflatoxin and fruit flies. 

• Supporting the emergence of Agropole-Centre. While large scale infrastructure, such as roads, power plant and 
construction of manufacturing or industrial processing facilities are excluded from PforR financing, the proposed 
Program may support the feasibility studies for the Agropole Centre, which aimed at addressing critical 
impediments to the development of processing and marketing of agricultural products. In parallel, the Program 
would support the construction and rehabilitation of small-scale rural infrastructure such feeder and connecting 
roads, aggregation/storage and processing parks in and/or around selected economic poles. The Program would 
ensure climate-resilience of implemented investments. 

32. The World Bank and IFC teams are working closely in the preparation of the proposed Program and will further 
deepen the collaboration during implementation to promote private investments in agricultural value chains and facilitate 
access to domestic and international markets. Specific areas of collaboration could include the extension of the warehouse 
receipt systems to value chains of interest for the groundnut basin (groundnuts, and animal feed crops such as cowpeas 
and maize), agricultural finance including insurance, and structuring contract farming between producer associations, 
traders/aggregators, agro-processing companies and exporters. 

33. Result area 3: Improving sector governance, coordination and programs management. The proposed Program 
would address the policy and markets failures that prevent efficient private sector development in the agri-food sector, 
focusing in particular on the groundnut value chain which development has been affected by inefficient interventions. The 
Program would also support the strengthening of the organizational and institutional environment to facilitate the 
development of diversified and resilient agri-food value-chains and improve coordination and execution of government 
programs in the agriculture sector. 

• Improving the policy environment for production, processing and marketing of agri-food products. The Program would 
focus on implementing key reforms to create an efficient and conducive environment for private sector development 
in agri-food value chains. This include (i) implementing the policies and activities defined in the Groundnut sector 
strategy (Note d’orientation pour le Développement et l’Optimisation des Performances de la Filière Arachide- Draft 
May 2018), (ii) establishing a more targeted – both in terms of beneficiaries and technologies focusing on climate-
smart agriculture- and cost-efficient inputs and mechanization support program, (iii) setting up a permanent public-
private sector dialogue on the agricultural sector, strengthening quality control and improving governance of 
government’s inputs subsidy programs, (vi) implementing a conducive fiscal environment for the development of 
agro-processing, and (vii) implementing sustainable financing of agricultural services (research-development-
extension) and facilitating access to finance for productive activities. 

                                            
10 Senegal has received 24 alerts notice from EU in 2017 on fruit flies on mango 



• Program Performance tracking, Sector coordination and capacity building. To accelerate the implementation of key 
reforms in the groundnut sector and implementation of investments supported by the proposed Program there is a 
need for capacity building and institutional strengthening. Key capacity building efforts under the Program would be 
directed at (i) selected inter-professions to enable them to carry out their mandate and become effective and inclusive 
platforms for intra-branch coordination and public-private dialogue, (ii) the Ministry of Agriculture (MAER) and its 
regional directorates to strengthen its ability to plan and coordinate different stakeholders and projects in 
implementing the second phase of PRACAS; (iii) national institutions in charge of data collection, treatment and 
analyses (MAER-DAPSA, DHORT, PAPA, DRD, MEFP-ANSD, PM-BPE) to improve their capacities to inform policies and 
monitor implementation programs; (iv) national organizations and institutions providing business development and 
technical support services to the agri-food sector; (v) authorities and laboratories ensuring quality control  of 
agricultural inputs and food products (DPV, CERES-Locustox, ITA, LCI) in particular for the control of aflatoxins and 
fruit flies (vi) national institutions in charge of monitoring natural resources (soil and water) management and 
infrastructures. 

E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 

34. It is assumed that the proposed Program by its nature will yield significant positive environmental and social 
benefits by promoting climate-smart agriculture, soil restoration, reduction of food losses, improved water management, 
etc., while its environmental and risk from  the promotion of PRACAS and PNDE, of increasing yields, developing 
infrastructure (such small catchment dams/weirs, retention basins, cattle watering points, crop and fodder storage 
facilities, cottage processing platforms, etc ), use of chemicals, will be limited. Interventions proposed for the Program’s 
support exclude activities which normally would be considered as Category A under Investment Financing Projects. For 
this reason, the proposed Program for Results is not considering heavy infrastructure on irrigation or infrastructure 
necessary to establishing a full Agropole, such as power plant or connection to high voltage power grid and connecting 
roads. Furthermore, intervention on irrigation will not consider transfer of significant flow of groundwater for irrigation 
development, but rather small-scale irrigation around existing water infrastructure or small-scale infrastructure such as 
catchment weirs and boreholes fit for purpose. Environmental and social impacts of such infrastructure would be limited 
in scope and manageable. Implementation of some investments may require acquisition of land or displacement of 
people, even though affected people during construction may also be ultimate beneficiaries of such investment. Regarding 
land acquisition, the structure of farming systems in the Groundnut Basin, overwhelmingly dominated by small scale family 
farming holdings, and the high population density prevent distribution or acquisition of massive amount of land for 
agribusiness operations, which in any case the project cannot support. Therefore, the proposed Program’s approach 
consists of developing targeted value chains around family farming.  

35. Although the Program will strive to promote climate friendly agriculture, agricultural intensification including 
agroforestry, drought-tolerant and salt-tolerant varieties, crop diversification, efficient soil and water management 
techniques) may involve increased use of chemicals for soil fertilization and for plants diseases, weeds and pest control. 
For instance, the control fruit flies on fruit crops and may involve use of pesticide at a significant scale or acquisition of 
advance technology to produce sterile males of ceratitis.    

36. Ministries of agriculture and livestock have long-standing experience of managing World Bank operations and are 
relatively well familiar with the Bank's guidelines and procedures on environmental and social risks management, but 
mostly through dedicated projects implementation units with qualified and competitively selected staff. As part of the 
Program's preparation, the Bank task team will prepare an environmental and social systems assessment (ESSA). The ESSA 
will review existing regulations and policies, their legal and practical applicability at the program level, institutional 
capacity, and the effectiveness of implementation in practice, using empirical information and data to be provided by the 
GoS and supplemented with information from other stakeholders and other available sources. The ESSA will include 
measures required to manage environmental and social impacts and risks and will include actions to strengthen 
institutions and increase the capacity of the whole program. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25413 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Malawi P167860  Malawi Resilient 
Productive Landscapes 
Project (P167860) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 17, 2019 Sep 25, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Malawi Minstry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation and Water 
Development 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen 
capacity for improved water resources management 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 125.00 

Total Financing 125.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 120.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 120.00 

          IDA Credit 120.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 5.00 

          Global Environment Facility (GEF) 5.00 

  



 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Malawi is a small, peaceful and democratic country, with a population of about 17 million people. Most of the 
population (85 percent) lives in rural areas. Population growth rate is estimated at 2.8 percent per annum. At this growth 
rate, Malawi’s population is expected to reach 23 million by 2025. The country is land-locked and is highly vulnerable to 
climatic shocks. Despite a recent difficult economic period, Malawi has a stable democratic political system and has 
initiated economic and political reforms. The country remains one of the world’s poorest, with over half of its population 
living in poverty.  

2. Malawi has a narrow export base consisting mostly of tobacco, with high dependence on imports and external 
aid flows. Investment climate constraints hinder private investment. The 2018 Doing Business report ranks Malawi 111 
out of 190 on the ease of doing business.  The main obstacles to doing business include poor infrastructure and services 
such as electricity, water, transport, an uncertain economic environment, poor legal and regulatory framework, lack of 
access to long-term finance and a limited skills base. Business confidence remains subdued following two years of 
drought conditions and weak economic growth. 

3. Poverty levels in Malawi are high. In 2017, poverty headcount at US$1.9/day (2011 PPP) remained stubbornly 
high at 70 percent of the population1. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita2 was estimated at US$320 in 2017. Malawi 
is ranked 170 out of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index, and 125 out of 157 on the World 
Bank’s Human Capital Index. Almost half (47 percent) of the children under age five in Malawi are short for their age 
due to long-term effects of malnutrition and 20 percent are severely stunted.   Malawi’s economic growth rates have 
fallen below the average of 2.8 percent in non-resource rich African economies during the last twenty years.  Real per 
capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has grown at an average of just above 1.5 percent per year between 1995 and 
2014.  With these persistent low growth rates, successive governments in Malawi have struggled to lift people out of 
poverty.   Wealth accounting data3 shows that more than half of Malawi’s wealth (estimated at US$10,442 per capita in 
2014) is renewable natural capital, mainly cropland with smaller shares contributed by pastureland, forests and 
protected areas. The natural capital base however is under extreme pressure due population growth, agricultural 
expansion and climate change. There is also a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those 
with a high incidence of poverty, although there is currently insufficient evidence to point to a causal link4.   


4. Natural resources underpin Malawi’s productive sectors and are the main source of livelihood for over 80 
percent of the population.  For instance, the agriculture sector contributes 28 percent of Malawi’s GDP and 78 percent 
of export earnings, and employs 64 percent of the workforce, which consists mainly of subsistence farmers. Smallholders 
account for 80 percent of agricultural production and 70 percent of agricultural GDP.  The forestry sector contributes 
6.2 percent to the GDP (and this does not account for the value of non-wood forest products, processed timber or the 
enormous informal trade in wood fuel and charcoal). Some 33,000 jobs are heavily dependent on the existence of 
Malawi's forests.  Forests provide a range of environmental services, such as GHG mitigation, watershed regulation, 
climate regulation, soil and water conservation, biodiversity support and nutrient cycling. The nine protected areas in 
the Shire river basin store an estimated 80 million tons of CO2e5.  Malawi is also heavily dependent on hydropower for 
its energy needs, with about 98 percent of current electricity generation coming from run-of-river6 hydropower plants 
on the Shire River. 

5. Agriculture remains the lifeblood of Malawi’s economy, and growth in GDP has historically followed growth in 
agriculture.  However, most of the population is engaged in smallholder, low-productivity rain-fed agriculture which 
regularly suffers exogenous climate-induced shocks with significant negative impacts on overall growth and poverty 
reduction. In recent years, weak fiscal policy, low investor confidence, significant weather shocks and land degradation 
have had detrimental effects on agricultural output and food security.  Malawi regularly suffers from droughts and 
floods, and its economic growth is closely correlated with hydrological variability. In recent years, the country has 
suffered from weather shocks with increasing frequency, including both floods and droughts in early 2015, followed by 
another major drought in 2016. Irrigation potential has not been fully developed. Only about four percent of crop land 
is currently irrigated, severely constraining agricultural intensification and commercialization. 

6. Medium-term economic prospects however appear positive as the country recovers from the recent weather-
induced shocks in 2016. Real GDP growth after two consecutive years of drought, fell below three percent in 2016 but 
is projected to pick up in the range of four to five percent over the next two years. Increased output is expected to be 
driven by a rebound in the agriculture sector, although this outlook is susceptible to downward risks such as a potential 
El Niño-induced weather shocks.  The continued vulnerability of Malawi’s agricultural sector and spillovers to other 
sectors point to the critical need to promote measures that improve resilience.  The Government of Malawi (GoM) has 
recently developed a medium-term strategy7, looking beyond the recent crisis, to establish strong foundations for a 
productive, competitive and resilient nation. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Malawi’s water resources are under threat from severe land degradation and loss of forest cover.  Critical 
watersheds are becoming degraded leading to reduced water availability, deteriorating water quality, increased 
vulnerability to droughts and floods, reduced energy security and reduced agricultural productivity. Malawi has a large 
network of surface waterbodies covering about 21 percent of the country’s total area; about 20 percent of this area is 
Lake Malawi itself.  Malawi’s drainage system is divided into 17 Water Resources Areas (WRAs)8. Major river systems 
include Shire (WRA 1), Ruo (WRA 14), Linthipe (WRA 4), Bua (WRA 5), Dwangwa (WRA 6), South Rukuru (WRA 7), North 
Rukuru (WRA 8) and Songwe (WRA 9).  Most of the rivers are subject to natural seasonal flows but maintain at least 
some base flow (at least in their lower reaches) throughout the dry season. The total renewable water resource available 
in Malawi is estimated at 17.3 km3/year, or 1,027 m3/capita/year.  While availability of water resources in the aggregate 

                                            
5 Bayliss (2015). Carbon Storage Analysis of select Protected Areas under the SRBMP.   Report to Government of Malawi 
6 ‘Run-of-river’ means that there is little or no storage capacity upstream of the power plant except small pondage for peaking. The amount of 
electricity that can be produced depends on the daily flow of the river.  
7 Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (2017-2022) 
8 A Water Resources Area is essentially a single large, or in some cases a collection of smaller, hydrological catchments. 



     

is considered satisfactory, per capita water availability has been declining at a rapid rate.  Malawi is now dangerously 
close to becoming water scarce9. Further, water resources in Malawi are highly variable between wet and dry seasons 
and from year to year, and the country’s stock of water storage infrastructure is one of the lowest in the region. GoM’s 
Water Resources Investment Strategy (WRIS, 2011) identifies poor catchment conditions and deteriorating water quality 
as significant risks to water resources and associated infrastructure (dams, hydropower plants, irrigation systems), and 
recommends investments in catchment management in strategically important WRAs.     

8. Land degradation10 in Malawi’s most important watersheds has reached alarming levels, with major impacts on 
water security, agricultural productivity, and hydropower generation.  Recent studies suggest that land degradation 
hotspots cover about half (41 percent) of the land area in the country11. Soil erosion and nutrient depletion are major 
forms of land degradation that are reported to affect more than 60 percent of the entire land area. The average annual 
national soil loss rates in 2014 was 29 tons per hectare12. Chemical land degradation, including soil pollution and 
salinization/alkalization, has led to 15 percent loss in the arable land in Malawi in the last decade alone. Projections for 
future land degradation and soil loss under different climate and population growth rate scenarios suggest that land 
degradation will become increasingly severe, with one study suggesting that overall rates of soil loss will increase by 
between three and four times 2010 baseline levels13. The Shire River Basin (WRA 1) remains the most prominent hotspot 
of land degradation. High loads of sediment are deposited in river beds, reservoirs and floodplain wetlands, affecting 
irrigation canals, fisheries and hydropower generation.  Existing hydropower plants on the Shire River are often unable 
to meet peak demand, partly due to low flows and sediments in the river caused by degradation of catchments upstream 
of the plants14.  

9. Forest degradation is a major contributor to land and water resources degradation.  Over the last 40 years, more 
than half of Malawi’s forests and woodlands have vanished and those that remain are being ‘thinned’ through over-
extraction and more frequent forest fires. Yet, forests make a substantial contribution to livelihoods and the economy 
and are needed to protect vital ecosystem services. They also provide the bulk of Malawi’s energy supply in the form of 
charcoal and firewood.  Wood fuels dominate Malawi’s energy sector and are used by 98 percent of the population. The 
industry provides large numbers of jobs and is worth nearly US$295 million per annum – equivalent to four percent of 
GDP15.  Forests and woodlands also play a key role in protecting watersheds from erosion, sustain the biodiversity that 
underpins a large proportion of Malawi’s tourism sector and make an important contribution to mitigating carbon 
emissions.   

10. The underlying drivers of land degradation in Malawi are well known. These include a growing demand for 
agricultural land due to increased population pressure and reduced agricultural productivity; insecure land tenure which 
reduces incentives to invest in soil and water conservation measures; and limited access to markets and rural finance. 
The proximate causes of land degradation include a wide range of biophysical factors and poor land management 

                                            
9 Under the Falkenmark definitions of water scarcity, a country with a total renewable water resource of less than 1000 m3/capita/year is 
considered water scarce 
10 Defined here as: “the reduction or loss of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of rainfed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, 
pasture, forest or woodlands resulting from natural processes, land uses or other human activities and habitation patterns such as land 
contamination, soil erosion and the destruction of the vegetation cover” 
11 MoNREM (2017). Forest Landscape Restoration Opportunities Assessment of Malawi. Lilongwe, Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and 
Mining, Government of Malawi.  
12 Vargus R. and Omuto, C. (2016). Soil Loss Assessment in Malawi. FAO, UNEP and UNDP and MoAIWD.  Available at 
http://unpei.org/sites/default/files/Soil_Loss_Assessment_in%20Malawi.pdf [accessed on November 20, 2018] 
13 LTS (2013). Integrated Assessment of Land Use Options in Malawi.  Report to the World Bank and Government of Malawi 
14 In 2017, Malawi’s power generation utility (EGENCO) spent around US$150,000 per ton on sediment management to enable operation of the 
hydropower facilities. 
15 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. World Bank, October 2018 

     

practices. Important biophysical factors that affect land degradation include topography, land cover, climate and soil 
erodibility.  

11. Efforts to address land degradation are hampered by a multitude of factors.  The major challenge is the weak 
institutional capacity for natural resource management at both national and local levels and the severe lack of funding 
for these activities in local government budgets. With insufficient resources, weak capacity and incentives, local 
governments are generally unable to play an effective role in addressing land degradation at the local level. In addition, 
changes to climate and weather patterns exacerbate the impacts of natural resources degradation, making it harder to 
address the problem.  Future climate change scenarios suggest that Malawi will see increasing climatic variability, higher 
temperatures, longer dry periods, and more erratic and intense rainfall events16. More intense flood events will cause 
greater soil erosion and land degradation. Hotter and drier periods will contribute to forest fire risks. Droughts will 
continue to negatively impact food production, causing food insecurity and increased poverty. Increased poverty results 
in greater demand for agricultural land, thus exerting more pressure on the natural resources base.  Yet, Malawi remains 
unprepared to anticipate, respond to and recover from the effects of climate change.  The country lacks reliable hydro-
meteorological information that is needed for building climate resilience.  For example, out of the 140 hydrological 
monitoring stations in Malawi that are considered a priority, 70 percent are not operational.  Systems for data storage 
and quick relay to modelling and forecasting systems are either non-existent or not integrated across agencies. Building 
a national and more integrated hydrometeorological service is key to building climate resilience across productive 
sectors and reducing pressure on the natural resources base.  

12. Reversing the rate of land degradation remains a government priority. The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and 
Water Development (MoAIWD) and the Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mining (MoNREM) recognize the 
interdependence between natural resource management, agricultural production, water and energy security. Sound 
policies and institutional frameworks for natural resources management exist. A new Environmental Management Act 
2017 has been enacted to strengthen environmental management and protection, while the Water Resources Act of 
2013 provides for the management, conservation, use and control of water resources, including management of 
watersheds.  

13. The recent establishment of the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA)17 is expected to help strengthen 
multi-sectoral planning and management of water resources in the country, and pave way for establishment of 
sustainable watershed management institutions at the community level. Land reforms introduced in 2016 are 
expected to improve land tenure security and strengthen incentives for small-holder farmers and businesses to invest 
in sustainable land and water management practices. Further, a new National Charcoal Strategy has been approved, 
which for the first time, provides an opportunity to legalize the charcoal value chain and move towards more sustainable 
charcoal production, and thus reducing pressure on forests and community woodlands. However, the ability to 
implement policy and legislation, both nationally and locally, remains weak.  Monitoring is often limited and ineffective, 
compliance is low and the structures necessary for providing guidance and procedures are not in place. Weak 
institutional capacity is particularly acute at district and local levels, partly because of the slow pace of decentralization 
and severe under-funding18 which constrains the effective functioning of institutions at district and local level, limiting 
their ability to implement policy. 

14. To reverse landscape degradation and protect watersheds, Malawi needs to invest at scale in the protection of 
renewable natural resources and their restoration where appropriate and cost-effective, using a broad suite of 

                                            
16 Government of Malawi (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience: Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR).   
17 GoM recently appointed the governing board for NWRA – a move that is seen as an important milestone in operationalizing the institutional 
framework for water resources management as laid out in the Water Resources Act of 2013.  
18 For instance, the share of agricultural spending on extension support – a critical service for promoting the uptake of SLM practices –reduced 
from 25 percent in 2005 to just 5 percent in 2012.  


interventions. These will include sustainable forest management and restoration interventions, development of water 
management infrastructure, scaling-up of climate smart agriculture and resilient livelihoods. At the same time, GoM 
needs to invest in strengthening institutions and improving the monitoring, management and use of hydro-
meteorological information.  GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS), published in July 2017, 
proposed that land restoration should be elevated to a higher national priority level, backed by financial investment to 
implement a large scale national program for land restoration. In this regard, GoM has committed to restore 4.5 million 
hectares19 of landscape by 2030, through a combination of interventions, including soil and water conservation, river 
and stream bank restoration, conservation agriculture, farmer-managed natural regeneration and agroforestry; natural 
forest management; community forests and private woodlots. The total cost of achieving this target is estimated at 
US$385 million (or US$86 per hectare). GoM is currently in the process of mobilizing finance from development partners 
to support implementation of the strategy, either through a new large scale national program or a series of separate 
programs targeting major river basins 20.    

15. One such program which GoM has been implementing since 2012 with World Bank support is the Shire River 
Basin Management Program (SRBMP) 21. Part of the investment under SRBMP targets degraded hotspots in the basin 
covering a total area of 129,500 ha (about 5 percent of the basin land area). These catchments have been undergoing 
rehabilitation over the past two years with promising results.  Available data shows that a total of 35,385 ha (i.e. 27 
percent of the targeted catchment area and 1.3 percent of the entire basin) has been rehabilitated, including 10,173ha 
of previously degraded community forests which have been regenerated. Vegetative protection measures have been 
implemented on 4,000km of water courses (rivers and streams) in the targeted catchments. Various infrastructure 
packages–rural feeder roads (80km), bridges (11) and markets (13)–designed to support alternative livelihoods and 
improve market access have been completed and commissioned. A total of 366 Common Interest Groups (CIGs) have 
been established, trained and provided with start-up capital for various non-farm business enterprises.  Finally, a total 
of 80 Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are now promoting conservation agriculture and improved farming practices using a 
farmer-to-farmer extension approach. To date, about 77 percent of households within the targeted catchments are 
reported to be engaged in sustainable land and water management.  These results, although achieved at a small scale, 
have demonstrated that it is possible to restore degraded landscapes through an integrated package of interventions 
involving land and water management, forestry management and livelihood support.  GoM would like to scale up these 
interventions in other degraded hotspots in the Shire River Basin and elsewhere in line with the national landscape 
restoration strategy. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) has been conceived in response to 
GoM’s letter of request for World Bank support dated June 28, 2017. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
16. The project is aligned with the new growth-oriented Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Malawi which is 
currently under preparation. The CPF focus on four themes which emerged from the Systematic Country Diagnostic 
(SCD).  These are: (i) human capital; (ii) governance and macroeconomy; (iii) energy and infrastructure; and (iv) 
environment and rural resilience.  The project contributes to the environment and rural resilience theme by addressing 
land degradation, improving natural resources management and boosting agricultural productivity.  Addressing these 
issues will contribute to protecting critical watersheds and securing water resources for existing and proposed 
hydropower plants on the Shire river as well as the large-scale irrigation scheme currently under implementation as part 
of the Shire Valley Transformation Program.   

                                            
19 This represents about half of the entire land area in Malawi 
20 So far, GoM has developed and is implementing two river basin management programs – Shire River Basin Management Program supported by 
the World Bank and the Songwe River Basin Management Program – supported by African Development Bank 
21 Current World Bank support to SRBMP ends on January 31, 2019 



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 8 of 12  

     

17. The project is also expected to contribute to the human capital agenda in Malawi. A recent study22 found that 
upstream watershed conditions were a strong predictor children’s health across 35 developing countries, including 
Malawi.  Specifically, the study found that in areas with no access to improved water sources, higher upstream tree 
cover is associated with lower probability of diarrheal diseases downstream, even after controlling for socio-economic 
and climate factors23. This suggests that improving watershed management is not only an investment in environmental 
resilience, it is also an investment in public health. 

18. The project responds directly to GoM’s priorities as laid out in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 
(MGDS III) 2017-2022.  The objective of the strategy is to move Malawi to a productive, competitive and resilient nation 
through sustainable agriculture and economic growth, energy, industrial and infrastructure development while 
addressing water, climate change, environmental management and population challenges.  The project contributes 
directly to the MGDS III priority areas of agriculture, water development and climate change management by supporting 
investments that address land degradation and its impacts on water resources, agricultural productivity and rural 
resilience.  Given the critical role water plays in Malawi’s economy, and given that the country’s wealth is still largely 
dominated by natural resources (largely cropland), future growth will depend on reversing land degradation to improve 
productivity, and sustainable management of natural capital (especially forests) to protect water security.     

19. The project also contributes to the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 
prosperity. The project area targets the poorest region of Malawi, where rural poverty rates are above 80 percent.  A 
recent study24 shows a strong correlation between areas with highly degraded land and those with a high incidence of 
poverty, implying that increasing levels of land degradation may be contributing to the poverty of millions of Malawians. 
The project will contribute to reversing this trend. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
20. The proposed Project Development Objectove (PDO) is to increase adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape 
management practices in targeted watersheds and strengthen capacity for improved water resources management. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 
21. The following PDO results indicators will be used to measure achievement of the PDO: 

1. Land area under resilience-enhancing landscape management practices (ha) 

a. Agricultural land area with productivity enhancing practices applied (ha) 

b. Forest land area restored, reforested or under improved management (ha) 

2. Proportion (%) of targeted watershed area showing: 

a. an increase in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)25 correcting for climate effects; 

b. an increase in Land Surface Water Index (LSWI)26 correcting for climate effects (percent); 

3. Number of farmers (disaggregated by gender) adopting improved agricultural technologies; and  

                                            
22 Herrera, D. et al (2016). Upstream watershed condition predicts rural children’s health across 35 developing countries. Nature communications, 
Vol 8, 811 (2017).  
23 This finding is consistent with other literature on the role of forests in regulating water quality.   
24 World Bank (2018). Malawi Country Environmental Analysis. October 2018 (under preparation) 
25 NDVI uses the visible and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on satellite 
imagery data) to determine the extent to which a target contains live green vegetation. 
26 LSWI uses the shortwave infrared and near-infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum to analyze remote sensing measurements (based on 
satellite imagery data) to determine the amount of water in vegetation and soil. 


     

4. Number of people (disaggregated by gender) adopting alternative livelihood activities supported by the 
project. 

5. Operationalization of the National Water Resources Authority 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
22. The proposed project responds to Malawi’s most pressing environmental challenge – severe degradation of the 
renewable natural resources base (land, forests and water resources) that underpins the productive sectors of the 
economy.  The project’s central thesis is that degradation of the renewable natural resources base and high exposure 
and vulnerability to climate change have adversely affected energy and water security, agricultural productivity and 
livelihoods.  The project will contribute to breaking the cycle of degradation in selected watersheds and reducing climate 
vulnerability by (i) strengthening the institutional enabling environment for landscape management at the national, 
local and community level; (ii) investing in productive landscape management and livelihoods in targeted watersheds; 
and (iii) improving hydrometeorological information and services for resilience.  Intervention in these three areas is 
expected to result in increased adoption of resilience-enhancing landscape management practices, which would 
ultimately contribute to improving water and energy security, agricultural productivity and livelihoods.   

23. The proposed project will support GoM’s National Forest and Landscape Restoration Strategy (NFLRS). The 
overall objective of the NFLRS is to restore degraded landscapes for improved water and energy security, agricultural 
productivity and livelihoods. The project will contribute to achieving this objective by investing in restoration activities 
in selected priority watersheds, while at the same strengthening institutions and information for resilience and 
sustainability. Proposed project activities will be organized under five components as outlined in the following 
paragraphs.  

24. Component 1 – Institutional capacity strengthening.  This national level component will finance a package of 
activities designed to strengthen the institutional and policy framework for integrated landscape and water resources 
management at national, district and local levels and will also support the development and piloting of a Payments for 
Ecosystem Services (PES) mechanism for the Shire river basin that could deliver longer-term financing for efforts to 
address land degradation and protect natural resources that generate ecosystem services.    

25. Component 2 – Landscape management and livelihoods support. This component will finance an integrated 
package of interventions designed to protect environmental services and restore degraded landscapes in selected 
watersheds in ways that will also build resilient livelihoods. The component will support: 

• Sustainable land and water management (SLWM) interventions that will focus on catchment planning, river 
and streambank management; and soil and water conservation.  The approach will be based on the successful 
participatory approach tested under SRBMP and codified in the new national guidelines on integrated 
catchment management; 

• Agriculture and resilient livelihoods interventions that will support climate smart agriculture practices to 
increase the resilience of both farmers and landscapes. Support for livelihood diversification through stronger 
engagement with the private sector will also be encouraged; 

• Forestry and protected areas interventions that will be delivered in the context of the NFLRS and will focus on 
strengthening the management and productive contribution of existing natural forests in both state-managed 
forest reserves and on customary land, and protected areas. Forest reserves and protected areas comprise a 
large proportion of the upper part of the landscape, play a key role in protecting ecosystem services and offer 
cost-effective opportunities for avoid the need for costly restoration of natural resources; and  



 
The World Bank  
Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (P167860) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2018 Page 10 of 12  

     

• Development of water management infrastructure will focus on small-scale investments for harvesting, 
storing, and delivering water for people, livestock and agriculture. The menu of water infrastructure 
investments will include small-to-medium dams, small sand and sub-surface dams in dry river beds, area 
infiltration interventions such as semi-circular bunds or soil bunds, and rock catchments. The component 
could also support rehabilitation and/or construction of boreholes for groundwater extraction. Diversification 
of water sources in each target watershed will increase the supply of water for multiple use and therefore 
mitigate against the risk of droughts. 

 
26. Component 3- Hydro-meteorological monitoring and climate services improvement.  This component will invest 
in the expansion and modernization of Malawi’s hydrometeorological monitoring network and associated data 
management and decision-support systems. It will also support the integration, efficiency and scaling up of climate 
information services.  It will support Malawi’s efforts to establish a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) 
through investments in the entire value-chain of climate products and services. This component will complement an 
ongoing Green Climate Fund-supported initiative by extending geographical focus to cover southern Malawi and by 
strengthening development of digital solutions.  

27. Component 4–Project management support. This component will finance a package of project management 
support activities to ensure cost-efficient, timely and quality delivery of project activities and results, and will include: 
(i) establishment of a project management support unit with specialized project management professionals to provide 
support to the lead implementing ministry/department and the multi-sectoral technical team; (ii) incremental 
operating costs for day-to-day management of project activities at the national and district levels; and (iii) support to 
multi-sectoral coordination and implementation at the district and local levels.   

28. Component 5 –Contingency Emergency Response. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with 
zero allocation will be created and made implementation-ready to allow the GoM to respond quickly in case of an 
eligible emergency. The CERC will complement those in place already under agriculture and nutrition projects and the 
forthcoming Malawi CAT DDO.   The mechanism will be defined in a specific CERC Operational Manual that will clearly 
outline the triggers, eligible expenditures, procurement thresholds, and procedures for using part of IDA resources of 
the project to respond quickly in the event of an eligible emergency. 

29. The project will use, where appropriate, community‐led landscape approaches—that is, an integrated approach 
to sustainably manage natural resources for multiple purposes and functions. Managing natural resources in an 
integrated way across different land uses and connecting them at the landscape level provides the basis for addressing 
trade‐offs and enhancing people’s livelihoods and resilience to climate variability and change.  In the context of the 
project, the operational boundaries of the landscapes are those of the watersheds or micro-watersheds targeted by 
the project.  The project area will include a total of 500 micro-watersheds located in the degradation hotspot areas of 
the Shire River Basin (upper and middle Shire), averaging approximately 500 hectares each.  This includes a total of 305 
micro-watersheds supported under SRBMP and a total of 195 new micro-watersheds to be selected in the upper and 
middle reaches of the Shire river basin, upstream of existing and proposed hydropower plants.  The watersheds 
supported under SRBMP will continue to receive support to allow for full implementation of the watershed 
management plans (or Village-Level Action Plans).  These watersheds will also receive technical assistance to graduate 
from project-based support, including establishment of catchment management committees, in accordance with the 
Water Resources Act 2013.   

30. The estimated cost of the proposed project is US$125 million.  It is proposed to finance this cost through an IDA 
credit of US$120 million and a GEF grant of US$5 million. The final project financing structure will be decided in 
consultation with MoFEPD. 

 

 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 Yes 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Project subprojects have not been identified, however screening of potential environmental and social 
impacts has been undertaken on similar subprojects. Possible risks and impacts that are likely to arise from 
some of the proposed subprojects include construction related health and safety risks to both labour and 
local communities; possible influx of populations and the social risks associated with that such as disease 
transmission and spread of HIV, potential for Gender Based Violence; and land acquisition leading to 
temporary or permanent physical displacement and loss of assets, land and livelihoods. Environmental risks 
include those related to civil works construction (controlling on-site erosion and pollution), localized changes 
in water use and distribution. unregulated wood cutting in areas with improved road access (absent adequate 
control measures), potential damage to patches of natural habitat (such as miombo woodland or dambos), 
and possibly increased agro-chemical use. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23298 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P163533  Odisha Integrated 
Irrigation Project for 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P163533) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 13, 2018 Jan 28, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Odisha Community Tank 
Development and 
Management Society 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience and 
improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 235.74 

Total Financing 235.74 

of which IBRD/IDA 164.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 164.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 71.74 

          Borrower 71.74 

   


 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Over the past ten years, India has seen strong economic growth - exceeding 7 percent per annum - driven primarily 
by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and a revival in some industrial activities. The reduced 
momentum in investment and exports notwithstanding, annual growth rates are still projected to average 7.5 percent per 
annum in coming years because of the diversity in the country’s drivers of growth and the vast scope for improvement in 
many areas.   

2. Alongside this growth, India has achieved significant progress in reducing extreme poverty - from 46 percent in 1993 
to 21 percent in 2011 (using the international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day in 2011 purchasing power parity). 
World Bank estimates point to continued reduction in poverty in more recent years, indicating that the country is on track 
to eliminating extreme poverty by 2030. Urban growth and rising labor earnings due to movement of labor from agriculture 
to non-farm work, an unprecedented rise in wages for unskilled labor, and demographic changes (e.g. a declining 
dependency ratio), underlie the rapid poverty decline.  

3. Over the past three decades, the economy has undergone a structural shift from agriculture as the dominant sector, 
to services and industry. Even then, agriculture continues to be essential for achieving India’s development goals, as the 
sector employs about 59 percent of the country’s total workforce, is a source of livelihood for 70 percent of India’s rural 
households, and is the main source of economic linkages in rural areas. In 2017, the sector contributed about 17 percent 
to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). While its contribution to the economy is likely to keep declining, agriculture 
will continue being the single largest contributor to employment and income of the rural population in the foreseeable 
future. 

4. Because of a complex web of policies and institutions that limit the performance of agricultural markets, diminishing 
returns to technologies that once sparked the green revolution, and suboptimal diversification among others, the 
agriculture sector continues to perform below its potential. Long-term agricultural growth has averaged about 3 percent 
per year1 and generally lags the growth rate for the larger economy. Sector growth is subject to large annual shocks, which 
as projected, are expected to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, India’s agriculture has, for long, been based 
on an unsustainable resource-intensive model, predominantly characterized by inefficient use of water and land 
resources, and as an imperative, will have to shift to higher levels of resource use efficiency, given the country’s low per 
capita natural resource endowments2 and the projected impacts of climate change.  

                                            
1 With decelerating productivity growth of food grains. 
2 With annual per capita water availability of only about 1,000 m3, India is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. 



     

5. Moving away from its long-running policy focus on raising agricultural output and improving food security, the 
Government of India has now prioritized the doubling of farmers’ incomes by 2022 and through a number of interventions 
e.g. the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is also committed to accord high priority to improving water use 
efficiency - more crop per drop - in a focused manner3. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6.  Odisha ranks among the fastest growing economies in India, consistently growing at rates higher than the national 
average. Mirroring the national level, Odisha’s economic growth has been mainly driven by services (43.5 percent of GDP) 
and industry (36.6 percent of GDP). Between 2012 and 2017, per capita incomes in the State increased by 30 percent 
(from Rs. 47,632 to Rs. 61,678) and poverty reduced at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. Despite this good progress, Odisha’s 
per capita income still stands at only 75 percent of the national average.  

7. While Odisha’s economy has transformed from a predominantly agro-based economy, agriculture remains a key 
sector, providing employment and livelihoods to more than 62 percent of the State’s workforce, and contributing close to 
20 percent to its GDP. Indeed, a strong correlation exists between agriculture sector performance and overall state GDP, 
pointing to strong linkages between agriculture and other sectors. 

8. Like much of India, Odisha’s agriculture sector performance, relative to potential, is low. The officially reported 
compound annual average growth rate of 2.8 percent for the sector for the period 2011-17, is below the national average, 
and masks the highly volatile sector performance, which in reality is characterized by significant negative growth every 
alternative year. Consequently, because of low sector performance, Odisha ranks at the bottom in terms of annual farmer 
income (i.e. Rs. 16,884 per family), only outperforming West Bengal, where the average farmer income stands at Rs. 
11,748 per annum.4 

9. Among others, key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low 
productivity; (ii) limited diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; (iv) access to 
reliable irrigation; and (v) dysfunctional or non-existing value chains for important crops. First off, average yields for major 
crops in Odisha still lag both those in neighboring states with comparable factor endowments and the national averages 
(Table 1), and are far below their potential5.   

 Table 1. Average Yields, 2016-2017 

Crop  

------------------------------Crop Yields (ton/ha)------------------------------ 

Odisha 
Andra 

Pradesh 
Madhya 
Pradesh 

Telangana West Bengal 
India 

Paddy 1.49 3.47 1.75 2.91 2.89 2.40 
Pulses 0.55 0.30 0.94 0.77 0.97 0.79 
Wheat 1.33 na 2.98 1.40 2.68 3.20 
Potato 12.00 14.92 20.07 25.96 26.16 21.51 

10. According to the findings of a State-level NITI Aayog Task Force on Agriculture6, these low farm-level yields are 
largely due to limited adoption of productivity enhancing technologies (including the use of improved germplasm), a 

                                            
3 PMKSY seeks to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve 
on-farm water use efficiency, enhance adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies (more crop per drop), etc. 
4 National Sample Survey Organization, 2013.  Situation Assessment Survey of Agricultural Households, All India Debt and Investment & Land 
and Livestock Holdings in India (January – December 2013) 
5 World Bank. 2014. Republic of India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth. Washington, DC.   
6 Government of Odisha, 2016. Rejuvenation of Agriculture: Recommendations of State NITI Aayog Task Force. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 5 of 14  

     

degrading natural resource base, inadequate and mostly unreliable irrigation7,8, and weaknesses in the extension system.  

11. Due to several factors9, Odisha’s progress with respect to diversification – an important vehicle for agricultural 
growth - has been mixed at best, even against a backdrop of real shifts in consumer demand towards more diversified 
food baskets. While the net area devoted to rice showed some reduction between 2006 and 2015, the latest year for 
which comprehensive data sets exist, the total area devoted to food grains has been increasing. In fact, according to the 
Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18 example, the areas under spices, vegetables, fruits, and floriculture - a proxy for 
diversification - declined by 20 percent, 6 percent, 9 percent and 12 percent, respectively, between 2014 and 201710. 

12. In addition, extreme weather events, largely droughts, and to a lesser extent, floods and cyclones, also continue to 
undermine Odisha’s agriculture performance and have been the principal driver of the volatility in sector growth. Figure 
1 for example, shows percent annual growth in rice production-the major crop - over five decades, and attests to the 
vulnerability of the State’s agriculture to the debilitating impacts of extreme weather events, which seem to occur with 
almost predictable periodicity.   

Figure 1: Percent annual  growth in rice production, 1962-201411 

 

 

13. While Odisha has a long history with the menace of drought – going all the way to the drought of 186612 - recent 
trends point to an increasing frequency13 as well as more agricultural areas coming under the ambit of droughts. As 
pointed out in the Odisha Climate Change Action Plan, this trend will be further amplified in the future due to climate 

                                            
7 About 2/3 of the State’s gross cropped area is rain-fed and depends on monsoon – a vast reliance on nature in an environment with highly 
skewed annual rainfall availability.  
8 Of the total cultivable area of 8.7 million ha in the State, irrigation potential has been developed for 2.96 million ha in Kharif and 1.48 million 
ha in Rabi season.  
9 A comprehensive understanding of which will be developed during preparation. 
10 Government of Odisha, 2018: Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18. 
11 Data source: Government of Odisha, Status of Agriculture in Odisha, 2014-2015.  
12 Reputed to have caused the death of one third of Odisha’s population due to famine. 
13 From 1 in 5 years to 1 in 2 years since 2009. 


change14. With 2/3 of its gross cropped area under rainfed production and an insignificant use of groundwater, the State 
has few and inadequate instruments to mitigate against climate change-induced weather vagaries.  

14. Moreover, even when Odisha has relatively more water resources than many States in India, Irrigation 
development is low and below the national average.  Of the total cultivated area of 8.7 million ha, only 1.9 million ha (21 
percent) is under irrigation. Only 34 percent of the total irrigation potential of 5.5 million ha has been developed and 
groundwater use is negligible. With limited irrigation development and seasonally skewed rainfall, Odisha is not making 
the most out of every drop of water. In fact, estimates indicate that about 40-50 percent of available rainfall is lost as non-
beneficial evapotranspiration, a loss higher than the neighboring states. In addition, many of the irrigation systems have 
become victim to a vicious cycle of the build-neglect-rebuild. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is not conduced 
systematically as a result of insufficient funds, the quality of irrigation services degrades and further undermines farmers’ 
willingness and capacity to pay for services. Arrangements for irrigation management have not been adapted to the 
requirements of recent developments, including the use of groundwater, adoption of more individual irrigation 
technologies, and the need to adopt a cascade perspective on irrigation management. 

15. Furthermore, remunerative and reliable markets in Odisha, a precondition for sustained agricultural growth are 
limited, mainly due to poorly functioning value chains. For example, supply chains for otherwise high-value commodities 
(e.g. spices, vegetables) are fragmented and uncoordinated, often involving multiple layers of intermediaries in some 
places, and completely no players in many other places. 

16. The Government of Odisha (GoO) has identified increasing production and productivity, reducing the vulnerability 
of agriculture to climate change, diversification towards high-value crops, rainwater harvesting and improving efficiency 
of water use, improved produce marketing, and addressing absentee landlordism inter alia, as important issues to be 
addressed to improve the performance of the agricultural sector and raise farmer incomes. The proposed project 
contributes to these efforts. The proposal is to support higher agriculture growth, more efficient water use, better quality 
and reliability of irrigation service delivery, and strengthen the resilience to climate change of production systems in six 
districts (see Table 2) in Odisha.  

17. Characterized by highly skewed and variable rainfall patterns15, a lack of perennial rivers, these districts depend on 
a cycle of dry seasons alternating with increasingly uneven and erratic monsoons for water. On average, they suffer from 
marginal drought one in three to five years, moderate drought in six to eight years, and severe drought one in thirty years. 
Among other reasons, the undulating physiography and the predominantly small-sized land holdings limit the technically 
and economically efficient development of centralized major and medium irrigation systems (reservoirs and canals) to 
serve these areas and, they therefore, generally have comparatively lower irrigation coverage than other parts of the State 
(Table 2).  

    Table 2. Irrigation potential created as a ratio of cultivated land 

Project District Ratio of irrigation potential created to total cultivated area 
Kharif Rabi 

Ganjam 0.74 0.29 
Kandhamal 0.30 0.38 
Kalahandi 0.55 0.70 
Nuapada 0.42 0.58 
Mayurbhanji 0.55 1.15 
Keonjhar 0.37 0.51 

                                            
14 Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier and flood prone areas will be subject to more flooding. Other problems such 
as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate change. 
15 When it rains, eighty six percent of the rains fall in the monsoon period (June-October), while the remaining 14 percent occurs during the 
other 7 months of the year, from November to May. 



State average 0.62 0.72 

 
18. The districts therefore, have historically relied on water, stored in cascades of impoundments (tanks) for agricultural 
production and as a buffer against droughts. The tanks support livelihoods of over 300,000 households, most of whom 
are in the poorest quintile. Besides sustaining agricultural livelihoods, the network of tanks in these areas also serves other 
important purposes such as controlling and reducing the impacts of floods - when they occur-and recharging the 
groundwater table. Investing in these districts will also help meet a key policy objective of the GoO to more evenly spread 
the benefits of irrigation - currently confined to a few districts in the form of major and medium irrigation projects16.   

19. Specifically, the project will support sustainable and resilient intensification, judicious diversification17 to high-value 
commodities (especially during the Rabi season and for some areas under upland rice in Kharif), improved produce 
marketing and also incentivize and improve the quality of irrigation service delivery and the reliability of water supply to 
ensure a more efficient, productive and equitable distribution of water to beneficiary farmers throughout the year that is 
more responsive to the more demanding higher value crops. The project builds on the successes of an earlier Bank-
financed Odisha Community Tanks Management Project in bridging the gap between the then existing irrigation potential 
and actual irrigation coverage of selected tanks and expands the engagement further into institutional reforms and 
capacity strengthening for improved system performance, diversification and marketing of farmer produce. 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The India CPF (2018-2022) argues that for the country to maintain its trajectory of high growth and poverty 
reduction, it must: (i) embrace much more efficient use of the country’s resources, particularly water and land and address 
the impacts of climate change; (ii) foster inclusiveness both for poverty reduction and as a key condition for sustaining 
high rates of economic growth; and (iii) strengthen the agility, performance and responsiveness of public sector 
institutions. One of the three CPF focus areas (Focus Area 1) proposed for Bank engagement is “resource efficient growth” 
where one of the Objectives is promotion of a more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector. 
The proposed project dovetails and is consistent with Bank support (to include inter alia, support to sustainable 
productivity gains, CSA practices, diversification, investments in irrigation and drainage for improved water use efficiency, 
value chains etc.) that is envisaged under this Objective.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
21. The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience 
and improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. Project beneficiaries include small and marginal farmers, 
Water Users’ Associations (Pani Panchayats), farmer producer organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. Targeted 
investments will be undertaken to address any gender gaps as well as benefit other vulnerable groups. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22. The project is expected to lead to increased average yields, increases in the range, volume and value of marketed 
agricultural output, more productive and efficient use of scarce water resources, a more reliable supply and a better 
quality of irrigation service delivery, and improvements in farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Proposed key 
outcome level performance indicators include the following: (i) increase in productivity of selected agricultural 

                                            
16 Government of Odisha, 2013. State Agriculture Policy, Department of Agriculture, Bhubaneswar. 
17 Diversification in this context is defined as reducing the emphasis on food grains and increasing the share of high-value 
agriculture. This would be done taking cognizance of the overall country policy intent to shift rice production towards relatively 
more water abundant states like Odisha. 


commodities supported by the project (t/ha); (ii) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number); (iii) share 
of non-rice products in total production in project areas(percent); (iv) water users provided with new/improved irrigation 
and drainage services (number); (v) acreage under crops that are less water demanding (ha); (vi) productivity of water use 
(kg/m3), and (vii) number of direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
23. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g. improving productivity, system resilience to climate change and 
resource use efficiency) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued 
and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve and diversify farmer yields and production, 
improve water productivity and efficiency, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers 
who can generate a marketable surplus in selected districts in Odisha. Producing higher value and more diverse crops puts 
a high premium on the quality and reliability of irrigation service delivery, as they leave no room for water supply errors 
and the higher use of farm inputs significantly increases the stakes. Higher value horticulture crops generally use less 
water as compared to wheat, paddy, sugarcane and cotton. The conceptual framework underlying the proposed design 
therefore links efforts to promote adoption of CSA practices18, diversification and productivity increases, with 
improvements in incentives for technology adoption, quality of water service delivery and water resource management. 
The project will comprise three components as described below: 

Component 1: Climate-Smart Intensification and Diversification of Agriculture 

24. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen the capacity of organized farmer 
groups to cope or adapt to climate change stresses affecting crop production, and diversify production in Rabi in response 
to effective demand as expressed by pre-identified commercial off-takers or gleaned from other reliable market signals. 
Support under this component is proposed to be organized around two mutually inclusive, overlapping and reinforcing 
subcomponents. 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Improved Productivity and Resilience 

25. This subcomponent aims at supporting and incentivizing farmer adoption of technologies and practices that 
demonstrably deliver the triple-wins of increased productivity, improved resilience to climate shocks and reduced GHG 
emissions, as a co-benefit. The exact nature of technology support will be: (i) a function of the specificities of production 
environments and unique climate vulnerabilities19 in individual cascade; (ii) scaled to farmer capacities and endowments 
and (iii) based on the principles of response to market demand, good choice of improved germplasm, adequate plant 
nutrition, and effective pest and disease management. 

26. In this respect, project support is envisaged to go towards organizing farmers for technology transfer purposes (e.g. 
through farmer field schools), technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improving availability and access 
to productivity enhancing and resilient germplasm by strengthening key segments in the State’s seed production and 
distribution system, and strengthening advisory service provision, currently plagued by weaknesses in the extension 
system - such as inadequate manpower and limited knowledge and skills.   

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Diversification and Produce Marketing 

27. The objective of this subcomponent is twofold: (i) support farmers to reduce the current emphasis on food grains 

                                            
18 In this context, CSA practices are defined as practices that sustainably increase productivity and farmers’ income and build resilience to 
climate change, while reducing GHG emissions where possible and appropriate 
19 To be mapped for the target districts following approaches developed through a World Bank Non- Lending Technical Assistance to Support 
Implementation of Odisha State Climate Change Action Plan. 


(especially rice and wheat) while increasing the share of high-value agriculture (e.g. fruits, spices and vegetables) in their 
overall production structure; and (ii) improve produce marketing to increase incomes and reduce price risks associated 
with diversification. A successful shift in favor of more diversified production would not only generate faster productivity 
and superior incomes for targeted farmers, but will also result into improved nutrition security, help reduce the water 
footprint of paddy, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.  

28. Project support to diversification and improved marketing is proposed to follow productive alliance approaches, 
which bring together organized farmers, produce buyers, technical service providers and leverage private sector financing 
to address market imperfections and build competitive value chains for select commodities. In this respect, the project 
could provide funding for several activities, including but not limited to: (i) awareness creation of diversification among 
farmers; (ii) identification of competitive value chains; (iii) farmer experimentation with new crops and 
training/demonstration of relevant production technology; (iv) strengthening of farmers for collective action (including in 
production, aggregation, technology transfer, among others); (v) business plan development; and (vi) selected productive 
investments - as would be identified in the business plans. Project support to crop diversification will be based on 
agronomic/agro-ecological suitability, comparative advantage of specific cascades, and local, national or international 
market opportunities. To further diversify farmer income streams (a key adaptation strategy) and maximize the utility and 
productivity of water stored in the tanks, during preparation, the project will explore the feasibility of using the tanks for 
seasonal aquaculture.  

Component 2: Improving Access to Irrigation and Water Productivity  

29. Access to reliable irrigation is generally critical to enhancing crop productivity, building resilience to climate change, 
promoting diversification and access to markets. It is doubly important in the targeted project areas that are characterized 
by frequent droughts and highly variable rainfall availability. Bridging increasingly longer dry spells during Kharif and 
producing more demanding higher value and more diverse crops during Rabi when the stakes are higher and when there 
is no margin for water supply errors, puts a high premium on the quality of irrigation services.   

30. Among others, reliability of irrigation services and a more productive use of water resources in the project areas is 
weighed down by: (i) the poor condition of hydraulic assets- mainly due to deferred maintenance; (ii) limited knowledge 
and skills in water management - often inadequate to provide supplemental irrigation during Kharif season, and to cover 
water-stress conditions during Rabi; and (iii) weak arrangements for O&M. Additionally, most of the tank irrigation 
systems have been developed for rice cultivation and need to be adapted for a more diversified and more demanding 
cropping system.  

31. The proposed project aims to improve the performance of irrigation throughout the year and across cascades of 
selected tank irrigation systems through modernization of hydraulic assets, institutional reforms, and capacity 
strengthening. The objective is to use water more efficiently, reduce water losses and save water during Kharif season, 
and transfer these savings to Rabi season. Capacities for irrigation management (including the introduction of asset 
management) will be strengthened to provide higher quality services. In addition, the project will promote sustainable 
groundwater use to supplement scanty rainfall and mitigate increasing rainfall variability. Key outcome indicators include 
the productivity of water use ($/m3) and the number of water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage 
services (number). 

Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Modernization 

32. The project will invest in the modernization of hydraulic assets. To that end, a comprehensive water assessment will 
be conducted in the Project cascades to identify opportunities for reducing water losses and for transferring the savings 
to Rabi season. For each of these opportunities, the implications on downstream water use will be identified through 
preparation of a pre- and post-project cascade-wide water balance. Investments include strengthening of canal bunds, 
modernizing hydraulic canal structures, installation of field channels and sub-surface pressurized pipes, and developing 

groundwater extraction. The project will also help farmers access subsidies at central and state level for the promotion of 
pressurized irrigation at chak level. In line with GoO’s intention, where feasible, the project will finance investments 
through DBOTs on a Hybrid Annuity Basis. 

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation Management 

33. Crop diversification and intensification require a higher quality of irrigation service delivery to meet the 
requirements of more demanding crops. Traditional arrangements for irrigation management often lack the capacities 
and incentives to deliver these improved services. The project will pursue institutional reforms and pilot the use of private 
(publicly funded) operators that will be incentivized to deliver high performing irrigation and O&M services through DBOT 
contracts on a Hybrid Annuity basis – in conformity with GoO’s intentions.  

34. The Project will promote conjunctive management and sustainable use of both ground- and surface water resources 
by improving groundwater monitoring linking these with irrigation scheduling decisions. The Project will also establish a 
surface and groundwater monitoring and benchmarking system and will (i) link these data to decision making on irrigation 
scheduling, and (ii) significantly improve citizen engagement in the management of irrigation systems.  

35. The project will strengthen capacities of farmers and Pani Panchayats through Farmers’ Field Schools and 
demonstrations, among others in modern irrigation technologies, improving irrigation efficiency and rational hydraulic 
asset management. The project will also introduce the allocation of investment resources on the basis of scheme 
performance (including abidance by agreed water allocation, meeting efficiency targets and cost recovery). Capacities will 
also be strengthened to improve the management and maintenance of hydraulic assets. 

Component 3: Project Management 

36. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including, 
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, 
training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will also develop a comprehensive management 
information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through baseline 
surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term reviews and final evaluations. Staffing of the PMU will include a number of 
technical, financial management, M&E and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. Detailed implementation 
arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual. (POM). Regular training of PMU staff will be organized 
to strengthen their capacities to implement the project. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Odisha is located on the east coast of India along the Bay of the Bengal. The state has coastal line of about 450 km, and a 

geographical area of 155,707 sq. km which accounts for 4.87% of the total area of India. The state of Odisha can be 
divided into five agro-ecological zones: (1) The coastal plains, (2) The middle mountainous range – part of Eastern Ghats 
mountain range, (3) The rolling uplands, (4) river valleys, and (5) subdued plateaus. While the state has a wide network of 
river basins and sub-basins, it is mainly associated with 3 major river basins; Brahamani, Mahanadi and Vansadhara. 
Despite such diverse natural resource base, it’s agriculture sector has been performing well below its potential. Among 
key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low productivity; (ii) limited 
diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; and (iv) dysfunctional or non-existing 
value chains for important crops. 
  


To address these concerns, the project will invest on repair and rehabilitation of about 600 tanks spread across the state 
to revive small holder farming. The interventions will include: improving the efficiency of water assets, modernizing the 
irrigation systems, enhancing agriculture productivity, promoting adaptive agriculture practices, enhancing fishery 
production,  and promotion of climate friendly agri-business practices. 
  
 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Government of Odisha has recently completed a project of this nature, reflecting that the implementation capacity has 

already been established to address environment and social safeguard implications. The PMU is already in place, and the 
consultancy services for conducting ESMF, IPNM and TDP are already in place. Safeguard compliance tools needed are 
already available with the Government of Odisha to be used during the proposed project. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would 
include rehabilitation of existing water assets such as 
strengthening of canal bunds, modernizing hydraulic 
canal structures, installation of field channels, etc. 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under the climate resilient 
agriculture practices could result in positive impacts 
on the environment with effective planning and 
implementation. The project has been categorized as 
category B. There is no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts envisaged due to the proposed 
project interventions. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will be undertaken to identify 
environment and social issues of significance. Based 
on ESA, an Environmental and Social and Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared toadress the 
requirements of a category B project, to manage risks 
and maximize environmental and social opportunities. 
Both the ESA and ESMF will take into account 
experiences and lessons from the previous project. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The rehabilitation and modernization of the tank 
system is likely to improve the water storage capacity 
and wetlands in the upper catchment. As the 
rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural resources 
including wetlands (if any). The ESA that  will help 
ascertain such impacts, and will develop a screening 
mechanisms that will help identify and avoid impacts 
on sensitive environmental habitats and important 
ecosystems. As details of the exact sites of the 
proposed investments are yet to be finalized, the 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for any 
negative effects on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No activities impacting on forests will be undertaken 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides, but 
improved irrigation efficiency and subsequent increase 
in crop productivity and diversification may induce 
pesticide use. The project will strictly use IPNM 
(Integrated Pest and Nutrition Management) 
approach. In addition, the ESMF will have a detailed 
local specific IPNM strategy for the project. This will 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides, include all 
measure for labour health and safety for pesticide 
application and usage, and guidance on training and 
demonstrations, that will be provided so that there is 
no significant adverse impact on the environment and 
public health. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The state has a sizeable tribal population - 22.5% of 
the total population. In fact, Odisha is unique in having 
distinct tribal areas enshrined under the 5th Schedule 
of the Indian Constitution. At this stage, investment 
plans and locations are not known, and therefore, a 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF) will be 
prepared. Subsequently, sub-project specific Tribal 
Development Plans will be developed as and when 
sub-project locations are finalized. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project does not anticipate any form of land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts as it 
would cover the existing  tank with a focus on repair 
and rehabilitation only. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
No new dam construction will be  supported under the 
project. The project will rehabilitate and modernize 
the existing rainwater harvesting structures (known as 

Tanks and each having more than 40 Ha of command 
areas). Some of them would be having earthen 
embankments above 10 meters high, hence the 
project is triggered. 
This policy was triggered during the previous project, 
and a Dam Safety panel was put in place. The same 
Dam Safety panel will continue for this project under 
the technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, 
Central Designs Organization. The project will seek 
better coordination with the Dam Safety panel and 
support safety enhancement of the tank system as 
part of the tank rehabilitation. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
There is no evidence that the project would impact on 
any international water ways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Project areas do not fall in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The Borrower has already engaged consultants who shall commence preparation of the safeguards instruments soon. 

They shall undertake ESA to prepare Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Tribal Peoples Planning 
Framework (TPPF), Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) / Integrated Nutrient Management Plan (IPNM). These 
instruments are expected to be ready by March 31, 2019, or before appraisal and will be publically disclosed.  
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. Assessments will be participatory with 
extensive consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Uganda Irrigation Modernisation Project (P163836) 

 
 

  
Nov 27, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23380 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uganda P163836  Uganda irrigation 
development and 
climate resilience 
project (P163836) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 15, 2019 May 30, 2019 Water 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance, Planning 
and Economic Development 

Ministry of Water and 
Environment 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To provide irrigation and drainage services, and develop institutional capacity for irrigated agriculture production in the 
project areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 195.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 195.00 

          IDA Credit 195.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 5.00 

          Borrower 5.00 
   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

1. Uganda has made significant progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the last 30 years, 

rural poverty remains a major challenge. Following policy reforms that allowed market liberalization and led to 

political stability, Uganda registered high economic growth between 1987 and 2010, with Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) averaging 5.1 percent1 in the last five years. The structure of the Ugandan economy has also 

undergone a major transformation during the same period, with a notable shift from a primarily agriculture-based 

economy to one dominated by services and industry. In 20152, the service sector became the largest contributor 

to GDP (52.8 percent), followed by agriculture (25.8 percent) and industry (21.4 percent), respectively. In line 

with its economic growth, the country achieved remarkable results in poverty reduction, cutting extreme poverty 

by half, between 1993 and 20063. The recent National Household Survey has however showed an increase in 

poverty from 19.7% in 2012/13 to 27% in 2016/17. The main poverty challenges are food insecurity, low 

agricultural productivity, a degrading natural resource base, inadequate planning for the rapid urbanization and 

low access to basic infrastructure and services.  

 

2. Agriculture has been a key driver of economic growth and poverty reduction in Uganda, irrigation 

development is essential for food security and agriculture transformation. As Uganda’s largest single economic 

sector, generating about one quarter of GDP and employing 70 percent of the labor force, agriculture plays a 

critical role for income generation, employment and livelihoods, particularly for the bottom 40% of the 

population, as well as overall economic development. In spite of the gradual decline in its GDP contribution, 

typical of transforming economies, agriculture remains the key source of exports contributing 80% of total 

exports. The agriculture sector supports over 80% of the poorest of the population, the rural areas account for 

94% of the poor, and 85% of the population. This demonstrates the high potential multiplier effect of agricultural 

growth on the socio-economic development of the country. Irrigation development which is now very limited in 

the Uganda is essential to increase agricultural productivity, manage the increasing climate risks and enable 

 
1 World Bank Data: Uganda Economic Overview (2017) 
2 World Development Indicators (2015)  
3 Uganda Poverty Assessment Report (2013): Ugandan poverty line USD 0.94 and 1.07 per day depending on the region and area). 



commercial cultivation in the country. In recognizing the critical roles of irrigation, the government in the Vision 

2040 and NDP II (2016-2020) lists irrigation investment as a high priority along with agricultural value-chain 

development. The goal is to transform the small-holder subsistence cultivation into modern commercial farming 

to increase production, productivity and farm income.  
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

3. The regulatory framework for irrigation in Uganda is generally aligned with international good 

practice although detailed implementation regulations and management institutions require strengthening.   

The Water Act (1995) provides the institutional framework and legislation for water resources management, 

irrigation, water supply and sanitation. The National Water Policy defines the responsibilities of different entities 

in water resource development, promotes water resource assessment and planning for irrigation, and calls for 

increasing the capacity of the farmers to access and use water for crop, fishery and livestock production. The 

Water Resources Management Reform Strategy (2005) provides for decentralized water resources management 

at the zone and basin levels. On the agricultural side, the 2010 National Agricultural Policy (NAP) stipulates the 

sectoral approach to the National Development Plan, emphasizes the need for rehabilitating government irrigation 

schemes, transferring the management responsibility of irrigation schemes to lowest appropriate levels, 

establishing new irrigation schemes, and increasing water storage for livestock and wildlife. The Agriculture 

Sector Strategic Plan (2015/16-2019/20) includes strategic interventions to increase access to water for 

agricultural production. The National Irrigation Policy (2017) lays out the guiding principles and general 

institutional arrangement for irrigation development and management, including coordinated planning, 

implementation, and service delivery, as well as cost recovery and beneficiary participation through water user 

associations (WUAs). The policy recognizes the role of farmers managing small-scale schemes, and encourages 

a community-based irrigation management approach. The National Irrigation Master plan (MWE 2011-2035) 

stipulates the priority irrigation development areas and schemes over short, medium and long terms.  

 

4. Irrigation, also called water for agricultural production (WfAP), is a shared responsibility between the 

Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

(MAAIF). MWE takes overall responsibility for irrigation and off-farm irrigation development while MAAIF for 

water use and management of on-farm agricultural water facilities. Horizontal and vertical coordination is often 

lacking. Overall policy guidance to the water subsector is provided by the Water Policy Committee, comprising 

members from relevant sectors. Technical guidance to the sector is provided by the cross-sectoral Water and 

Environment Sector Working Group (WESWG), which includes recommendations of budget and programs, and 

sector performance assessment.   

 

5. Agriculture and irrigation are performing well below their potentials.    Uganda has a diverse agricultural 

production system primarily based on small-scale manual subsistence farming, and comprising a system of mixed 

agriculture with perennial and annual crops in most of the seven agro-ecological zones. The main crops are cereals 

(maize, sorghum, millet, rice) on some 1.7 million ha for the two cropping cycles out of the total 14.4 million ha 

agricultural area: root crops (25%), banana (17%), as well as pulses, oil seeds, coffee, vegetables and fruits. Export 

crops include coffee, tea, tobacco, cotton, cut flowers, and cocoa. Food crop production dominates the agriculture 

sector, contributing over 55% of the agricultural GDP, while cash crops contribute 17% and livestock 15%. 

Despite the dominance of food crop production, one third is marketed with export being less than 7%. The sector 

is seeing a trend of moving towards higher-value crops (perennial and seasonal) such as Tea, Cocoa, fruits etc., 


with more clear commercial and export orientation.  

 

6. Agriculture is mainly rain-fed with only 1.3% of total cultivated land under irrigation over a potential of 

1.1million ha (AICD/IFPRI, 2010) and 3.0 million ha (NBI 2012). Therefore, the sector is very vulnerable to 

climate change and variability. According to the 2017 National Food Security Assessment and IPC, around 31 

percent of the population was food insecure (in January 2017) and this deterioration was partly due to the drought 

conditions caused by the 2016/17 El Niño and La Niña climatic events. This highlights the inadequate climate 

resilience of agricultural production and farming communities. The crop yield and productivity in the country are 

well below their potentials, for example, the yield of maize in the country is around 2.4 tons/ha while in some 

parts of world farmers could easily produce with irrigation, 10-15 ton/ha of maize. The main contributing factors 

found by different studies are lack of reliable water supply (irrigation), quality of production inputs, poor 

extension services and little value-chain development. As a result, food insecurity and malnutrition as well as 

very low agricultural income are still major challenges for the country. Many households suffer from food 

insecurity and high levels of malnutrition, with 34% of children under 5 years being stunted. The most food-

insecure region is the North, followed by the East, in terms of dietary energy consumption. In the North, 59% of 

households consume only one meal per day. The number of food-insecure people in Uganda is projected to rise 

from 7 million in 2015 to 30 million by 2025. 

 

7. Irrigation development is still at preliminary stage in the country. To date, a total of some 15,000 ha of 

public small scale irrigation schemes (largest 600-800 ha) has been developed, mostly in the form of valley tanks 

and river diversion schemes. The government ministries are responsible for scheme construction, and once the 

schemes are completed farmers operate the schemes. There is no dedicated irrigation management authority and 

the irrigation service concept is not fully developed. Irrigation water charge is being exercised in some places. 

Operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes have been essentially informal until in the past few years when 

farmer-based irrigation management through WUAs and farmer cooperative societies were piloted under AfDB 

funded irrigation rehabilitation project, which has mixed results. Negligence and deferred maintenance are 

common phenomena, management capacity at national, district and scheme levels is rather limited, sustainability 

of the existing schemes are questionable. 

8. The Government has developed a strategy for irrigation development and management.     The NDP II 

(2016-2020) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) both recognize investment in irrigation as one of the 

keys to the country’s transformation. The NDP II Objectives related to irrigation include: increasing production 

and productivity along the value chain; addressing challenges in selected thematic technical areas including 

critical farm inputs, mechanization and irrigation; improving agricultural markets and institutional strengthening 

for agricultural development. Institutional strengthening is crucial, alongside investments in rural infrastructure 

and markets, farmer aggregation in producer associations and agricultural extension systems, to support the shift 

to higher-value agricultural production. The government has committed itself to increasing agricultural growth to 

6 percent per year and allocate at least 10 percent of the budget to the agricultural sector. In order to address the 

irrigation development and management challenges, the government has formulated an irrigation development 

strategy. The strategy includes the following key elements: (a) boosting irrigation infrastructure development 

investment through difference sources; (b) promoting integrated planning and coordinated implementation among 

irrigation, agriculture and related sectors; (c) rolling out the National Irrigation Policy and detailed 

implementation regulations; (d) developing  irrigation management institutions and farmer water user groups 

(WUAs) as well as service charge based cost recovery mechanisms for sustainable irrigation service delivery; and 

(e) strengthening agricultural support services through different pathways, including public service delivery, 


farmer-based cooperatives/enterprises and partnership with the private sector. The 2017 National Irrigation 

Policy sets an ambitious target of total irrigated area of 400,000 ha by 2040, with the objectives of achieving 

national food security, transforming the agriculture sector and significantly increasing agricultural income, 

through increasing production and productivity, improving drought-resilience of farming communities, and 

investing in agricultural value-chain development. To implement the above strategy, the government requested 

the World Bank to support its irrigation development agenda with focus on irrigation infrastructure development, 

irrigation management institution development and value-chain development.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

9. The CPF of the World Bank Group for the Republic of Uganda for the period of FY16-21 responds to the 

Government of Uganda vision of a transformed society from a peasant economy to a modern and prosperous 

country by 2040, and its interim goal to attain middle income status by 2020 as described in the second National 

Development Plan (NDP II). The CPF is designed to contribute directly to achieving the Sustainable Development 

Goals, focusing on three strategic areas: (a) strengthening governance, accountability and service delivery; (b) 

Raising incomes in rural areas; and (c) boosting inclusive growth in urban areas. 

 

10. The proposed project, marked as an FY19 lending operation, directly supports the Strategic Focus Area B 

of the CPF: Raising incomes in rural areas, by increasing agricultural productivity, improving the climate 

resilience of the poor and vulnerable farming communities. The project aims to modernize both the physical 

infrastructure system (including technology) and management and service institutions, required for sustainable 

irrigation services and agricultural transformation. This is well aligned with the GoU’s Vision 2040 and 

agricultural development strategy.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

11. Program Development Objective:   The proposed program development objectives are to improve 

financially sustainable irrigation and drainage services, and increase farmers’ agricultural revenue in the project 

areas. The objective will be achieved through a phased investment program to be implemented over 10-12 years, 
with each phase focusing on one or two priority region(s). 

 

12. Proposed (Phase 1) Project Development Objectives:   The development objectives of the project are 

to develop irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services, and institutional capacity for irrigated agricultural 

production in the project areas. The schemes under Phase 1 will focus in one or two regions such as southwestern 

and northern regions. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 

13. The key results (PDO) indicators for Phase 1 Project would likely include the following: (a) Farmers/Area 

provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure services (no./ha); (b) Operational WUAs 

established or strengthened (number); (c) farmer cooperatives or organizations established or strengthened 

(number); (d) Change in crop intensity; and (e) Irrigation service fee established.  


D. Concept Description 
 

14. Project concept and overall approach:    The proposed project will adopt a programmatic approach, 

based on the strategic vision that sustainable irrigation infrastructure operation and services depend upon 

helping farmers turn agriculture into a profitable business. The overall thinking is that reliable and affordable 

irrigation infrastructure and services enable high agricultural production and productivity leading to increase in 

farmer household income, that will enable farmers to pay for the irrigation and associated support services, and 

invest in high-value cultivation including value-chain development; and such investments demand high quality 

services to achieve the expected returns and foster a virtuous cycle of irrigated agriculture development. In view 

of the time required to complete the above development cycle, a three bite-sized program through a series of 

projects (SOP) is conceived for the proposed operation.  

 

15. The Program would be implemented over a period of 10-12 years. It targets a total irrigated area of some 

25,000-35,000 ha at a cost of US$400-500 million directly benefiting some 200,000 small and medium sized 

farmers (tentative, assuming an average 1 ha landholding for a household of six) in the water stressed areas with 

high development potential and/or where there is significant food insecurity issues. Phase 1 project will lay the 

foundation for the subsequent phases. Each phase will have different focus on infrastructure, institutions and 

productivity/income. Each phase prepares follow-up investments for the next phase, while every phase aims to 

bring the project objectives of the previous phase to a new level. Funding sources of the Program beyond Phase 

1 would be more diverse including possible private sector investments. The program focus, phasing, and coverage 

are shown in the Annex. 

 

16. Project Design Guiding Principles and Scheme Selection Criteria:  The project design will follow the 

guiding principles below: (a) integrated investment planning and joint preparation; (b) complementarity and 

synergy with related (agricultural) investment programs; (c) institutional design to ensure sustainability of project 

facilities and service delivery, with adequate arrangements, capacity building for cost recovery and user/private 

sector involvement; and (d) simple project design with adequate implementation readiness before approval.  

 

17. Project Composition:    The proposed Phase 1 Project at an initially estimated cost of US$150-200 

million, will have three components, i.e. irrigation infrastructure development, essential support services for 

agricultural production and value-chain development, and institutional strengthening including implementation 

support. At this stage, the project is estimated to develop some 10,000 ha of new irrigated area, directly benefiting 

around 60,000 poor small to medium farmers. The component description and indicative costs are as follows:   

Component 1.  Irrigation infrastructure development (US$175 million):   The objective of this component is to 

develop the irrigation and drainage infrastructure primarily for supplemental gravity irrigation services. It will 

finance construction and equipment for the water source works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 

pumping stations), related catchment management interventions, and three to five irrigation systems (including 

main canal and drainage system, cross structures, on-farm works, and operation and maintenance (O&M) 

facilities), associated resettlement and environmental management costs. It will also finance consultancies for 

scheme feasibility studies, designs and safeguards assessments including for the follow-up investments. The 

schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising 

commercial production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity 

(northern), and very importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be 

guided by the GoU irrigation master plan and groundwater option considered where adequate studies exist. 
     

Component 2.  Essential support services for agricultural production and value-chain development (US$15 

million):   This component aims at filling critical gaps in provision of essential support services for crop 

production and value-chain development.  It will include strengthening farmer groups/cooperatives for better 

access to quality inputs and appropriate technologies or practices with the aim of improving production and 

productivity. It will also support value chain development and market linkages to increase the value of traded 

items for better economic gains to the target population. The interventions will largely involve retaining experts 

for diagnostic assessments and for imparting knowledge and skills to the beneficiary communities; and provide 

financial support in form of credit or matching grants towards investment in produce storage facilities and value 

addition technologies. Interventions under this component will be complementary to the ongoing agricultural 

development operations by the government and other development partners, such as the Bank-financed 

Agricultural Cluster Development Project (ACDP), the Millennium Village Project (MVP), and the EU-funded 

Common Market for East and Southern Africa (COMESA) initiative. The approach to be adopted for this 

component would be consistent with that followed by the ACDP for improving farmer access to quality 

agricultural inputs and post-harvest handling.  

Component 3.  Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Support (US$8 million):  This component is 

intended to strengthen irrigation management institutions through technical assistance and capacity building and 

implementation support. The institutional strengthening will finance: (a) consultancies for irrigation regulations 

and guidelines development, and necessary supporting studies (e.g. irrigation water tariff) for implementing the 

national irrigation policy; (b) consultancies and training for formulation and capacity building of irrigation 

management organizations for irrigation service delivery and system O&M , including management entities and 

farmer irrigation water users associations (WUAs); and (c) training and consultancies for skills development for 

staff at national, district and scheme levels including beneficiary communities and farmers, in irrigation policy 

and regulations, irrigation technology and management, and agricultural water management. Implementation 

support will include technical and project management consultancies, necessary facilities (goods) and incremental 

operating costs for project implementation management.  

18. Lessons learned and considered in the project design:  The lessons learned from irrigation and irrigated 

agriculture operations supported by the Bank and other development partners in Uganda and elsewhere, which 

will be incorporated in the project design include the following: 

(a) Sustainable irrigation investments require development at adequate scale and support over a sufficiently 
long period to break the vicious cycle of irrigation (or irrigated agriculture) development; 

(b) Project design (complexity) should be compatible with the client capacity and development stage in the 
sector. The general implementation performance of Bank-financed agricultural operations in Uganda has 

been significantly below expectation, and therefore warranting a simple and realistic project design;  

(c) Integrated irrigation and agricultural investment planning, preparation, implementation and operational 
management are crucial prerequisite to successful irrigation projects;  

(d) Institutional design for irrigation operations should cover the entire project cycle. Participation of 
beneficiary communities through water user groups in irrigation system O&M and service delivery is 

essential for sustainable operation. Private sector involvements in irrigation and agricultural supporting 

services can enhance service delivery efficiency and performance;  

(e) Farmer-based irrigation scheme management arrangements have limitations particularly for larger 
schemes as reflected under the Uganda’s irrigation rehabilitation projects and other management models 

(options) need to be explored for managing the project schemes;  



(f) The project related social and environmental risks are adequately assessed and used to inform and 
influence the project design, and a robust institutional mechanism put in place for resettlement and 

safeguards risk management during implementation; and 

(g) Project implementation readiness at appraisal is critical for smooth implementation and timely completion 

19.    The proposed project will be implemented by the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE). The 

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fishery (MAAIF) will be involved in implementation of Component 

2. The district local governments (DLGs) and local communities at the locations of the project schemes will 

participate in implementation of different components. A project steering committee (PSC) chaired by the 

permanent secretary for water, and comprising senior officials from MAAIF and related ministries and districts, 

will be established to provide strategic directions, policy guidance, and high-level coordination. The existing 

project management unit (PMU) of MWE with experienced project management, procurement and safeguards 

staff, will function as the PMU for overall project management and coordination, and the secretariat to the PSC. 

An integrated implementation team comprising technical, agricultural and institutional staff from national and 

local government will be established at each location for execution of scheme-specific activities.    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The schemes are likely to concentrate on southwestern and northern regions. This is in view of the promising commercial 

production prospect (southwestern) and high drought-vulnerability and severe food insecurity (northern), and very 
importantly implementation readiness for a successful first phase. Scheme selection will be guided by the Government of 
Uganda (GoU) irrigation master plan and agreed selection criteria and process. Groundwater option shall be considered 
where adequate studies exist. As described in the project concept note, the project will finance construction of 20-30 m 
high storage dams on rivers and other water source works, several large scale new irrigation and drainage canal systems 
each with 1,000-4,000 ha of command area, as well as catchment management and agricultural water management and 
essential supporting services. Significant resettlement and labor influx are anticipated at some project schemes although 
land redistribution is not required. The project is expected to boost agricultural productivity through crop intensification 
and diversifications as well as value chain development. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Although the ministry of water and environment (MWE) as the implementing agency for the project has substantial 

experience in implementing World Bank funded projects and have overall social and environmental safeguards capacity, 
the envisaged project implementation unit (Directorate of Water Development, DWD) may require capacity 
enhancement. As such, a project management unit (PMU) will be established in the ministry's liaison department which 
has long years of experiences in managing water infrastructure projects financed by the Bank, to augment DWD’s capacity 
to manage the project. At District/Local Government level, there are District and Community Development Officers whose 
Safeguards Capacity will be enhanced as appropriate. A comprehensive safeguards capacity assessment of the project 
implementers will be carried out as part of the formulation of safeguards instruments and where necessary, 
enhancement measures will be proposed and implemented before project activities start. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Herbert Oule, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 


Boyenge Isasi Dieng, Social Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project involves a number of interventions and 
investments such as large-scale irrigation 
infrastructure. Typically the irrigation infrastructure 
works will occur over a large area of some 10,000 
hectares in Phase 1 (25,000 – 35,000 hectares over 3 
phases) and may lead to large scale environmental and 
social impacts, affecting a wider area, and resulting in 
significant health and safety impacts, including labor 
influx and associated socio-economic aspects. Because 
of this, the project has been assigned EA Category A. 
This Category A project is preparing two independent 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) 
for the planned Nyimur (North East) and Kabuyanda 
(South West) schemes, which will respectively cover 
approximately 2,741 and 3,663 hectares, under Phase 
1 project. Civil works will include construction of dams 
20-30 meters high and associated reservoirs, and 
establishement of irrigation systems in the command 
areas. The studies will also include Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMP), Pest Management 
Plans (PMP) for the priority schemes. During 
preparation of ESIAs for the individual sub-projects 
sites, Cumulative Impact Assessment will be part of 
the assessment and appropriate mitigation measures 
captured in the ESMPs for implementation. The ESIAs’ 
preparation has included extensive stakeholder 
consultations, which will continue after the ESIA 
reports are publicly disclosed and during project 
implementation. Since these two ESIAs are 
deliberative, their findings (including impacts) shall be 
included in the Appraisal ISDS after clearance by the 
RSA and disclosure by both the Bank and GoU. Since at 
this stage only two irrigation schemes shall be 
subjected to ESIAs and RAPs, Environmental and Social 
Management Frameworks (ESMFs) will be drafted to 
guide the mitigation of impacts for schemes whose 
detailed designs are to be completed during 
implementation stage. They will include an annex with 
an Environmental and Social Screening form for sub-
project activities under component 1.. The 
Frameworks will also cover auxiliary facilities which 


are normally not covered under the first set of 
ESIAs/RAPs, and these shall include guidance on 
acquisition, operation and management of facilities 
such as workers’ camps, equipment storage areas, 
material sites, waste management sites, etc. The 
ESMPs will include environmental rules for contractors 
that cover site-specific technical specifications, Labor 
Influx Management Plans, Labor Camp Management 
Plans, Code of Conducts for all construction personnel, 
and recommended penalties for non-compliance. 
These ESIAs and ESMPs will demonstrate how the 
project would comply with all applicable rules and 
guidelines, including: (i) all triggered World Bank 
Safeguard Policies; (ii) relevant World Bank Group 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines; (iii) 
World Bank guidance on Managing the Risks of 
Adverse Impacts on Communities from Temporary 
Project Induced Labor Influx; (iv) Guidelines on the 
establishment of a functioning Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM); (v) World Bank Africa Region’s 
Interim Guidelines for Safeguards Application in 
Agricultural Water Management Projects; and (vi) 
Uganda National Environment Management 
Authority’s (NEMA) Guidelines for Environmental 
Impact Assessment and Environmental Auditing for 
Irrigation and Drainage Operations. In addition, a 
Stakeholder Engagement/Communication Plan will be 
drafted during project preparation to ensure that two 
levels of consultations are carried out  with adequate 
involvement of all stakeholders, including women and 
members of vulnerable groups. These Plans will serve 
as a tool for having an open and continuous 
communication with the affected communities. The 
communications strategy will be updated to include 
measures to address specific issues related to labor 
influx that will be explored by the social assessments, 
such as child labor, harassment of any sort, safety and 
security, gender-based violence (GBV), Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), HIV/AIDS and so on. 
 
The ESIAs and RAPs, including ESMPs and PMPs for the 
priority schemes and the framework instruments 
(ESMF and RPF) will be cleared and disclosed in-
country and on the World Bank’s external website by 
project’s appraisal.  


Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project is designed to minimize any adverse 
impacts on natural habitats as a result of irrigation 
development, while strengthening the management of 
vulnerable catchment areas. This policy is triggered 
because irrigation development will take place in 
wetlands and river areas and may have an impact on 
the remnants of natural habitats, both downstream of 
the command area, and in the catchments where 
deforestation and land clearing activities may be 
carried out. It is, however, expected that no 
environmentally sensitive habitats will be significantly 
converted under this project, rather environmental 
conservation will be encouraged at the project sites. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of envisaged potential 
impacts on forest habitats as a result of dam 
construction and water collection/harvesting and 
delivery systems. Detailed information on site specific 
impacts on forests will be provided in the ESIAs to be 
prepared for the different project sites and 
appropriate mitigation actions included in the 
respective ESMPs. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered due to potential expansion, 
intensification of agricultural activities, and 
diversification into new crops that often require more 
frequent usage of combinations of agro-chemicals. A 
generic Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared 
as part of the ESMF and disclosed by appraisal. Where 
use of pesticides will be anticipated, site specific PMPs 
will be included in the respective ESIAs. The PMPs will 
be adopted and included in the project 
implementation manual to address pest management 
issues that may arise in project sites due to both area 
expansion under irrigation and expected increase in 
pesticide use associated with productivity 
improvement. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as construction activities may 
lead to opportunistic finds of archaeological artifacts 
and/or may have an impact on graves and other 
cultural sites. Chance find provisions will therefore, be 
included in construction contracts while potential 
impacts on other identified physical cultural resources 
will be addressed by site-specific environmental 
management plans (EMPs). 


     

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered because none of the people 
within the planned project area meet the specific 
criteria under which indigenous peoples are defined in 
OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of anticipated impacts 
under component 1, which objective is to develop the 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure (primarily for 
supplemental gravity irrigation services) and finance 
construction and equipment for the water source 
works (storage reservoirs, river diversion weirs and 
pumping stations), related catchment management 
interventions, and three to five irrigation systems 
(including main canal and drainage system, cross 
structures, on-farm works, and operation and 
maintenance (O&M) facilities), associated 
resettlement and environmental management costs. 
These activities may trigger land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement as land requirements for 
purposes of construction of any of these facilities may 
permanently or temporarily limit access to both public 
or private land and other assets by local communities. 
The areas envisaged to be used as reservoirs for both 
priority schemes are currently used by a few PAPs for 
residence and farming while the rest is utilized by 
community members for growing perennial crops, 
hunting, gathering, apiary and fishing. 
 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are being prepared 
for the two priority schemes and will be disclosed by 
project appraisal. For those where the scope and other 
details of works, including the exact locations of the 
infrastructure within each project site are not yet 
determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared and disclosed both in country and on 
the World Bank’s external website before project 
appraisal. 
 
In addition, some land consolidation might be required 
for some of the irrigation schemes and particular 
attention will be given to the process through 
extensive and inclusive consultations with affected 
communities to ensure that potential changes in 
ownership and land tenure are adequately addressed;  
All RAPs will be required to explicitly describe the 
modalities of these processes. 



Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered because of the project will 
finance construction of dams. In compliance with the 
triggered OP 4.37, a Dam safety panel is being 
constituted to provide the necessary oversight. The 
irrigation dams will be designed by qualified 
engineers, and dam safety measures will be 
incorporated in dam operations. Dam Safety plans for 
the proposed large dams (including an Emergency 
Preparedness Plan (EPP)) will be drafted, reviewed, 
endorsed and disclosed. For small dam construction, 
rehabilitation, and maintenance relevant oversight 
procedures will be included in the Project 
Implementation Manual. Kabuyanda scheme will 
iinclude construction of a 25m high dam, while the 
total number of dams to be constructed under each 
phase of the Program is not yet known at this stage. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered by the Project as it will 
contribute to building infrastructure and enhancing 
the environment for irrigated agriculture in selected 
high potential sites across the country during project 
implementation that may have an impact on riparian 
water sources. Irrigation schemes under the proposed 
project may be located on rivers which are tributaries 
to international waterways such as the River Nile. The 
relevant notifications per the requirements will be 
sent to Riparian countries before appraisal. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
All of the territory within the program undisputedly 
falls within Ugandan territory. Therefore this policy is 
not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Safeguards related studies (ESIAs, RAPs, and PMPs) for two priority schemes (Kabuyanda and Possibly Nyimur schemes) 

and the safeguards policy framework (ESMF and RPF) will be completed by Project Appraisal in August, 2018; Other 
scheme-specific ESIAs, RAPs, PMPs and the Cumulative Impact Assesment will be completed during early stage of project 
implementation. 
 
 



 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC19997 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P161706  Lake Chad Region 
Recovery and 
Development Project 
(P161706) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 21, 2019 Dec 17, 2019 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cameroon - 
Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development,Republic of 
Chad - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning,Republic of 
Niger - Ministry of Economy 
and Planning 

(TBC) Republic of Cameroon 
- Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Regional 
Development, (TBC) 
Republic of Niger - Executive 
Secretariat for the SDS Sahel 
Niger (SE/SDS Sahel-Niger) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional coordination and crisis monitoring, 
connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, Chad and Niger. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 165.00 

Total Financing 165.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

          IDA Grant 105.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Regional and Country Context           
                            Figure 1: The Lake Chad 

1. Lake Chad is a large transboundary lake located in the Sahel as well 
as in the West and the Central Africa sub-regions. The Lake Chad is shared 

between Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria1 and a total of 49 million people 

live from the exploitation of its rich natural resources (fishing, livestock 

farming, flood-recession agriculture, hunting and gathering). A net exporter of 

food and a provider of seasonal jobs, it also contributed to the food and job 

security of people in its hinterlands2, including two regional metropolises, 

Ndjamena and Maidiguri, as well as the impoverished regions of the lake’s 

Sahelian hinterlands (Borno in Nigeria; Diffa in Niger, the Far North Province 

in Cameroon and the regions of the Lake, Lac, Kanem, Hadjer Lamis, and Chari 

Baguirmi in Chad). If the lake area represents such a food production hub, it is 

because it offers, all year long, a relative secure source of water, fodder and 

fertile land. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and farming systems are labor intensive and generate 

significant indirect employment (processing, trade, crafts, and transport). Finally, the ecological value of Lake 

Chad has been recognized by the Ramsar convention and the Lake is being classified a World Natural Heritage 

Site by UNESCO. 

2. Despite its potential of being a driver for development in West Africa, however, development in the 
Lake Chad area is challenged by multiple and interrelated drivers of conflict and fragility. Most recently, 

the Boko Haram regional insurgency has affected over 23 million civilians around the four countries (Cameroon, 

Chad, Niger and Nigeria). Violent acts caused by Boko Haram include coercion, abduction, forced recruitment, 

                                            
1 This project includes the three countries Cameroon, Chad and Niger. While the World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Program includes Nigeria, Nigeria 

is not participating in this concrete project. This project, however, is processed as a Series of Projects, and will thus allow for the participation of 

Nigeria to opt into the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. 
2 The lake hinterlands, or its area of influence through trade and seasonal migration, extends-up to 300 km around the Lake and represents an area of 

about 250,000 km2. 

indoctrination, human rights abrogation, violent extremism, etc. and besides causing immense psychological 

trauma and weakening social networks, these acts have also disrupted livelihoods and destroyed assets. The 

conflict has exacerbated pre-existing challenges and caused extensive damage. As a consequence of the Boko 

Haram conflict, the Lake Chad Region is also Africa’s largest forced displacement crisis. Latest estimates show 

2.3 million individuals (half of them are children) are now displaced in the Region, both internally and across 

borders as refugees.3 These significant numbers of refugees and IDPs have added pressure on host communities 

that are already food insecure. 

 

3. Vulnerable groups, in particular women and youth have been mostly affected by the consequences 
of the Boko Haram crisis. While youth account for most of the population in the countries around the lake and 

could be a potential driver for economic growth, they are faced with the highest rates of unemployment and the 

lowest levels of formal education and vocational training in the respective countries. Facing limited opportunity, 

youth are easily susceptible to recruitment into criminal activity or armed violence. Young women and men who 

have been recruited and used by armed groups are especially vulnerable as they are marginalized and stigmatized 

by their communities (when and if they return), thus facing many barriers to their reintegration.4 Gender-based 

violence (GBV) and violence against children, already widespread in the Lake Chad Region before the outbreak 

of the Boko Haram conflict has also increased since the crisis (reported acts include abduction, detention, rape or 

forced marriages, and the forced use of children as kamikazes). In addition, common to many young women in 

the Region is the experience of early marriage and childbirth and resultant health risks. 

 

4. The underlying causes of the Boko Haram crisis include high inequality, perceived social injustice, 

a lack of social service provision, historic marginalization, inadequate economic opportunities, high levels 

of poverty, rapid demographic growth and the impacts of climate change and land degradation. The conflict 

can be traced back to a range of fragility drivers and historical underinvestment in remote areas. Fragility drivers 

include i) lack of public services; ii) the pressure on the already fragile ecosystem which is significantly increasing 

due to a high population growth5, iii) poor natural resource management, and climate and disaster risks in the 

Region6; iv) weak governance and weak presence of state institutions; v) weak agriculture performance vi) poor 

connectivity around the lake and rural access roads which are old and not regularly maintained, and vii) missing 

international road corridor and energy transmission linkages. The lack of public services, basic infrastructure and 

social services within the areas surrounding the Lake Chad reflect systemic national development problems and 

are a result of many years of neglect by central authorities. Grievances of the populations living in the Lake Chad 

Region are further deepened by repeated unfulfilled promises of development and many have lost their trust in 

the government. As one of the results, the areas surrounding the Lake Chad represent the poorest, most 

                                            
3 Plan International, Lake Chad Snapshot, 15 Feb 2018. 
4 Young women have especially been negatively impacted as they have been facing the additional stigma of being survivors of sexual violence. 
5 The population of the four countries around the Lake Chad (Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria; entire territory of the countries, not vicinities of the 

Lake Chad) has more than quadrupled in the last 50 years – from 60 million in 1960 to more than 243 million inhabitants in 2017. See UNFPA: From 

crisis to development around Lake Chad, Strategy for an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response, 2018. 
6 The project has been screened for climate and disaster risks. The exposure of the project locations and the impacts on the project’s physical 

infrastructure and assets have been rated as High. Extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, flooding and drought are projected to increase in all 

three participating countries of this regional project (Cameroon, Chad and Niger) and in particular in the Lake Chad Region. Future projections show 

that mean annual temperature is projected to increase between 1.0-3.4°C by 2060. Annual number of ‘warm’ days and nights are also projected to 

increase. Projected increase in inter-annual rainfall variability is likely to exacerbate drought risk in the future. Projected increases in seasonal rainfall, 

total runoff, and the proportion of rainfall in heavy events will have profound implications for flooding. These extreme climate and hazard events affect 

marginalized groups more severely. 



marginalized and neglected part of each respective country and have been left susceptible to crime and violence 

and promises from radical Islamists. In Cameroon, for example, poverty is increasingly concentrated in the 

northern parts of the country – the Far North and the North present a poverty rate of 74.3% and 67.9% respectively, 

and the literacy rate is almost half in the North (43%) compared to the rest of the country (72% nationally). While 

the regions bordering the Lake Chad in Chad and Niger have been less marginalized and less excluded from 

development planning compared to equivalent regions in Cameroon and Nigeria, development indicators remain 

worse than the national averages.7 

 

5. As a result, a military victory and humanitarian assistance alone are not enough to create peace and 

stability in the Lake Chad Region and a focus on restoring and enhancing resilience is needed, even as 

humanitarian activities and security operations continue. As outlined in the joint World Bank Group’s (WBG) 

and United Nations “Pathways for Peace Study” (2018), conflict stems from the mobilization of people’s 

perception of exclusion and injustice, which are rooted in inequalities, and tackling these issues should be a 

priority to prevent further escalation of conflict. While military and security agencies have made some progress 

in limiting the activities of extremist groups, their own practices have, at times, been heavy-handed and have 

included violations of human rights, adding to the sense of insecurity and alienation which increase divisions 

among displaced persons and communities. Furthermore, social inclusion will also be key for a long-term 

stabilization and prevention of future conflicts. In this regard, preventive action needs to adopt a more people-

centered approach that includes mainstreaming citizen engagement. Enhancing the participation of women and 

youth in decision making, as well as long-term policies to address the aspirations of women and young people, 

will also be fundamental to sustaining peace. 

 

6. The conflict has significantly impacted livelihoods and economic productivity in the Lake Chad 

Region, which are largely based on farming, pastoralism and fishing. The main impacts of the conflict include 

inaccessibility and a loss of productive assets and inputs due to human displacement and the disruption of markets 

due to physical destruction of facilities, and the enforcement of security-related measures such as restrictions of 

movement and the prohibition to farm or trade in certain areas.8 As a result, agricultural production and access to 

land have declined sharply, resulting in a widespread loss of livelihoods and employment. In addition to direct 

losses in productive assets, agricultural trade has also been significantly impaired by damages to the road network 

and the closure of borders. The recent AFD/IRD study “Crisis and Development – the Lake Chad Region and 

Boko Haram” shows that the Lake Chad Region was a highly complex and interlinked regional system prior to 

2013, where the country’s borders did not represent real boundaries. Acts of violence by Boko Haram have 

destabilized the former regional system and have compromised productive activities in the rural areas around the 

Lake Chad. A growth of rural income and livelihood opportunities combined with connectivity improvements 

would build the resilience of the population around the Lake Chad and thus help to (i) give the population, and in 

particular those who are at-risk a viable livelihood option besides joining Boko Haram, (ii) restore the 

communities’ trust in the government and the prospect for development in the region, and (iii) reestablish 

community ties. 

     

7. A regional and geospatial targeted approach will help to chart a path that promotes growth and 
economic clustering, while at the same time efficiently promoting inclusion, equal opportunities, and 

security. The contextual rationale for a regional response is three-fold9: (i) The Boko Haram insurgency is a 

regional crisis with significant cross-border spill-over effects; (ii) the Region is characterized by a web of 

economic, trade, historical, political, cultural, ethnic and religious ties, which makes its populations linked and 

interdependent across borders. Events in one country affect others, and the problems of weak community 

institutions, livelihoods and connectivity can only be solved through a broader regional response; and (iii) the 

Lake Chad area is a fragile and vulnerable socio-ecosystem and regional in nature. Furthermore, the “Lagging 

Lands, Violent Lands”10 framework for action suggests a combined spatial and social lens for such areas and 

around country borders where interventions as well as violence can have impacts that spill beyond national 

boundaries. In the Lake Chad Region, where violence is recurrent, and divisions are entrenched, area-based 

interventions that are spatially targeted at places with development deficiencies and socially targeted at factors 

that elevate the risk of violence are required in order to create areas which can become socially, politically and 

economically stable. Coordination between administrative areas at national and regional levels will also be key 

to ensure regional stability and exploit possible positive economic and social externalities, such as those achieved 

by public productive investments, livelihoods, value chain development and transport infrastructure investments. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
8. The current security crisis has forced countries of the region to coordinate and collaborate more 
extensively on security issues, though on development there is a general lack of regional leadership and 

collaboration on common problems. These issues surfaced during the Oslo Consultative Group meeting in 

Berlin (September 2017). The lack of collaboration between regional economic communities of the Economic 

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States 

(ECCAS-CEEAC), and the weakness of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, means that a coherent regional 

response to the deeply-rooted drivers of fragility will remain challenging. While putting in place a sustainable 

platform for programmatic prioritization and coordination, regional dialogue, exchange of ideas and policy 

harmonization will take time and will require sustained support over many years, it will be an important and 

necessary early step for the long-term sustainable development of the Region and will help to restore citizens’ 

trust in government interventions. 

 

9. The Sahel Alliance has opened a window of opportunity for stabilization and recovery in the Lake 
Chad Region. Informed and sustained high-level dialogue and diplomacy in coordination with strong 

international commitment are the prerequisites to help build trust between neighboring governments in areas 

beyond security cooperation. During the International High-Level Conference on the Sahel in Brussels, Belgium 

on February 23, 2018, France, Germany, the EU, the African Development Bank, UNDP and the World Bank 

(the six founding members), joined by Italy, Spain and the UK, officially launched the Sahel Alliance, which 

paved the way for international cooperation following the guiding principles of (a) governance; (b) gender; (c) 

youth and (d) donor coordination. The AFD, EU/DEVCO, AfDB, Germany, the UK and USAID, amongst others, 

have already made allocations for stabilization and development activities in the Lake Chad Basin in parallel to 

humanitarian funding. This proposed Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (i) builds upon the 

                                            
9 The IEG found that a regional approach is relevant if i) program objectives require cooperation among neighboring countries to address regional 

externalities, ii) program objectives align with country and regional development priorities, and iii) the program adheres to the principle of subsidiarity. 

These three conditions are fulfilled in the case of this proposed engagement. 
10 World Bank: Lagging Lands, Violent Lands, A framework for Action, 2017. 


momentum created by the launching of the Sahel Alliance, and (ii) constitutes the World Bank’s commitment to 

the Sahel Alliance by focusing on the stabilization of a main sub-region – the Lake Chad Region. The project 

aligns with the specific objectives of the Sahel Alliance by ensuring a strong coordination with the members of 

the Sahel Alliance, promoting multilateralism and better coordination and collaboration with humanitarian and 

development partners and security actors, in particular through the proposed Component 1, and by putting special 

emphasis on the development of rural areas and infrastructure development through the proposed Component 2 

and 3. 

 

10. The project contributes and will be guided by the World Bank’s Regional Recovery and 
Development Strategy for the Lake Chad Region (Lake Chad Region Business Plan) which is currently 

being developed. A first mapping of WBG responses in the Lake Chad Region has showed that the total amount 

of current World Bank activities in the Region is an estimated USD 470 million11 and that more than 10 million 

beneficiaries benefit from these activities. There is thus a considerable scope for the WBG to scale up its 

development support to the Lake Chad Region, though particularly in Chad and Niger. To this end, the World 

Bank is currently developing its longer-term strategy for the Lake Chad Region of which this project is an integral 

part of. In this context, a grant of the State and Peace-building Fund has been approved in September 2018 for 

the Cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project to build the foundations of this Regional 

Recovery and Development Strategy for the Lake Chad region by enhancing cross-collaboration between the four 

countries around the Lake (the three countries participating in this proposed project and also Nigeria)12. 
 

Map 1: World Bank activities in the Lake Chad Region               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11. The project is part of the World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program. The project constitutes the 
second phase (“Stabilization and early recovery) of the World Bank’s three-phased Lake Chad Region Program 

and prepares the transition from a national post-crisis response (Phase 1) to a long-term resilience and sustainable 

development response (Phase 3) in the Lake Chad Region. The World Bank’s broader Lake Chad Region Program 

                                            
11 USD 140 million have recently been spent on activities and USD 330 million are currently in progress. The national breakdown is the following: 

Nigeria: USD 230 million; Chad: USD 75 million; Cameroon: USD 150 million and Niger: USD 15 million. 
12 The expected outputs of the cross-border collaboration in the Lake Chad Region Project are: (i) Support to the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum 

organization including an early 2019 meeting in Niger; (ii)  Citizen engagement consultation/awareness workshop; (iii) Establishment of a knowledge 

and monitoring platform for the Lake Chad; (iv) Establishment of a data center; (v) Study on multi-dimensional risks around the Lake Chad; and (vi) 

Stakeholder engagement including quarterly multi-partner meetings and support to key conferences (briefs, presentations and participation). 


     

aims to address regional, national and sub-national drivers of fragility through a programmatic, coordinated and 

holistic approach. It is guided by the following five key principles of engagement: (i) a multi-phased and multi-

sector approach to increase the resilience of populations; (ii) flexibility for both riparian client countries and 

stakeholders in their degree of engagement; (iii) flexibility in resource allocation across project components and 

geographic locations; (iv) convergence of efforts with other donors and initiatives along the humanitarian-

development-security nexus; and (v) use of innovative project preparation and M&E mechanisms, such as third-

party execution or monitoring, on an as-needed basis. 

 

12. The World Bank’s Lake Chad Region Program was confirmed at the High-Level Conference on the 
Lake Chad Region in Berlin 2018. On September 3-4, 17 UN Member States, the European Commission, the 

World Bank and the African Development Bank combined announced US$2.17 billion and US$ 467 million in 

concessional loans to support a comprehensive response to the crisis in the Lake Chad Region. The conference 

also highlighted the regional dimension of the Lake Chad crisis, the crucial role of local actors, cross-border 

cooperation and ownership at all levels. Furthermore, stakeholders committed to address the immediate and 

longer-term needs and help build the resilience of crisis-affected people in the Lake Chad region – thus strongly 

endorsing the work along the humanitarian-development-security nexus.13 

 
Figure 2: Supporting the transition from a humanitarian to a development response and cooperation with partners 

 

 
 
 

13. The project is aligned with the WBG’s priorities and UN Strategies in the Lake Chad Region. The 
WBG’s engagement in the Lake Chad Region is aligned with the two interrelated pillars of its Africa Strategy: 

(i) vulnerability and resilience; and (ii) economic opportunity and integration, the Bank’s corporate priority under 

IDA 18, aimed at scaling up its response to issues of fragility, conflict and violence, as well as the Lake Chad 

Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan and the Africa Climate Business Plan. The proposed project 

will be aligned with the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Sectorial Strategy and Operations in the three 

countries. Furthermore, the project is aligned and reinforces UNDP’s and UNOCHA’s “Resilience for Sustainable 

Development in the Lake Chad Basin”, UNFPA’s “From Crisis to development around Lake Chad – Strategy for 

                                            
13 Most activities in the region are almost entirely focused on a humanitarian response with very little development programming, in particular on the 
Chadian and Nigerien side. While humanitarian actors have begun incorporating resilience programming and small development interventions, there 

is an identified need for development actors to engage at scale and support the development of the regions adjoining the Lake Chad. 




an Integrated, Holistic and Sustainable Response” and the “UN Support Plan for the Sahel – Working together 

for a prosperous and peaceful Sahel”. This will be done by supporting the transition from a medium-term response 

focusing on resilience and recovery to a longer-term response that will strengthen transformation and 

development. The project will adapt a comprehensive people-centered approach and will, as highlighted in various 

UN Strategy Documents, strengthen resilience of communities in the Lake Chad Region that improves coping 

capacity and reduces vulnerabilities. 

 

14. The project is also in strong alignment with existing regional and national strategies and plans. The 
project is in line with the recommendations of Cameroon’s RPBA to focus all efforts on achieving concrete results 

around the following objectives: (i) putting in place durable solutions for forced displacement; (ii) improving 

local development/decentralization processes and the functioning of local governance; (iii) improving the 

provision of basic social services; (iv) promoting the recovery of the economy and improvement of economic 

opportunities; and (v) improving individual and territorial security. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned 

with the nine pillars of the “Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko-Haram 

affected areas of the Lake Chad Basin” which has been adopted by the Lake Chad Basin Ministers on August 31, 

2018. The nine pillars of the strategy are: (i) Political cooperation; (ii) security and human rights; (iii) 

disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation, reinsertion and reintegration of Persons Associated with Boko 

Haram; (iv) humanitarian assistance; (v) governance and social contract; (vi) socio-economic recovery and 

environmental sustainability; (vii) education and vocational training; (viii) prevention of violent extremism and 

peacebuilding; and (ix) empowerment and inclusion of women and youth, respond to the multilayered challenges 

in the Lake Chad Basin region. 
 

Relationship to CPF and other strategies 
 

15. The project’s objectives are fully aligned with the Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) for Chad, Cameroon and 
Niger: 

 Chad: The three identified themes of engagement for FY16-20 are: (i) Strengthening management of public 
resources; (ii) improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (iii) building human capital and 

reducing vulnerability. The proposed project addresses the second and third themes of the CPF by supporting 

public productive investments and development along the agricultural value chain, enhancing sustainable 

livelihoods of local communities, strengthening social accountability mechanisms, and improving rural transport 

linkages. 

 Cameroon: The three focus areas for FY17-21 are: (i) Addressing multiple poverty traps in rural areas (with a 
focus on northern regions); (ii) fostering infrastructure and private sector development; and (iii) improving 

governance. The proposed project will address the first focus area by supporting public productive investments, 

improving access to livelihoods and rural transport linkages in the Far North Region of Cameroon. 

 Niger: The three focus areas for FY18-21 are: (i) Rural productivity and incomes; (ii) human capital and social 
protection; and (iii) governance for jobs and growth. The proposed project focuses mainly on the first focus area 

of the CPF ‘Rural Productivity and Incomes’ by directly improving rural livelihoods (in particular the agricultural 

value chain), rural connectivity and public productive investments. 

 

16. Relationship to Africa’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance. The project’s objectives are aligned 
with the “Supporting Africa’s Transformation: Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-FY23)” 

and in particular its strategic priority 4 “promote collective action to address risks of regional economic contagion, fragility, 

epidemic and climate hot spots”. Sub-objective 4.2 refers to support to sustainable management and financing of 


     

transboundary waters and 4.3 to provide support to communities affected by regional forced displacement and help countries 

to deal with underlying conflict prevention measures. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

17. The proposed project development objective for the Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development 
Project-SOP1 is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake Chad Region through supporting regional 

coordination and crisis monitoring, connectivity and agricultural livelihoods in selected provinces of Cameroon, 

Chad and Niger. 

 

18. The proposed program development objective is the following: to contribute to the recovery of the Lake 
Chad Region through enhanced regional coordination and crisis monitoring, socio-economic development and 

the strengthening of local level institutions in the Lake Chad Region. 

  

19. Project beneficiaries will be vulnerable populations in selected intervention areas in the three countries. 
This includes, for instance, youth at risk and women. While not specifically targeted, project beneficiaries could 

also include displaced and ex-combatants. While the project intends to include activities which also support the 

R (“Reintegration”) of ex-Boko Haram combatants, this project does not specifically target ex-Boko Haram 

combatants so as to avoid any possible stigmatization that would exacerbate an already very difficult social 

cohesion effort between and within communities. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

20. The following PDO indicators will be considered and refined during project preparation: 
- Establishment of a functioning knowledge and monitoring platform endorsed by the participating 

countries. 

- Increased regional dialogue and coordination on conflict and climate and disaster risk management among 
the three countries (Cameroon, Chad and Niger).14 

- Number of direct project beneficiaries in the three countries (number), of which percent of female and 
youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel project investments reflected their needs (percentage), of 
which percent of female and youth. 

- Beneficiaries in the three countries that feel that project investments have positively contributed to the 
community’s social well-being and have helped to restore trust. 

- Beneficiaries of regional economic development activities that report an increase in income 
(disaggregated by type of service, gender and target group). 

- Improvement of Rural Access Index (RAI; number of index points improvement). 

 

Figure 3: The Project’s Theory of Change 

                                            
14 As reported by the participating project countries. 

 
 

 

D. Concept Description 
 
                                 Figure 4: The Project’s Intervention Rationale 
21. To restore and enhance resilience in the 
Lake Chad Region, this project will work along the 

humanitarian-development-security nexus to (i) 

address some of the existing drivers of fragility in 

the Lake Chad Region, in particular poor regional 

crisis preparedness and management, poor 

connectivity around and on the Lake, poor local 

governance and unemployment (especially youth 

unemployment), and (ii) mitigate some 

consequences of the crisis, in particular destroyed 

public productive investments, poor livelihood 

opportunities and a weakened agriculture value 

chain. More concretely, this project will bridge the gap between humanitarian and development assistance and 

support its transition. Investments will be made complementary to humanitarian activities and collaboration and 

coordination with security actors will allow the project to operate in an insecure environment and support the 

recovery of provinces where security interventions have achieved to bring peace back to the communities. By 

showing an immediate positive development impact through quick-win interventions, peace and stability brought 

back by security actors can be sustained and can make a transition from a humanitarian to a development response 

possible. This project’s specific added value lies in (a) strengthening crisis and conflict preparedness, response 

and coordination at the regional level to better prevent and mitigate regional fragility, and (b) addressing a set of 

priority activities which are expected to have a high development impact; are in areas where security allows for 

an intervention; and are complementary with other programs (clusters). 

 

22. Following a contextual regional rationale as outlined in the context section above, the project will translate 
this into a technical regional rationale and thus prioritize activities which are trans-border in nature and will 



therefore help to restore and strengthen the regional system which has been negatively impacted by the Boko 

Haram crisis. The regional activities will be the following: (i) restoration of rural mobility and cross-border 

connectivity through the rehabilitation of critical rural roads and infrastructure (on the Lake Chad and around the 

Lake, and other intervention areas which are of regional importance), which will help to connect communities of 

all the participating three countries, and (ii) agriculture value chain development with a regional aspect combined 

with public productive investments which will facilitate and reinforce cross-border trade.15 In addition, the project 

will support a coordination and monitoring platform to reinforce regional dialogue and institutional capacity. 

 

23. The proposed financing instrument for this project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with total 
proposed IDA funds of US$225 million to be disbursed as grant and credit16. Following a pre-identification 

mission and the readiness of all three participating countries, the IDA funds are likely to be allocated as follows: 

US$60 million for Cameroon; US$45 million for Chad; and US$60 million for Niger. The proposed project is 

being processed as a Series of Projects (SOP) given that the three proposed project countries all deal with the 

same negative impacts of the Boko Haram crisis, similar underlying drivers of fragility and regional 

underdevelopment. The SOP approach will also allow for the participation of the Republic of Nigeria to opt into 

the program at a later date and according to the country’s needs and specific requirements. This project is the first 

proposed project of the SOP, and will focus on regional coordination and monitoring, rural connectivity and a 

few agricultural livelihood restoration priority activities. In addition, this first SOP will pilot social community 

engagement activities to support the process of restoring trust between and within communities. The second 

project in this SOP Series would build upon first achievements, expand livelihoods support and community 

engagement activities and also provide direct support to the beneficiaries’ access to basic socio-economic services 

in the Lake Chad Region. 

 

24. The project will embed essential features of ensuring citizen participation in prioritizing developmental 
needs including livelihoods opportunities to improve self-reliance of communities and social cohesion and greater 

demand for social accountability. Citizen Engagement mechanisms will be built into the project through (i) setting 

up effective grievance redress and beneficiary feedback mechanism, (ii) ensuring an intensive program of 

engagement with project stakeholders, (iii) deploying effective strategic communications and public education, 

and (iv) monitoring social impacts through annual stakeholder surveys. In addition, the project will identify local 

conflict and help set up conflict resolution mechanisms with the aim to restore trust among the community 

members and promote inclusion. The project will also use a targeted geographical development approach which 

combines a spatial and social lens. Targeted social inclusion will be ensured by using specific community-led 

processes to identify and reach vulnerable and systematically excluded people17, including young women, women 

from poorer households (including widows), and women with disabilities; and youth in general, at risk youth and 

youth affected by radicalization, involved in criminal networks, etc. Innovative citizen engagement approaches 

already tested in the region, mobilizing third party monitoring, ICT and CSOs will be explored.18 In addition, the 

concept for the operationalization of gender mainstreaming, in particular multi-sectoral prevention and response 

                                            
15 The component description provides examples of activities with a regional rationale which will be supported under this project; a detailed list of 
activities under Component 2 and 3 that have a regional public goods nature will be defined during project preparation. 
16 See a detailed overview of the project’s financing in the table on p. 13. 
17 The reasons for systematic exclusion from programs and economic participation are for a range of reasons, including social norms, lack of 

information, and inability to meet costs of participation in community institutions, including cost for transport. 
18 In Cameroon, for example, a successful Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been included in the context of the CEMAC Transport and Transit 

Facilitation Project. Important lessons learned from this project and other projects in the Region will be included in the design of this proposed Lake 

Chad Region Recovery and Development Project.  

to gender-based violence (GBV) will, amongst others, be guided by a joint French Development Agency 

(AFD)/World Bank study which is currently being conducted.19 

 

25. Investments will be integrated and complemented by investments of the AFD’s Lake Chad Inclusive 
Economic and Social Recovery Program (RESILAC)20, initiatives on polder rehabilitation close to the Lake Chad, 

key WBG’s operations such as the CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation Project in Cameroon, the Niger Rural 

Mobility and Connectivity Project, and the Refugees and Host Communities Support Projects in Chad and Niger, 

and interventions of humanitarian and development partners, and will be in alignment with the UN strategies for 

the Lake Chad Region21 and the Sahel Alliance. The following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas 

of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions along the main corridor of the national road from 

N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle area in the North of the Lake Chad22; (b) in 

Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion and communes in the close vicinity 

to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor connecting N’Djamena to the 

South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 

 

26. Security will be monitored closely and will inform project implementation. The project design will allow 
for flexibility in resource allocation across project components and geographic locations. Such flexibility is 

necessary to operate in a highly volatile environment with ongoing security concerns and people’s movements. 

A careful targeting of selected provinces and the use of a carefully chosen mix of activities combined with robust 

monitoring will help to reduce the risk that communities could become a target of violence as a consequence of 

investments made under this project.  
 

Component 1: Regional and national coordination platform and local capacity building 

 

27. This component will aim at reinforcing regional dialogue and institutional capacity by putting in place an 
analytical and monitoring platform of key vulnerability factors of the Region. It will also provide targeted capacity 

building of selected institutions at the regional, national and local levels to reinforce the regional cooperation and 

governance. This component will finance the following activities: 

 Sub-Component 1.1: Knowledge and Monitoring platform: An analytical and monitoring platform will be set 
up to foster knowledge exchange, collaboration and partnerships and to strengthen conflict and disaster early 

warning systems. This platform will be used for programmatic prioritization and coordination, policy 

harmonization23, regional dialogue at technical and strategic levels; as well as consolidate and strengthen 

already existing early warning systems (as e.g., the Continental Early Warning System (CEWS) established 

by the AU), provide capacity building to monitoring institutions and connect the systems across the three 

countries. Integrated and coordinated conflict and disaster early warning systems will allow stakeholders to 

anticipate disaster and conflict trends and better understand the rapidly changing dynamics of situations. Other 

topics that the platform could address and promote are citizen engagement, social inclusion and gender, 

                                            
19 The name of the study is Opportunity study: Strengthening the consideration of gender dynamics in the response to the Lake Chad crisis. 
20 This project aims at boosting the local economy by creating jobs for young people in rural areas and diversifying family-based production systems, 

strengthening social cohesion through psychosocial support for communities affected by Boko Haram's violence and providing institutional support 

for local authorities and civil society organizations. 



including strategies to prevent GBV. The platform will build on existing initiatives (in particular AFD and 

UN) and will engage researchers from the countries bordering Lake Chad and other key stakeholders, i.e. 

humanitarian workers, diplomats, international actors and national development programs. Data collected 

from monitoring will be confirmed based on the existing research data gaps24. The knowledge platform will 

have strong linkages with universities25 in each country bordering the Lake Chad. The platform will also 

conduct a review of the existing ICT services and the demand from users; and will use and test innovative 

technology, such as satellite images, geo-enabled data and other ICT tools to generate knowledge about the 

Lake Chad Region and its ecosystem, and to ensure monitoring in a challenging environment with many 

security constraints. Information and data gathered under this component will directly feed into the monitoring 

of the results of Component 2 and 3. 

 

 Sub-Component 1.2: Institutional capacity building to strengthen regional cooperation and local governance: 
The project will reinforce institutional capacity at regional, national and local levels and coordination of 

institutional stakeholders to strengthen regional dialogue on conflict prevention and local development in the 

Lake Chad Basin. This will be by supporting existing regional dialogue initiatives (such as the Lake Chad 

Basin Governors forum and other cross-border initiatives in the Lake Chad Region). Moreover, the project 

will support innovative citizen engagement mechanisms (access to information, participatory planning and 

budget, Grievance Redress Mechanisms) aimed at improving participatory planning and monitoring of 

investments around local plans and better institutional governance thus rebuilding trust between local 

populations and institutions. 

 

Component 2: Restoring Rural Mobility and Connectivity 

 

28. The component consists of civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads which are of regional importance, 
focusing on small-scale infrastructure provision to address immediate priority gaps in rural road connectivity in 

selected areas of the Lake Chad. The aim of this component is to improve access of communities to markets, 

especially regional markets, and to provide beneficiaries with an opportunity for short-term employment. 

Selection of the investments will be aligned with the activities of Component 3, in particular with regards to 

enhancing the logistics performance of the selected value chains on the infrastructure side and addressing the lack 

of mobility services or equipment, such as IMT (Intermediate Means of Transport). Road rehabilitation and 

maintenance sites will be assessed by considering the accessibility to basic services and a rapid mobility 

diagnostic based on (i) the calculation of RAI (rural access index), (ii) the accessibility by road to markets and 

health facilities such as centers offering emergency obstetrical services, and (iii) mobility needs and constraints 

of the population (through e.g. conducting some focus group discussions with selected communities). The civil 

works will be performed by using the Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPW) method for rural roads rehabilitation. 

This approach will contribute to promoting social cohesion while improving local governance and supporting 

economic recovery through wage jobs, community engagement (collective decision-making, collaborative 

behaviors, and community ownership, etc.) and improved regional road infrastructure. As part of the technical 

approach and to maximize cost efficiency and economic benefits, the use of a combination of regular full all 

weather standard rehabilitation/construction and environmental Oriented Spot Improvement Design to restore 

basic connectivity integrating duration of execution as a factor will be explored during project preparation. This 

component will consist of two sub-components: 

 

                                            
24 See the recent AFD and IRD study Crise et développement – La région du lac Tchad à l’épreuve de Boko Haram. 
25 Potential identified universities are: University of Diffa in Niger, University of N’Djamena, University of Maroua and University of Maiduguri. 


 Sub-Component 2.1: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Preparatory and Technical Studies and Community 
Maintenance System: This sub-component will finance preparatory and other technical studies to be 

conducted during project preparation and implementation including preliminary conditions surveys, bills 

of quantities and cost calculations and support for environmental and social assessments. Gender specifics 

needs will be identified by the LDP and a mobility assessment (e.g., such needs could include dedicated 

sanitation facilities, street lighting, GBV, etc. at important logistical hubs or market areas). In addition, 

this component will support the development of a community maintenance system to promote the 

sustainability of investments, in terms of both jobs and roads. This could include the development of a 

small association or micro enterprise at community level for road maintenance. 

 

 Sub-Component 2.2: Rural Roads Rehabilitation Works: This sub-component will finance all civil works-
related expenses to beneficiaries for the preparation, execution, and supervision of works which aim at 

restoring rural mobility and connectivity on the Lake Chad and around the Lake. This component will 

complement productive investment activities under Sub-Component 3.1. This includes civil works to 

rehabilitate existing rural roads to obtain all-season road upgraded to respect defined technical standards, 

in particular targeted small rural roads to improve access of communities to regional markets.26 The 

financing of targeted dredging of navigation channels and construction/rehabilitation and maintenance of 

river docking piers infrastructure will also be explored.  

 

Component 3: Agriculture Investments and Value-Chain Development 

 

29. This component will promote public productive investments, value-chain development and citizen 
engagement and community participation activities in underserved communities in targeted areas. It has three 

sub-components: 

 

 Sub-Component 3.1: Public Productive Agriculture Investments: This sub-component will provide 
investment funds to communities through local planning processes to finance small investments for 

agriculture activities with a regional link. Activities that could be supported under this component are as 

follows: (i) Participatory local development needs assessments and local development plans, including the 

identification of areas of the agricultural value-chain that can be strengthened; and (ii) economic or 

productive investments, the construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, landing platforms for boats, small 

bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels, platforms (small commercial/logistics/processing platforms27), 

community storage facilities, the restoration of land quality through watershed management, irrigation 

perimeters, enclosures and waterpoints for agriculture and livestock use.28 

 Sub-Component 3.2: Livelihood Support and Value Chain Development: The project will provide targeted 
support for agriculture value chain development, including targeted support to agriculture production, pre- 

and post-harvest and marketing for selected products along the agriculture value chain (in particular red 

pepper, livestock and fish)29. The supported activities will have a cross-border potential, as for example 

                                            
26 The design of the civil works for rehabilitation of rural roads will take in mind potential risks due to extreme temperature, extreme precipitation, 

flooding and drought – risks to which the project locations are being exposed. 
27 This could, for example, include improved technologies for irrigation and fish processing. 
28 The design of the small-scale infrastructure work under this component will take in mind above identified climate and disaster risks to which the 

project locations are being exposed. 
29 Due to the importance of multiple livelihood strategies in the Region, the project will also focus on the interaction of livelihood with agricultural and 

fishery activities. 



activities which support the production of trading goods will be prioritized, such as the red pepper road in 

Niger (which is then exported to Nigeria), livestock/fish support in Niger and Chad which would be traded 

to Cameroon and Nigeria, and products along the agriculture value chain that have a regional rational. 

Activities under this component could include: (i) strengthening areas of production and livelihood 

opportunities (irrigation, material, rehabilitation and development of selected polders and horticulture 

perimeters); (ii) provision of assets to enhance the production of sorghum, horticulture, rice, cattle, 

fisheries, etc. to increase the productivity of these sub-sectors;30 and (iii) targeted support aimed at 

facilitating and reinforcing selected trans-border trade for selected areas of value chain development (such 

as markets, storage facilities, etc.). Technical assistance on trans-border trade will also be explored. 

Innovative approaches for improving the agricultural value chain development will be identified during 

project preparation31. Activities of this component will particularly target women and female-headed 

households and youth and will thus serve both as a means of prevention (i.e. reducing women’s and 

youth’s vulnerability) and as a means of longer-term support for those affected by violence. Activities will 

also be chosen following a careful assessment of their level of positive impact on women and youth, and 

if these activities are accessible for women and youth. Furthermore, the negative impacts of post-harvest 

processing which address in particular women and children will also be reduced.32 Given the large youth 

population among the beneficiaries, targeted skills trainings to include life and entrepreneurship skills will 

also be explored based on needs. The approach for identifying, prioritizing, implementing and monitoring 
these activities will be participatory, therefore done in collaboration with local institutions and beneficiary 

communities to mitigate risks of conflicts between communities and contribute to reducing Gender Based 

Violence (GBV), including sexual violence.  

 

 Sub-component 3.3.: Citizen engagement and community participation activities: The project will provide 
targeted support to citizen engagement and community participation activities, such as psychosocial 

support and mentoring, flexible and adaptable community reintegration programs, sports and cultural 

community activities, and different campaigns, such as GBV prevention, de-stigmatization campaigns and 

the engagement of youth and women as conflict and climate and disaster risk management champions will 

also be supported during the planning and implementation processes. These activities will help to restore 

trust among the population and will reduce the risk of further stigmatization, exclusion, radicalization and 

violence, including GBV, etc. These activities would also be complementarity to UNDP’s support to the 

DDR process in the Lake Chad Region, and in particular to the activities of a DD facility which UNDP is 

currently assisting to establish. 
 

 

 

Component 4: Project Management 

 

30. This component will finance the planning, implementation, and technical oversight of program activities; 
and effective social and environmental safeguards management, financial management, and procurement. The 

arrangements for project coordination will be determined at preparation stage. Relevant government agencies at 

                                            
30 The activities will complement the activities under the sub-component 2.1. and especially with regards to the provision of small scale post-harvest 

infrastructure which strengthens the agriculture value chain. 
31 The project may also include support for diversification out of climate-sensitive livelihoods; this will be identified during project preparation. 
32 See Central Africa Coastal Fisheries report (P165882). Fish smoking is done with basic ovens that have negative impacts on the products themselves 

and on the health of the processors mainly women and their children. The FAO, for example, has recently developed a new type of smoking oven that 

reduces the exposure to toxic smoke and chemicals, while also reducing the amount of fuel needed for smoking.  



the regional, national, sub-national and local levels will be involved in the implementation process with adequate 

capacity building support. The following activities will be included: Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E) arrangements, including the set-up of a Management Information System (MIS), outcome/impact 

evaluations at mid-term and end-of-project; and measures for enhanced transparency and accountability. 

Innovative implementation mechanisms (use of Third Party Monitoring, digital monitoring/supervision tools, 

such as satellite data) will be considered given the specific security challenges. Data produced with the help of 

the Knowledge and Monitoring platform as outlined in Sub-Component 1.1. will feed directly into project 

supervision and oversight. Project Management will be undertaken in close coordination and collaboration with 

security and justice forces and mechanisms for identifying risk of violence at various stage of project 

implementation will be established so as to allow the project to operate in such an insecure environment. 
 
  

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 

 

31. The project will operate in a highly complex and volatile environment. This zero-funded component will 
allow the governments to quickly mobilize funds in the event of an emergency that will require immediate 

recovery and reconstruction response. The detailed design of this component will be developed during project 

preparation. 
 

Figure 5: Overview of Project Components 
 

 
  



 
The World Bank  
Lake Chad Region Recovery and Development Project (P161706) 

 
 

  
Oct 12, 2018 Page 18 of 22  

     

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in several areas that border Lake Chad, initially in Niger, Cameroon and Chad. The 

following areas have been pre-identified as potential areas of intervention: (a) In Niger: Clusters of pepper productions 
along the main corridor of the national road from N’Guimi via Diffa to Zinder, two fishing communities and one cattle 
area in the North of the Lake Chad ; (b) in Cameroon: communes along the CEMAC corridor in Maroua and Septentrion 
and communes in the close vicinity to the Lake Chad (here, in particular fisheries), and (c) in Chad: a transport corridor 
connecting N’Djamena to the South of Cameroon and West via Bol and Baga Sol and polder areas in Tangal and Gueni. 
These are low density areas in terms of population but represent important transport corridors for goods and produce for 
the region. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon: The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework, including the 1996 

Environmental Law and its implementation decrees including a decree on ESIA.  The Ministry of Environment, Protection 
of Nature and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED) is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs/RAPs and ESMPs/RAPs 
compliance monitoring. The Ministries has divisional entities that ensure local ESMPs monitoring compliance. The Order 
No 0010/MINEP of April 3, 2013 requires to set up in each Division of the country, a Committee for the technical and 
administrative supervision of ESMP. However, only one Divisional committee has not been set up in the Project. The 
decentralized entities remain weak and have limited human and logistic capacities.  The country has experience in 
monitoring environmental and social safeguards policies of World Bank financed projects. 
 
Chad: The country has an environmental and social legal framework that includes the legislative framework includes Law 

n ° 14/PR/98 of August 17, 1998 defining the general principles of environment protection. The Country published also on 
August 4, 2010 decree n °630 regulating the Environmental Impact Assessment and on November 29, 2012, the EIA 
preparation general guide. The Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs through 
DEELCPN. This Department remains very poorly staffed and staffs that are there are poorly equipped. The country has 
experience in monitoring the implementation of World Bank financed projects.  The  capacity to deal with environmental 
and social safeguards remains very weak.  
 
Niger:  The country has a comprehensive environmental and social legal framework that includes the Law n ° 2018-28 of 

May 14, 2018 determining the fundamental principles on Environmental Assessments. The Bureau Environmental 
Assessments and Impact Studies (BEEEI), under the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
responsible for approval of ESIAs/ESMPs and ESMPs compliance monitoring. In practice, BEEEI lacks decentralized 
entities. BEEEI has some skilled staffs but the number of staff remains limited with regards of the workload and 
responsibilities to be undertaken. BEEEI has very limited logistic  capacities. BEEEI has experience in monitoring World 
Bank safeguards. 
 
During the project preparation, an in-depth assessment of the three borrower's institutional capacities will be 

undertaken and relevant mitigation measures will be proposed. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as category B 
project under this policy, because activities under 
Component 2 and 3 are expected to generate 
potential adverse social and environmental risks and 
impacts that will be limited in scale. Most of them will 
be site specific within the target area, few if any of 
them will be irreversible and in most cases, mitigation 
measures can be designed. As the identification of 
sites and works is not yet finalized, an ESMF will be 
prepared for each country, consulted upon, and 
disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. In addition, a GBV risk 
assessment for each country will be undertaken in 
order to provide recommendations for how to 
mainstream mitigation measures appropriate for each 
context into the country components. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
This policy is not triggered as the activities do not 
intend to use private sectors activities as described 
under this policy. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP 4.04 is triggered as the Lake Chad has been 
recognized by the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of 
International Importance (i.e. the Lake Chad is a 
"Ramsar site"). While specific project sites are 
currently not known, it is likely that some project 
activities might take place in the vicinity of the Lake 
Chad. Provisions and further information on 
appropriate risk mitigation strategies and measures in 
relation to the site(s) will be included in each of the 
country specific ESMFs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

This policy is not triggered as the project activities do 
not expect to affect negatively on the health and 
quality of forests and/or finance activities that would 
do so. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is possible that the activities with 
regards to the strengthening of agriculture production 
will lead to an increased use of pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Cameroon, Chad and Niger are 
viewed as rich cultural heritage area. The Lake Chad is 



also classified as a World Natural Heritage Site by 
UNESCO. Though it is unknown at this time which sites 
may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project, it was judged prudent 
to use caution when implementing the productive 
investments, especially the civil works. During the 
development of the country specific ESMFs, physical 
cultural resources will be taken into consideration and 
a baseline will be defined. The ESMFs will include clear 
procedures that will be required for identification, 
protection of cultural property from death and 
treatment of discovered artefacts, and which will be 
included in standards bidding documents. The ESMFs 
will also provide procedures for handling chance finds 
(during implementation of the project's activities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 TBD 

A social assessment to determine if there are 
Indigenous peoples in the project area or that will be 
impacted by project activities will be undertaken. If 
there are Indigenous peoples, an IPPF or IPP will be 
prepared for the specific country to provide guidance 
during implementation. The IPPFs or IPPs will be 
disclosed in country and on the World Bank website 
prior to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works under Components 2 & 3, which 
may lead to minor land acquisition, loss of assets 
and/or access to resources. A Resettlement Policy 
Framework for each country will be prepared or 
updated, consulted upon, approved and disclosed 
both in-country and at the World Bank website prior 
to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project activities will 
not involve the construction of a dam or being 
dependent upon an existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered because some of the proposed 
investments under component 2.2. (e.g. targeted 
dredging/navigation channels/rehabilitation and 
construction of docking pier infrastructure) and 
possibly also 3.1. (e.g. landing platforms for boats, 
small bridges and culverts, cleaning of channels) will 
take place on an international waterway (Lake Chad), 
as per OP 7.50. As a consequence, other riparian 
countries will be notified of the proposed project and 
the Lake Chad Basin Commission will be involved as 
appropriate and as according to Bank procedures. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project does not 
anticipate any disputes in the targeted area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 25, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
RPFs will be simultaneously prepared (or updated in the case of PNDP in Cameroon) for each country prior to appraisal. 

The information obtained during the preparation will be used to prepare the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC21925 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Pakistan P163474  Khyber Pakhthunkhwa 
Irrigated Agriculture 
Improvement Project 
(P163474) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Oct 31, 2018 Feb 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 

Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Khyber 
Pukhthukhwa, Department 
of Irrigation, Government of 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture in project areas 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 183.00 

Total Financing 183.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 165.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 18.00 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 18.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

  Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Pakistan, the world’s sixth most populous country, is a lower-middle-income country 
which has made significant progress towards macroeconomic and financial stability. Pakistan’s 
per capita income has almost doubled and the share of the population living in poverty has 
decreased by two-thirds over the last decade. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 4.7 
percent in 2016 and is expected to reach 5 percent in 2017, supported by construction and 
manufacturing activities, increased private sector credit growth, increased reserves, low 
inflation, continuing strong remittances, and an upturn in foreign direct investment related to 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.  

2. Nevertheless, Pakistan faces serious development challenges, mostly in rural areas. 
GDP growth has been slower than needed to provide for the level of jobs required for a young 
and growing population. Inadequacy in the private sector environment, public sector 
management, and implementation capacity will continue to hamper service delivery 
performance. Thus, human development indicators continue to lag. In fact, Pakistan did not meet 
the targets of most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Rural poverty remains 
about double the urban poverty (35 percent versus 18 percent in 2014) and decreases less 
rapidly, given low growth of the agriculture sector, inadequate rural infrastructure and 
connectivity to markets, weak governance and institutions, and limited access to finance. 

3. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) has faced a number of crises in the past decade. With 
geographical proximity and community-level ties to Afghanistan, KP has suffered from the fallout 
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has given rise to a precarious security situation as well as 
prolonged political and social instability. Related hostilities and extremist violence have caused 
far-reaching disruption to economic activity and inflicted extensive damage on private property, 
livelihoods, and public infrastructure.  


4. KP is also one of Pakistan’s less developed regions, with some economic and social 
development indicators lagging behind the national averages. The province of KP accounts for 
an estimated 10.5 percent of the country’s GDP and about 14.6 percent of the population 
(approximately 30.5 million). The per capita income in KP is estimated to be 33 percent below 
the national average, and despite a sharp and consistent decline in poverty, 27 percent of 
households are estimated to be living below the national poverty line. Another relevant indicator 
is the household size, which is strongly correlated with poverty in Pakistan. KP households 
comprise 7.2 members on average, well above the national average of 6.3 members. Most of 
KP’s population (85 percent) also lives in rural areas, where access to public services and income 
generation opportunities is lower than in urban centers. 

5. Climate change is expected to exacerbate extreme weather events in KP, thereby 
increasing the vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Since 2010 
extreme events such as cloudburst over the catchment areas of Indus and its tributaries, have 
frequently occurred during the annual monsoon season. This often leads to flash floods and 
landslides, causing damages across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
infrastructure, transport and communications, and housing. Since 2010, KP has been facing 
extreme precipitation events, in the Indus catchment areas, particularly during the annual 
monsoon season. This results in swelling of rivers, causing localized and major floods in low-lying 
areas. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) due to 
increased temperatures and intense precipitation. Being an upper riparian province in Pakistan, 
KP receives the shortest lead times for early warnings on climate induced hydro-meteorological 
disasters. As a result of the 2010 floods, KP suffered US$ 1.1 billion in damages, which included 
damages and losses of US$ 96 million1 to the agriculture sector in the province. 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Agriculture is important for Pakistan and the Government has placed agriculture 
development and water efficiency at the forefront of its development agenda. Agriculture2 
remains the second largest economic sector in Pakistan, contributing about 21 percent to the 
national GDP and employing approximately 42 percent of the labor force. The sector is also the 
largest contributor to export revenues with about 75 percent share from exports of primary and 
processed (mostly cotton textile) goods. The Government acknowledges that sustaining an 
annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent or more will require greater focus on agriculture and 
improved water resources planning, governance, and resilience. The Government is pursuing 
multiple initiatives to boost efforts to increase agricultural and water productivity, promote 
efficient use of its scarce water and precious land resources, and incentivize private sector 
investment in these areas for economic growth and shared prosperity.  

7. The contribution of agriculture in the KP economy, however, is less prominent, although 
it employs a high percentage of its labor force. KP’s contribution to the country agriculture GDP 

 

is the smallest of all provinces at 7 percent, compared to its share in total GDP of 11 percent. Also 
within KP, agriculture accounts for only 14 percent of the provincial GDP, representing the 
smallest share of all provinces. The sector accounts for 37 percent of labor force employment3 
and 11 percent of the total household income. The total cultivated area of the province is 1.6 
million ha (7 percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of the country’s total wheat, 2 percent of rice, 17 percent of maize, 8 percent of sugarcane, 16 
percent of barley, 4 percent of gram, 3 percent of rapeseed and mustard, and 75 percent of 
tobacco. Its share in the country’s total livestock population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 
percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit 
and depends heavily on imports from other provinces, especially from Punjab, for important 
commodities like wheat (64 percent), rice (74 percent), milk, meat, sugar (80 percent), and 
vegetables (90 percent) to complement its production. The answer to this conundrum of 
agriculture may lie in the under exploitation of its natural resources, as the sector grew at a 
decent rate of 3.1 percent to 7.3 percent in the 2010–2015 five-year period, especially after the 
active insurgency period ended. 

8. KP’s land and water resources are under exploited. Of the total culturable4 land of 2 m 
ha., 1/3rd is irrigated, 1/3rd is rainfed and 1/3rd is culturable waste. Water allocated to KP under 
the National Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) of 1991 is 8.78 million acre feet (MAF) but due 
to current carrying capacity of the aging infrastructure and lack of new infrastructure the 
province is only able to withdraw about 68 percent (5.97 MAF) of its share. Also, 14 percent in 
floodwater, under the accord, is not fully used. Additionally, all water resources freed up from 
the WAA’s ambit, for the province, are not yet fully used. These include waters from schemes not 
exceeding 5,000 acres above elevation of 1200 ft. (Survey of Pakistan Datum [SPD]) and waters 
from Kurum/Gomal/kohat basins located in the highly-underserved areas of Kohat, Hangu, Karak, 
Bannu, Lakki Marwat, and D.I. Khan Districts. Thus, one-third of KP’s arable land depends on 
rainfall in a climate that is semiarid to arid. Another one-third (1.08 million ha) of KP’s arable 
land, called culturable waste land, is out of cultivation due either to water logging, non-
availability of irrigation water, salinity, unlevel land, lack of manpower, funds shortages, and so 
on. Thus, more land and water resource development is desperately needed for KP’s food 
security, import substitution, and economic development especially of the lagging areas. That’s 
why feasibility studies are included in the project design to prepare future investments in water 
resources development. 

9. The irrigation infrastructure in KP suffers from deferred maintenance5. KP canals are 
aging. Some are older than 100 years. As an upper riparian province with hilly terrains and steep 
slopes, KP’s canals suffer from frequent bank breaches, bed erosion and scouring due to floods, 

 
3 28 percent of male and 77 percent of female (mostly rural); 44 percent of rural and 6 percent of urban labor force is engaged 
in agriculture. The labor force participation is 80 percent male and 20 percent female (21 percent in rural and 12 percent in 
urban areas). 
4 According to bureau of statistics-Pakistan, culturable land includes cultivated and culturable waste lands and 

cultivated area includes rainfed and irrigated lands. 
5 De-siltation; oiling & greasing; repairing leakages, damaged sections of canal prism, cross drainage structure and outlets 



sliding and high velocities in addition to the normal wear and tear of a canal. Due to the poor 
condition of the canals, the system’s delivery performance is poor and the leakages/wastages 
(estimated at 25%) are causing water logging. Unlike Punjab, the reliance on ground water is 
minimal in irrigated areas, therefore water lost would be wasted and even would cause water 
logging and salinity. The silt deposition raises the level of the command area for which canal bed 
needs to be raised to continue providing the required volumes of water. 

Besides the canals, there are some 4,000-km long surface and subsurface drainage system in KP 
that was built to flush out the excess water to keep the fertile land in production in the central 
districts. However due to lack of funds, this infrastructure is also suffering and, the carrying 
capacity of the drainage system has diminished and large tracts of precious fertile lands are 
becoming water logged and saline again.  

To keep pace with the exceptional level of O & M needs of the KP irrigation and drainage system, 
larger amounts of funds are needed. However, according to the KP Irrigation Department, only 
1/3rd (PkR 500 m vs PkR. 12,00 m for the last 10 years) of the needs are provided. Water charges 
(Abiana) collections in the province has been low at 30% of the total assessed, mainly because of 
the limited paying capacity of the large number of small landholders and low flat rates - PKR 
300/year/acre. Besides, its own system, the department also must, at times, shoulder the 
rehabilitation of civil canals which are community owned and do not pay any water charges. 

This practice of ‘build neglect rebuild’ costs the exchequer dearly6 which are oftentimes met from 
the development budget. 

Removing this backlog of rehabilitation as well as modernization is important to improve the 
system service capability, reduce water wastages/leakages and water logging and safeguard the 
system sustainability.  

10. In KP, as reported by the Irrigation Department, 10-15 percent of the canal outlets are 
tampered and /or illegal. This creates in-equity among growers in the system and affects the 
productivity of the farmers mainly at the tail end. An understanding has been reached with the 
Department to resolve such in-equities during the rehabilitation of the system. 

11. Historically, the collaboration between Irrigation and Agriculture Departments, in KP, is 
weak. Irrigation Department is responsible for development of dams, canals and drains, its 
functionality and O&M; delivering water to farmers at the outlet/farmgate (in watercourses); and 
assessment and collections of water charges. The Agriculture Department is responsible for 
development and rehabilitation of watercourses, promoting water conservation technologies 
and training farmers in good agriculture practices. Due to poor coordination, the benefits of up 
and down stream investment do not consolidate at the farm level. The Baizai Irrigation scheme 
is a good example. The Irrigation Department constructed the upstream delivery system with 
capacity for 25,000 acres but since no provision was made in the scheme budget for the 

 
6 According to a global estimate, a dollar deferred maintenance costs US$7 in repair/rehabilitation 


construction of watercourses, the agriculture department could not do so and after more than 2 
years the farmers are unable to utilize the water fully. This collaboration has started to improve 
in some very new schemes and this project will contribute to improving this collaboration further. 

12. In KP, as in the rest of the country, O & M of the watercourses, that brings water from 
canals to the farms, is a challenge on the daily basis. These are earthen structures owned and 
managed by farmers. The average length of a watercourse (including branches) is about 3 km, 
serving an average area of 150 acres with an average number of 75 shareholder farmers. Every 
farmer has a turn, once a week, to take his share in proportion to his landholding from the 
watercourse. Every time a farmer diverts his/her share, loose earth/mud and stone mixture are 
gathered from the surrounding fields to plug and unplug the farm gate and watercourse at the 
turnouts. Preventing leakage from these structure is a continuous battle for the farmer. Since 
this channel must pass near each farm, there are many turns and branches through which water 
passes. This is an important cause of spillage and leakage for water. Being earthen, many 
different weeds/shrubs/trees start growing on the banks of the watercourse. These often 
become a source of blockage due to its own biomass and capturing silt load causing the water to 
overflow and causing ponding near the watercourse-sometimes becoming mosquito breading 
points. Another source of damage are rodents and grazing animals. This necessitates recurrent 
seasonal cleaning by farmers. Since farmers are poor and cannot afford to hire labour, they do it 
mostly themselves. This O & M of the watercourse draws heavily on the farmers’ time and labour 
-and also cause wastage of his precious water estimated up to 40%. Being earthen, it is easier to 
cut and steal other farmer’s share that can become source of heavy rifts in relations. Therefore, 
it is important to support farmer with watercourse improvement i.e. lining of 507% length, 
installing all turnout structures, construction of crossing culverts, washing pads, and animal 
drinking wallows. It is estimated that this investment helps the farmer save 75% labour time, 15 
percentage point of water wastage, water travel time by 50%, in-equity, theft control which 
results in 15-20% crop yield increase, 30% cropping intensity and ultimately increased net 
incomes. In addition to these benefits it also helps in saving energy costs and precious ground 
water on tube-well water courses. 

13. Field application of water is highly in-efficient in KP as in other parts of the country. Due 
to the widespread practice of flood irrigation and insufficient knowledge of good irrigation 
agronomy practices, water losses are highest at the field level where application efficiency is as 
low as 65–70 percent. Resultantly, crop yields and cropping intensities are low. Investments to 
promote water conservation technologies such as high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) and 
laser-based precision land leveling (PLL) on-farm are of paramount importance for saving losses 
on-farm. HEIS is estimated to increase field application efficiency by 25 percentage points to 95% 
and PLL helps save water by about 30% resulting in increased yields and incomes. 

14. In KP, farmers’ productivity is generally low. Most crop yields in KP are low compared to 
other provinces and progressive growers. This could be attributed to large number of (80%) small 

 
7 So far the department lined 30% but the new findings and demand from the farmers suggest to increase it to 50% 



landholdings lacking scale and purchasing power; labour shortage due to out migration to cities 
and abroad and insufficient mechanization to off-set this shortage; shortage of skilled labour; 
insufficient private sector participation and services; lack of financial services; weak public sector 
research and extension services. 

15. KP has pockets with unique agro-climatic conditions, ideal for horticulture production. 
These include, among others, citrus, dates, pome fruits, potato, tomato, and onions. However, 
the current share of the subsector in the total cropped area is only 6 percent. With improved 
access roads to the main domestic markets and neighboring Afghanistan and air links to the Gulf 
and Central Asian countries, KP could potentially further capitalize on this comparative 
advantage.  

16. Postharvest losses are high. Lack of postharvest technology and management and 
modern cool chain infrastructure and inappropriate storage, packaging, and transportation 
facilities are major bottlenecks specially for perishable commodities in KP. Postharvest losses of 
35 percent to 40 percent for fruits and vegetables remain one of the most pressing problems, 
mostly given the lack of farmer’s awareness about scientific handling of farm produce. 
Inappropriate storage facilities, both in the public and private sector, register the highest losses 
during handling operations. Horticulture products are mostly stored in shallow pits covered with 
farm wastes without ventilation, without proper sanitation, and without preventive measures for 
insect and disease control. The concept of a cool chain network is in its infancy and integrated 
cool chain networks are mostly lacking. The existing cold storage facilities are unevenly 
distributed across the country with Punjab dominating with 512 units, while KP only had 16 units 
in 2009 (Planning Commission 2009). The cold storage facilities are based on old technology that 
do not differentiate for unique temperature requirements of crop species. Moreover, most of 
the existing packing facilities do not measure up to international standards. The types of 
containers used for transporting and storing products vary from place to place, but a common 
practice is to use whatever container is available. This causes the produce to be pressed hard in 
the crates or carried in oversized containers, causing huge loss.  

17. In addition, the agricultural marketing infrastructure and system is inadequate and 
lacks market responsiveness. Many wholesale markets (mandis) were built years ago, and are 
unable to cope efficiently with increased transactions. Serious traffic congestion, insufficient 
space for efficient movement of products in and out, inadequate storage, and improper 
management are some of the major factors for increased marketing costs and physical losses of 
farm products. Hygiene conditions, particularly in the case of fruits, vegetables, and livestock, are 
quite dismal. Excessive domination of commission agents, lack of physical and allied facilities, 
non-involvement of growers and consumers in market committees, and an ineffective market 
information system are some of the inherent problems of these markets and are putting farmers 
at a disadvantageous situation while selling their produce. In addition, the lack of planning and 
communication between demand and supply result in gluts at one time and shortages at other 
times, causing severe price fluctuations and loss of farmer incomes.  



18. The level of processing and value addition of agricultural products is very low in 
Pakistan. Only 3 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetable and less than 10 percent 
of milk are processed in the country (Planning Commission 2009). There exists enormous 
potential of adding value to various fruits and vegetable, such as freezing, drying, dehydrating, 
or crushing into powder, juice, pulp, oil, paste, sauce, chips, pickles, chutney, and jam. The culture 
of value addition through processing and diversification is still at infant stages in Pakistan. This 
small amount of processing leaves large opportunities and could also absorb some of the 
seasonal glut and extend the life of the raw material. 

19. The new government has increased the budget allocation to the sector and shifted its 
policy from higher productivity to higher profitability for smallholder farmers. The KP 
Government increased the budget for its annual development plans to US$62 million for 
agriculture and US$71 million for irrigation in FY17, which is still well below the needs. Key 
priority areas of the new government, as highlighted in the KP Integrated Development Strategy 
of 2014–18 and the KP Agriculture Policy and Strategy—a ten-year perspective (2014–24), are 
improving, among others, production, processing, and marketing, thus improving extension 
services; diversification into high-value agriculture (horticulture, livestock, dairy, and 
aquaculture); adaptation to climate change; on-farm water management (OFWM); development 
of new water resources; rehabilitation/modernization of the existing irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure; and governance. 

20. The World Bank’s last engagement with KP in the sector was for about six years from 
2001 to 2007 for a total of US$21 million made mainly in restoration/rehabilitation of the 
irrigation network from the secondary to the tertiary level. Major efforts were also made, in 
support of the national drainage program (NDP), in devolving the management to farmers, with 
powers to collect water charges and keep 40 percent for managing the operation and 
maintenance of the system from the secondary level downward. However, this outcome could 
not be sustained for long and has been rolled back by the Government. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

21. To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture in project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

22. The project outcomes will be measured with the following indicators: 

a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; 

b) Increase in agriculture productivity (yield); 

c) Increase in areas cultivated for High-Value Agriculture; 

d) Area under climate-resilient technologies and practices (resilience); 

e) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries) 


D. Concept Description 

23. The project will contribute to the development of the agriculture sector by working on (a) 
water as an important input and limiting factor to productivity and overall production (b) training 
and technology for improving productivity, post-harvest management and value addition. More 
specifically, it will support six key priority areas of the government strategy for the sector, that 
is, improving performance/functionality of the delivery system and reducing water wastages; 
making water allocation/distribution equitable; increasing financial sustainability of the irrigation 
system management; increasing climate resilience; increasing productivity and promoting high 
value agriculture (production, processing and marketing); and strengthening the department for 
improved service delivery and governance.  

24. To consolidate the benefits of the project, priority will be given to schemes where all the 
three components’ interventions can happen together. In this way, the two departments of 
agriculture and irrigation will work in close collaboration, hitherto weak.  

25. The project will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by changing 
irrigation management systems and practices to reduce vulnerability to climate change, by 
reducing water wastages and its negative externalities during delivery and by reducing losses 
during field application and crop growth stages; and by promoting innovative resource 
management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 
mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected 
agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting sustainable 
water management practices that promote water use efficiency and by promoting agricultural 
intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping 
patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy. 

26. Woman will be particularly encouraged and targeted to derive maximum benefits of the 
project and play role in the implementation of the project. The project will also ensure to 
safeguard the interest and needs of woman and marginalized groups e.g. providing for protected 
washing pads and animal drinking willows, and avoiding technologies and practices that increases 
drudgery for woman. Further, contractors, consulting firms and implementing partners of the 
project will be sensitized on gender issues and encouraged to achieve gender balance in their 
teams. The operational manual will spell out gender aspects and protocols for mainstreaming 
gender within project interventions.  

27. The project will be open to the entire province and will be completed in six years. The 
project will have the following components: 

Component A: Irrigation System Management (IDA $52 m US) 

This component will have the following three sub-components. 



28. Sub-compoenent-A1: Rehabilitation and reduction in in-equities: This sub-component 
would support the Irrigation Department to overcome the backlog of rehabilitation to fully 
restore the functionality/performance of the irrigation system; reduce the excessive and wasteful 
losses estimated at 25% by 7 percentage points; and increase economic/service life by at least 
10-15 years. This will include support to both the government and civil (community owned) 
canals systems. The government has prepared a prioritized list of 22 schemes, costing about 
USD140 million, for rehabilitation. The project, during the preparation, will conduct a diagnosis 
of the KP irrigation system, including the list provided by the government to, identify the schemes 
to be support by the project. The criteria for selection would include: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts; acreage and number of beneficiaries; potential for high value agriculture; 
poverty levels in the area served; and cost effectiveness (cost per unit area served). A Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) has been discussed with the client for preparing detail designs and 
bidding documents for the selected schemes. The rehabilitation works would, usually, include 
flood eroded beds and banks; sunken earth filled sections; and damaged hydraulic structures like 
100ft up and down stream of the fall structures, off-taking points of minors and sub-minors, 
footings of overhead bridges; passages through settlements and deep cut areas; and catchwater 
drains for flushing flood water. Before rehabilitation work begins, any outlets tampered and/or 
illegally installed will be removed. 

29. Sub-component-A2: Institutional strengthening & Reform: To avoid buildup of further 
backlog, an understanding with the GoKP will be developed to increase allocation of recurrent 
budget for the O&M of the system by lifting the current cap that is in place for the last 10 years. 
This could be informed by conducting a study on the cost of neglecting (under funding) the O&M 
of the system. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, support will be provided to the 
department to improve its revenue generation capacity by improving collection of the water 
charges. The investments of component C, should help increase the farmers’ capacity to pay 
water charges by improving their crop productivity and switching to high value crops.  

Further support will be provided for training of staff; developing asset management plan; and 
developing water budgets and water balances estimates for the six-major government canal 
systems.  

The KP government has planned to develop the Provincial Integrated Water Resources 
Management Policy with support from the Bank managed MDTF funded Governance and Policy 
Support project. Support under this sub-component will be re-aligned with the directives of this 
policy.  

30. Sub-compoenent-A3: Future investments preparation: To increase availability of water for 
irrigation, households and livestock; support ground water recharge; reduce intensity of floods, 
siltation downstream by tapping hill torrents and splash floods in the rainfed areas, the project 
will finance preparation of feasibilities, detailed designs, and bidding documents for selected 
dams and irrigation schemes. The scheme selection will be based on criteria of number of farmers 
and acreage benefiting and cost effectiveness and poverty levels in the area served. 


Component B: On-farm Water Management (IDA $51 m US) 
This component will enable the Agriculture Department to support farmers including woman, to 
rehabilitate/improve existing and construct new watercourses; adopt water conservation 
technologies on their farms; and in training its staff. The component design benefits from lessons 
drawn from Sindh and Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Improvement projects. These include a) 
developing good database of watercourses with information for length, no. of shareholders, legal 
status; inclusion of tube-well watercourse; lining 50% length and all turnouts; seasonal work 
windows; monitoring dashboards; estimation of average costs; openness to the entire province 
b) empowerment of the farmers to select and negotiate price of the HEIS and PLL equipements 
with suppliers; training of farmers in crop agronomy; fixing maximum cap on project support per 
unit, c) ensuring geographical spread for laser land leveling promotion etc. The component will 
also finance the extended presence of consultants/firm for engineering supervision of activities 
to be implemented by the field teams of the Department. This component will have the four sub-
components, as follows; 
31. Sub-component-B1: Rehabilitation of existing watercourses: The rehabilitation/improvement 
works will be done on existing watercourses on government and civil canals; springs and tube-
well irrigated areas. This work will include lining of 50% length from the offtake point including 
selected critical sections; alignment; desilting; re-sectioning; installing all turn out structures; 
crossing culverts, washing pads and animal drinking willows. Farmers will contribute 20% of the 
total cost in the shape of skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into water users’ 
associations with at least 70% farmers’ representation.  

32. Sub-component-B2: Construction of watercourses network: Construction of new 
watercourses network will be done in some new schemes areas where the Irrigation Department 
has already completed the upstream irrigation infrastructure but not the watercourses due to 
which farmers are unable to utilize water. The project support will include farmer’s mobilization 
and their formation of WUAs; engineering design, BOQ & cost estimates for construction of the 
full length of earthen watercourse; lining of 50% length preferably from the off-taking point and 
other critical sections; construction of all turn out structures, crossing culverts, washing pads and 
animal drinking points. Here again farmers will contribute 20% of the total cost in the shape of 
skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into a water users’ association where at least 
70% farmers become members. 

33. Sub-component-B3: Promote water conservation technologies: To promote on-farm 
water conservation, technologies like HEIS and precision laser land leveling (PLL) will be 
supported on a cost sharing basis. These technologies will particularly suit at the tail end and 
tube-well irrigated areas. Farmers will be trained in growing high value crops under HEIS to make 
the use of technology economically viable. 

34. Sub-component-B4: Capacity building & institutional strengthening: The project will 
finance training of staff in new improved methods of on-farm water management and data and 
studies on the watercourses network. 


Component C: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement and Value-Addition (IDA 
$50 m US)  
The objective of this component is to improve the productivity, diversification, harvest and post- 
harvest management and processing & value addition in agriculture (crops, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock sub-sectors). This objective will be achieved by i) strengthening public sector 
institutions (e.g., research and extension institutions) to solidify the foundation for sustained 
sectoral growth; i) investing in capacity building and iii) introducing modern technologies to 
farmers; and iv) support agribusinesses/ag-entrepreneurs for higher value addition through agro-
processing and commercialization services. This component addresses the climate change 
vulnerabilities to the agriculture sector, as set out in the project’s vulnerability context. All the 
activities under the Component will adequately reflect important CSA areas of productivity, 
adaptation and mitigation as highlighted in Pakistan CSA profile important for agriculture in 
Northern Pakistan. Considering that more than 70% of Pakistan’s female workforce is employed 
in agriculture, there is a special need to ensure all services provided by the Component will be 
more gender sensitive. The lessons drawn from similar projects, for example, the Sindh 
Agriculture Growth Project, have been incorporated to the Component design. The component 
will also finance the extended presence of technical consultants/firm to assist with planning and 
management of the Component. 

35. Subcomponent C.1: Modernizing public extension service and agricultural research (US$14 m). 
The sub-component will finance modernizing and rehabilitating extension and research facilities 
which have been identified as critical for the KP agriculture sector, such as the agricultural 
research centers, training centers and laboratory facilities etc. The subcomponent will also 
finance information and communication (ICT)-based technologies and services for delivery of 
agricultural extension and marketing for farmers and value chains, such as developing mobile 
phone APPs and other ICT tools (e.g., 24/7 call center, interactive websites, mobile training and 
demonstration centers etc.). The subcomponent will also support studies and data on the sector 
and training of staff. 

36. Subcomponent C.2: Capacity building of farmers (US$6 million).  The project will finance 
training and capacity building for famers, which will be based on training needs assessment 
carried out by the departments and their technical assistance providers. Training topics will 
include, but not limited to, good agricultural practices (including those specifically related to 
CSA), agribusiness management, negotiating in the market, basic accounting, and business plan 
development skills, etc. This will be done through demonstration plots, public information 
campaign, face-to-face training (farmers field school), domestic study tours and exposure visits 
etc.  Special attention will be given to climate smart agriculture related knowledge.    

37. Subcomponent C.3: Introducing modern technologies to farmers (US$20 million).  The project 
will finance investments to increase productivity, climate resilience and on-farm pre-and post-
harvest management of crops, horticulture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors through 
technology (e.g., farm machinery, equipements, seeds, breeds, and infrastructure etc.).  This 



support will be provided on a cost sharing basis with 70% paid by the Project and 30% by 
beneficiaries on a first come first serve basis, with ensuring regional equity. 

38. Subcomponent C.4: Support agribusinesses (US$10 million). This sub-component will support 
agribusinesses (SMEs)/agro-entrepreneurs for improved services, commercialization and 
processing & value addition. This will include businesses like seed companies, nursery growers, 
fish hatcheries, animal semen producers, farm machinery & equipements providers; reefer 
transporters, chillers, ventilated & cold storages, pack-houses including graders, sorter; slaughter 
houses, pulpers, oil extractors, de-hydrators, tanners; trading centers like rehabilitation of fruit, 
vegetable, livestock and grain wholesale markets; introducing digital trading platforms and 
contract growing etc. The project will provide a competitive grant program with a transparent 
and efficient review and selection process. The grant size will be up to US$100,000, with 30% 
matching fund from applicants. The grant will be released in three tranches based on verified 
progress of proposal implementation. 

39. The component will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by 
promoting innovative resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use 
of crops and crop mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of 
protected agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting 
agricultural intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and 
cropping patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy.. 

Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (IDA US$12 
million) 

40. This component will support the establishment of the project management structure. This 
will include project administration, human resources including woman staff, procurement, and 
financial management; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); communications management; social 
and environmental safeguards management; and grievance redress and community feedback 
mechanisms particularly channeling the voices of woman beneficiaries.  

41. Citizen Engagement (CE): The populations targeted in the citizen engagement mechanism 
of the proposed project will be farmers and agribusiness owners receiving support to increase 
their yield/productivity and the commercialization of their products. The CE mechanism will 
assist the extension service and government officials in making more informed decisions about 
resource allocations, training and technology needs of farmers and agribusiness owners. Overall, 
the CE mechanism will enhance the successful implementation of the project, and guide the 
government in preparing better programs for farmers. A detailed citizen engagement mechanism 
and grievance redressal mechanism will be elaborated during the preparation phase of the 
project, and will be included in the project implementation manual. 

42. Gender. The project design and approach will reflect the need for taking account of the 
gender dimension and risks associated with knowledge and technology transfer. Project will be 
designed to ensure that it provides equal opportunities for women to participate in project 



activities. Climate-resilient agricultural technologies will be screened to ensure that they are 
gender-neutral. A comprehensive social assessment has been initiated as part of project 
preparation and is expected to result, among others, in a Gender Action Plan. 

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in various districts of KP. The land cover of KP changes from north to south. The 

Province sits primarily on the Iranian plateau and comprises the junction where the slopes of the Hindu Kush mountains 
on the Eurasian plate give way to the Indus-watered hills approaching South Asia. Geographically, the province could be 
divided into four agro-ecological zones on the basis climatic conditions covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and 
topography as developed by Environmental Protection Agency of KP:  
(a) Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, Swat and Chitral.  
(b) Zone B – Sub Humid Mountain covering districts of Haripur, Batagram, Mansehra, Abbottabad, Kohistan and 

Torghar.    
(c) Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Mardan, Charshada and Nowshera. 
(d) Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman) covering districts of Bannu, karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan.  
The snowcapped mountains of Chitral and Swat have low vegetative cover above 4,000 meters. Mountains having 

altitude less than 4,000 meters have alpine forests (up to 3,300 meters). Altitudes between 3,000 meters to 1,500 meters 
have conifer and between 1,500 up to 900 meters have sub-tropical forests. These forests and plains provide habitat to 
98 species of mammals and birds including endangered species of snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, etc. The protected 
areas notified in KP includes 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community game reserves, 
16 private game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks. The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. 
The project activities are located in parts of Zone C valley plains and Zone D piedmont plains, which are are mostly used 

for agriculture and livestock grazing. Indus River and its tributaries are the main source of water for agriculture in the 
Province. Other major rivers that crisscross the province are  Kabul, Swat, Kunar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Dor, Haro, 
Gomal and Zhob. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The KP Government will be the implementing agency. The last time these two departments, Agriculture Department and 

Irrigation Department  implemented a World Bank project was in 2001-2007, and there the Irrigation Department had a 
secondary role. This leaves much desire for familiarity with and improvement in the understanding of the Bank safeguard 
policies. Therefore, safeguards capacity support, handholding and training will be provided throughout the project 
implementation to ensure that they have adequate capacity to respond to project safeguard issues. 
 
A Project Coordination & Management Unit (PCMU)—led by the Agriculture Department, will be established to manage 

implementation and coordination. Project Implementation Units one each in Agriculture (or two in its sub departments) 
and Irrigation Departments will be established to supervise technical implementation in the field. The PCMU will have a 
senior Safeguards Specialist as part of the PCMU Team. PIUs  at the two departments level will be supported by individual 
environment & social safeguards consultants. These consultants will work closely with the engineering supervision 
consultants, and will provide input into the project design as per safeguards instruments (such as ESMF, RPF, RAP, etc.). 
The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level will be responsible for the overall implementation and performance of 
the safeguards documents, while the day-to-day screening, monitoring and implementation will be the responsibility of 

d specialists at the PIU levels. The project will have a Project Implementation Committee (PIC) co-chaired by 
Secretary Agriculture and Secretary Irrigation and membered by heads of the PIUs, Chiefs of Water, Agriculture & 
Livestock from P & D, to review the progress of project components. The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level 
will be a part of the PIC. All project implementation and supervision consultant firms will be required to have adequate 
social and environmental safeguards specialists. The contractors for civil works will implement Contractor ESMP, including 
all necessary guidelines on labor health, safety and environment.  
 
Project launch workshop will be organized by the task team once the project becomes effective and will include a 

detailed session on safeguard implementation arrangements. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities involve irrigation infrastructure 
improvement, on farm water management schemes 
and production and post-production support to 
farmers and market actors. These activities are 
expected to cause some adverse environmental and 
social impacts. Overall, most of the impacts are 
expected to be during the construction phase and are 
likely to be temporary and reversible. Consequently, 
the policy has been triggered. Since project will also 
finance feasibility studies for dams, the scale and 
capacity of which is currently unknown. Based on 
existing information, the project has been categorized 
as Category A.   
 
The irrigation infrastructure improvement will overall 
improve irrigation efficiencies and help in ensuring 
availability of designed water flows at the tail-end of 
watercourses. However, improved infrastructure will 
not change the designed water allocations.Typical 
negative impacts associated with civil works financed 
by the project include land acquisition and 
resettlement; noise, air, soil and water pollution due 
to dust and exhaust emission and other wastes; 
vegetation clearance; damage to the existing 
infrastructures such as rural road, temporary water 
stoppages for irrigation, community and worker health 
and safety risks, etc. During operation, some potential 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

     

adverse impacts are forecasted such as water 
pollution and spreading diseases by human and animal 
wastes, pesticides use potentially causing water and 
soil pollution, excessive application of irrigation water 
causing leaching of soil nutrients and changes in soil 
characteristics, etc.  
Since the exact location of subprojects are not known 
at present and will be identified during project 
preparation and implementation, framework 
approach has been adopted.  Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) along with 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
for the known priority projects will be developed by 
project appraisal. The ESMF will also include 
assessment of regional impacts on water quality, 
analysis of any possible changes in groundwater and 
downstream surface water availability. The ESMF will 
also include Terms of Reference for environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA) for the feasibility 
studies of small dams and environmental and social 
screening checklists/procedures for competitive grant 
program (project component C). 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Most of physical infrastructure investments financed 
by the project are rehabilitation and improvement of 
the existing infrastructures. Some new construction 
activities such as construction of watercourses in new 
command areas and small-water storage tanks will 
take place on the existing agricultural lands. These 
activities are not expected to convert or degrade 
natural habitat. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.   
It is important to mention here that the project is 
supporting preparation of feasibility studies for 5 small 
dams or irrigation schemes. The studies will include 
EIAs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project is not expected to impact forests and 
associated ecosystems as envisaged in the policy. 
Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not support purchase of pesticides. 
However, the policy is triggered because the project 
interventions may lead to substantially increased use 
of pesticides and subsequent environmental 
problems. Thus, to mitigate this impact the project will 
apply an IPM approach with an IPMP prepared. 


     

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

At this stage, it is not possible to identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (PCRs). 
However, final determination would be made by QER.  
Chance find procedures will be included in ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project area extends across KP, including Chitral 
district which is home to the Kalash who are 
recognized as Indigenous People (IP); hence, OP 4.10 is 
triggered. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for interventions in Chitral district will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly on 
the client’s website (in-country) and by the Bank prior 
to appraisal. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), if 
required, will be prepared for specific project 
locations. 
Given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, the social assessment will carefully assess 
potential project impacts on IPs and mitigation 
measures including grievance redress mechanism will 
be developed through free prior and informed 
consultation as required under OP4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Small parcels of land will be required for project 
interventions. In most cases land needs will be met 
through Community or Voluntary Land Donations 
(VLD), the procedures for which will be laid out in the 
ESMF. In few cases small parcels may need to be 
acquired e.g. watercourses construction in new 
command areas (e.g. Bazai etc.). Certain interventions 
e.g. rehabilitation of existing water courses, may 
involve minor temporary impacts on livelihoods (due 
to restricted access; temporary dislocation) which 
could require small scale compensation. However, the 
impacts are not expected to be large scale. Hence OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for actual sites that 
may have been identified, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed publicly on the client’s website 
(in-country) and by the Bank prior to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project will not directly finance rehabilitation of 
existing dams or construction of new dams. The 
project activities especially investments for 
improvements in irrigation infrastructure may rely on 
performance of the existing dams such as Warsak Dam 
on Kabul River or Munda dam on Swat River. However, 
the exact location of schemes are not known at 
present. The project will also finance feasibility studies 



     

for dams, scale and capacity of which is currently 
unknown. The policy is therefore triggered to ensure 
due diligence and for adequate coverage of 
environmental and social aspects/impacts. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project activities are located in the 
command area of tributaries of Indus river, which is an 
international water way (river). The proposed project 
activities under component 1 and 2 qualify to trigger 
this policy. The task team will consult LEGEN to 
determine whether waiver to notification to riparian is 
applicable. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas as defined in the Policy 
where project interventions are to be undertaken and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 17, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
1. ESMF by 30 August, 2018 
2. ESMP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
3. IPMP by 30 August, 2018 
4. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide guidelines for project interventions that could 

require land acquisition, and which may lead to resettlement and impact on livelihood. RPF will be completed by 30 
August, 2018. 
5. RAP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
6. Ingenious Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by 30 August, 2018. IPPs (Indigenous Peoples Plans) for 

the first year schemes will be prepared by 30 August, 2018, where required.  
7. Assessment of regional impacts on water quality, groundwater availability and downstream water availability will be a 

part of the overall ESMF, as well as the social assessment. Moreover, given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, all assessments will carefully assess consultations/GRM/FPIC requirements.  
8. All feasibility studies will include a TOR on E&S screening and social and environmental impacts analyses.   
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
AP Integrated Irrigation& Agriculture Transformation Project (P160463) 

 

 

  
Feb14, 2017 Page 1 of 17 

 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19733 


  BASIC INFORMATION 
   

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160463  AP Integrated Irrigation 
& Agriculture 
Transformation Project 
(P160463) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA March 1, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   68.08  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  170.00  

Total Project Cost  238.08  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  
  

Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India has sustained economic growth during last decade: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for 2016-17 is 
estimated at 7.6 percent, higher than the 7.2 percent for the preceding year, but lower than the projected 8.1-8.5 
percent for this year

1
. Sustained economic growth during the last decade, however, has contributed to annual decline in 

poverty by 1.5 percent, but income inequality has continued to persist. Emerging as one of the fastest growing 
economies, there has been significant upturn in key development indicators. Life expectancy at birth increased to 68 

                                            
1
Economic Survey 2016-17 



 
Years in 2014 from a low of 54 in 1980. India's per capita gross national income increased by about 338 percent between 
1980 and 2014, from $1,255 in 1980 to $5,497 in 2014. As a result, India has climbed five notches to 130th rank in 
Human Development Index among 188 countries in 2014

2
.  

2. Reducing poverty and creating jobs can fuel economy: Sustained economic growth notwithstanding, India 
remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day. Expansion 
of the economy in recent decades has largely resulted in jobless growth. For addressing these issues, Govt. of A.P has set 
an ambitious goal of achieving an annual growth rate of 8.2 percent, reducing poverty by 10 percent (poverty in the 
State is on a decline and currently stands at 9.2%, as per Socio-Economic Survey 2016-17), and creating 50 million new 
jobs.. It has been argued that adequate attention to agriculture could fuel growth, create  jobs and reduce poverty. In 
the wake of consecutive low monsoon rainfall and consequent decline in farm productivity, agriculture has served a 
wake-up call, demanding attention from policy makers. 

3. Agriculture sector continues to lag behind: The issues of inclusive growth and gainful employment are major 
challenges in rural areas where two-thirds of the workforce resides. About 66 percent of the labor force is employed in 
agriculture sector which accounts for 14 percent of GDP, and is saddled with problems of uncertain growth. Per capita 
land and water availability is decreasing while high intensity rainfall events and dry spells are increasing. Land and labor 
productivity continues to be low. 

4. Agriculture growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: During the last 25 years, agriculture 
sector has not achieved the envisaged growth targets. In 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was 
around 3-3.5 percent and declined to less than 1 percent in the last two years (2014-16) due to technology fatigue, 
degradation of land and water resources, growing water scarcity, exacerbated by two consecutive droughts, floods, 
cyclones, heat waves, and declining international commodity prices. The growth in agriculture sector in 2015-16 has 
continued to be lower than the average of the last decade, mainly due to a second successive year of lower-than-normal 
monsoon. Report from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for 2015-16 indicates that the 
production of food-grains and oil-seeds is likely to decrease by 0.5 and 4.1 percent respectively, while that of fruits and 
vegetables is likely to witness a marginal increase. 

5. To fuel the agrarian economy, strategic shifts in agriculture would  be aimed  (based on the Socio-economic 
Survey 2016-17 projections) at: (i) towards high value vegetables, fruits, livestock and fish products; (ii) towards value 
addition in post-harvest segments; (iii) towards diversification and resilience of farming systems to address climate 
change effects; (iv) towards nutrition sensitive agriculture; and (v) finally a shift towards improved water use efficiency. 

6. Many new schemes have been launched to effect the proposed shifts in agriculture: Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana will fast track irrigation coverage and improve water use efficiency in rural areas; Parmparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana aims to reduce input costs by promoting organic farming; Pashudhan Sanjivani, Nakul Swasthya Patra, and 
E-Pashudhan Haat have been proposed to improve livestock productivity. There is an enormous potential for harvesting 
gains from transformation of irrigated agriculture as production, consumption and agribusiness shift from traditional 
cereal crops to horticulture, livestock and fish production. India has a comparative advantage in having a very large and 
largely untapped domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver and consumer of agriculture 
growth. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Andhra Pradesh is a leading reforming economy: Bifurcated on June 2, 2014, the present state of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP) is a middle income state with an average per capita annual income of INR 107,532 which is 15 percent 
higher than the national average. The state accounts for 4.95 percent of India’s land mass, 4.09 percent of its population 
and 4.44 percent of its GDP. AP is predominantly a rural state with 70.4 percent population living in villages and 
dependent on agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Despite severe challenges following the division of AP into 
two states in 2014 (AP and Telangana), the state has recorded appreciable progress in terms of the objective of 
achieving inclusive growth with noteworthy performance in both development and welfare sectors. In 2015-16, the 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at the rate of 10.99 percent, compared to corresponding growth rate of 7.2 
percent for the country. 

8. The sector-wise growth rate is equally impressive. At 2011-12 constant prices, agriculture grew by 8.4 percent, 
compared to industry by 11.13 percent and services sector by 11.39 percent. The per capita income of AP at current 
prices registered a growth of 12.38 percent over 2014-15. This has led to decline in the incidence of poverty from 45 
percent in 1993-94 to 9.2 percent in 2015-16

3
. AP is recognized as one of India’s leading reforming states and in the last 

two decades has achieved significant development outcomes through sustained policy and institutional reform 
programs in which the World Bank has been an important development partner. Rich in natural and human resources, 
the state is keen to leverage its strengths through specific growth strategies tailored to achieve double digit growth. 

9. Agriculture sector has performed below capacity: The performance of the state agriculture sector, which 
accounts for 27.6 percent of the state GDP and employs 62 percent of the work force, has been a cause of concern. 
Between 1999-00 and 2013-14 agriculture grew at around 2.1 percent per annum with most of this growth coming from 
livestock, horticulture and fisheries sub-sectors. In 2015-16 these sub-sectors respectively contributed 26, 25 and 15 
percent to the Agriculture State Domestic Product (AgSDP). Land use pattern is critical for agriculture growth, only 38.31 
percent of the state’s geographical area is net sown (6.23 million hectares). Majority of the farmers are small and 
marginal with average landholdings of 1.06 hectare (ha). The main crops are rice, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, maize 
and Bengal gram. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly limited to only one crop per plot 
per year, with a cropping intensity of 126 percent.  

10. The productivity of major crops has remained largely stagnant: The reason for low productivity is because AP is 
one of the severely water stressed states of India with an average annual rainfall of 966 millimeters, and a coastline of 
974 kilometers that is vulnerable to cyclones. Agriculture in AP is highly exposed to extreme weather events like 
droughts, untimely and high intensity rains, floods, cyclones and hailstorms. Increasing erratic weather aberrations and 
climate change are likely to exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural sector. Of the net sown area of 6.23 million ha in the 
state, 3.15 million ha is presently irrigated through a combination of canals, wells, tanks, ponds and other sources. 
Although 40,817 tanks cover a command area of 2.56 million ha, the actual area irrigated by tanks has declined 
significantly from about 1 million ha in 1990 (24% of irrigated area at that time) to 0.26 million ha in 2015 (8.4% of 
irrigated area).  

11. Irrigation is the key to revival of the agriculture sector: Due to deficient maintenance and management of the 
tank systems, as a result of which most tanks are performing well below the capacity, the actual area irrigated to 
potential created varies between 35-55 percent depending on rainfall. Some 35,376 tanks having a command area of 
0.32 million ha have been transferred from Panchayat Raj Department to Minor Irrigation Department. The rapid spread 
of groundwater irrigation has been an additional contributing factor to the decline in tank irrigation, and has also led to 
a serious depletion of groundwater resources across large parts of the state. Since most of the tanks are in rainfed areas 

                                        
 

with limited possibilities of providing other systems of surface irrigation, their decline poses a serious threat to the 
fragile agricultural economy of these areas.  

12. Poorer farmers, often found at the tail-end of dilapidated tank/pond systems (Small Scale Community Based 
Irrigation Systems- SSCBI Systems) and lacking resources to access groundwater irrigation amidst low and falling water 
tables, are particularly affected. In response to the difficulties being faced by the agriculture sector, the State 
Government has substantially expanded capital investments for modernizing irrigation infrastructure since 2006-07.  The 
Government has also taken steps to strengthen participatory irrigation management and AP was the first state in the 
country to adopt participatory irrigation management (PIM) following enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Farmers 
Management of Irrigation Systems (APFMIS) Act in 1997.  About 6,400 Water User Associations (WUAs) were formed 
which collect water taxes for meeting operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of tanks.  

13. Institutional development through capacity building has contributed to the success of PIM, a process that has 
been significantly supported by externally funded projects. The Bank-supported AP Community Based Tank 
Management Project (APCBTMP), which concluded in July 2016, has made significant development impacts in the state 
by rehabilitating 2,157 tanks, which resulted in 32 percent increase in tank command area and contributed to increase in 
paddy, maize and groundnut productivity by 36, 72 and 97 percent, respectively. In addition, tank rehabilitation resulted 
in 388 percent increase in fish productivity. 

14. Agriculture sector is in need of a paradigm shift: The negative consequences of low agriculture yields extend 
from precarious incomes of farmers to large tracts of land locked in low value agriculture, despite growing demands for 
high value products such as fruits, vegetables, and livestock products. According to NSS data4, the average annual 
income of the median farmer net of production costs (of 1 hectare) from cultivation is less than INR 20,000 in 17 states, 
including Andhra Pradesh. Add high cost of cultivation, growing indebtedness, climate uncertainty, ineffective 
procurement, insufficient storage space and market linkages, and it makes agriculture an increasingly uneconomical 
activity.5 The crisis in agriculture sector is evidenced by the ‘Crop holiday’ (farmers abstained from farming) observed by 
farmers of East Godavari district in an area of 85,050 acres in Kharif 2011, which is further reflected in continuing 
suicides by farmers in the state. During 2015, 516 suicides by farmers were recorded in AP

6
. 

15. Primary Sector Mission seeks institutional convergence for maximizing profitability: To pull agriculture from its 
current abysmal condition, AP requires a new paradigm with the following components: increasing productivity by 
getting “more from less” especially in relation to water; prioritizing the cultivation of less water-intensive crops, 
especially pulses and oil-seeds, supported by a favorable price regime that incorporates the full social benefits of 
producing such crops, and backed by a market-linked value chain. To effect a paradigm shift, GoAP has proposed the 
Primary Sector Mission to converge independently operating sub-sectors viz., agriculture, horticulture, fishery, and 
agribusiness into an integrated farming system for maximizing profitability of small and marginal farmers from a unit of 
arable land. The proposed project will showcase an alternate approach for leveraging capacities of relevant departments 
to improve farm incomes, and make agriculture resilient to climate change.  For a clear understanding at the highest 
level of authority in the state to prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, farmer 
suicides), a more comprehensive, longer term approach based around adaptive management in agriculture is required – 
particularly given the climate projections and their impact on the agriculture and water sectors in AP. The GoAP has 
evaluated the results of different initiatives taken during the previous years to develop a comprehensive long term 
strategy aimed at making agriculture in the state productive, profitable, sustainable and climate resilient. The state has 

also realized that a mono-cropping production system based on capital intensive irrigation infrastructure and 
technologies has its limitations under the present circumstances with climate variables.    

16. To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, AP has stressed a strong need for policies and programs 
to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping systems and diversification to high 
value crops and commodities; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management and value addition; and (iv) improvement 
of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal with increasing threats of climate change. By reorganizing PIM 
with regular administrative systems, AP envisions realizing the full potential of its water sector reforms by achieving a 20 
percent increase in water use efficiency over the next five years. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS): The proposed 
project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2013–17 to support poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity in India. The proposed project is aligned with two key pillars of CPS – ‘transformation’ and 
‘inclusion’. In line with ‘transformation’, the project aims to promote inclusive rural growth, development and 
dissemination of new agricultural and water management technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market 
linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management (CPS Outcome 2.4). The 
proposed project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting diversification to pulses and high value crops, which 
significantly reduce water and carbon footprint of agriculture (CPS Outcomes 2.5/2.6). 

18. The project is aligned with the Bank’s transformative and inclusive criteria:  With respect to ‘inclusion’, the 
project aims to enhance the livelihoods of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market 
access (CPS Outcome 3.6), and also by improving disaster management abilities of GoAP and local communities through 
enhanced design and restoration of smallholder irrigation infrastructure with better drought proofing and flood 
protection features (CPS Outcome 3.8).  

19. The proposed project will directly contribute to the achievement of 5 out of 17 United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), namely:  

Goal 2 – End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and ote sustainable agriculture, by enhancing 
income, food security, and nutrition of large number of rural population, where majority of AP’s poor reside. 

Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by investing in irrigation 
infrastructure, promoting a whole range of water saving technologies for irrigated agriculture, which uses 
about 75 percent of all water in the state. 

Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all by promoting a broad-based agriculture growth and employment in rural areas, where more than 
two-third of country’s population are employed. 

Goal 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 
rehabilitating and modernizing irrigation infrastructure (supply canals, water tanks) with enhanced resilience 
features of flood protection in about 1,211 tanks. 

Goal 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts and reduce GHG effects of agriculture production 
by promoting a wide range of water saving technologies and agricultural practices (SRI, micro-irrigation), 
expanding areas under pulses and high value crops, which consume less water, and also by enhancing 
awareness-raising, human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and impact 
reduction. 

 
20. The project will also coordinate with other Bank-supported projects in Andhra Pradesh and at national level 
including Assam Agriculture project, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project, Andhra Pradesh-Telangana 
Water Sector Improvement Project, National Hydrology Project, and National Groundwater Improvement Project to 
ensure synergy and enhance long-term project impact. 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)     
 

The Project Development Objective is to enhance agricultural productivity, profitability and resilience of Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation Systems (SSCBI Systems)

7
in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh.  

 
21. The project beneficiaries will include small and marginal farmers, water users associations, farmer producer 
organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. During project preparation, specific target areas will be identified and 
specific interventions will be designed to benefit women and other vulnerable groups.  

 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22.  The following 5 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed to measure key outcomes of the project: 

(i) KP#1: Number of Farmers / farmer groups adopting resilient technologies and practices –(such as  Agriculture Technology,  

water  productivity/efficiency)  (Corporate Result Indicator) 

(ii) KP#2: Percentage increase in irrigation supply in the project area / selected tank command area  

(iii) KP#3: Percentage increase in productivity (for selected crops, vegetables and fisheries), and  percentage increase in 

returns from two selected agriculture commodities over the baseline value through development of supply chain 

(iv) KP#4: Number of farmers benefitted through increased access to agricultural assets and services – disaggregated by 

gender   

(v) KP#5: GHG: Change in incremental value to various Carbon stock assessments in selected plots (Corporate Result 

Indicator) 

D. Concept Description 
 

. Description 
 
23. Project Rationale: The proposed project is seized of GoAP initiatives in ameliorating the current distress in the 
state farm sector. The biggest challenge for the state is to pull farmers out of the current crises. To achieve food and 
nutritional security, the issues related to growing water scarcity, degrading land resources, high cost of cultivation, 
stagnant farm productivity, and the impacts of climate change need to be systematically addressed. AP with 13 districts 
and 6 agro-climate zones has great potential for growth and profitability in agriculture and allied sectors (fisheries & 
horticulture). This is what the project seeks to realize by providing transformative direction to the agriculture sector by 
packaging and up-scaling relevant technologies and appropriate practices, and by supporting reforms (Primary Sector 
Mission) that could support more effective policies and management practices to improve the productivity of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries to increase net benefits, and improve equity and livelihoods 

24. Alternative considered:  

25. In line with the Government of India’s policy imperative on getting ‘more from less’, especially in relation to 
water, the project proposes to improve SSCBI for realizing underutilized potential of decentralised irrigation system for 
benefitting small and marginal farmers for producing less water-intensive crops, especially pulses and oil-seeds, and 
creating a favorable procurement ecosystem towards improved profitability under emerging specter of climate change. 
 

 
 

 
26. Innovative design: The project design is consequently built on the key lessons learnt from the APCBTMP 
and from similar projects in other States (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra), clubbed with the emerging need of 
integrating with climate variables, and value addition to the SSCBI Systems for reducing farm-level water footprints, 
and for enhancing carbon stock in farmers’ fields in providing a strategic direction to develop climate-resilient 
sustainable production systems. The innovative aspects will include improved designs of smallholder irrigation 
infrastructure for efficient capture, storage and delivery of rain water, strong focus on improving water-use 
efficiency, recent advances in intensification and diversification of agriculture, agri-entrepreneurship, and 
movement toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and substantial 
improvements of participatory irrigation management practices.  
 
27. Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the project 
through improving soil organic carbon, higher water use efficiency, reducing crop water footprints through 
diversification, and increased adoption of technologies and practices for optimizing and sustaining productivity. 
Project activities will be complimented by the use of innovative information and communication technology (ICT) for 
enhanced efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries, and new media 
technologies for real time reporting and data sharing among project teams working at different levels. 
 
28. The total project cost is expected to be around US$ 238 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$ 
170 million (70 percent of total project cost) and the GoAP will finance US$ 68 million (30 percent of total project 
cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Andhra Pradesh (its individual components will cover 
different geographic areas) and will be implemented over a six-year period. The project activities would be grouped 
into four main components: (i) Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm Level; (ii) Promoting Adaptive 
Sustainable Agriculture Practices; (iii) Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion; and (iv) 
Project Management and Capacity Building. The individual components have been detailed below.  

 
Component A: Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm level  (approx. US$ 110 million) 

 
29. This component would improve SSCBI systems to strengthen the integrated farming system (in which 
growing crops, agro-forestry and rearing of livestock co-exist) with reduced water footprints. It will consist of four 
inter-related sub-components: (i) institutional strengthening and capacity building (ii) improving Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation System (SSCBI System) performance and resilience; (iii) improving water productivity 
and efficiency; and (iv) building synergy with the Primary Sector Mission (on agriculture, fishery, horticulture, 
livestock and irrigation). 

 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 

 
30. The sub-component would focus on engaging communities through water users’ associations (WUAs) in 
social engineering of project interventions. The Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) will follow a distinct 
approach where better operation and maintenance (O&M) of rehabilitated smallholder tank systems will be 
dovetailed with irrigation outreach based on reduced water footprints through adaptive agriculture practices 
(Component B) at the farm level.This sub-component will also sensitize water users and ensure that a desired level 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission is managed at the tank level. Water use efficiency will be the leitmotif for 
creating a culture for ‘more crops, per drop’ through community based institutions for assuming greater 
responsibility towards making water-conserving crop choices for water conservation and management. The sub-
component will support in strengthening the existing WUAs and establish new WUAs for effectively developing all 
aspects related to efficient in situ water conservation and management practices. The component would enhance 

WUA capacity in grounding the concept at the farm level. 
 
31. In addition, the sub-component would relate to mobilizing water users for collective action through the 
vehicle of WUAs for ensuring local level participation in planning, implementing and managing the SSCBI facilities as 
well as establishing backward and forward farm-linkages with the external government, private sector and non-
government agencies. The proposed project would expand the scope of ‘SSCBI” beyond the ‘crop irrigation’ into 
others - fisheries, animal husbandry and domestic users. The spheres of intervention would include: (i) Policy and 
Governance - educating and enabling enactment of the existing legislative provisions and  exploring new vistas for 
establishing relation between different sets of water users; (ii) Physical and Engineering- creation of assets, 
including capacity building support for designing and implementing construction, as well as managing procurement, 
finance and quality control; (iii) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) involving physical sustainability and improved 
irrigation performance leading to enhanced production/productivity, incomes and food security; (iv) Social 
mobilisation - local level organizational development including leadership building and problem solving approaches, 
empowerment of poor and vulnerable sections such as women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., and 
provision of capacity support and capacity building including observation and study tours; and (v) Economic - fixing 
and collection of water tariff and building of a corpus to enable further modernization and diversification, market 
penetration to enable establishing backward and forward linkages; and the related book keeping.  

 
Sub-component A.2: Improving  Small Scale Community Based Irrigation (SSCBI) System Performance and 
Resilience 

 
32. This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructure, including SSCBI systems and irrigation canals 
within a defined catchment and also use a cascading management approach. The modernization of irrigation 
infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and 
modernization of approximately 1,211 smallholder irrigation structures. The expected works will include 
modernization of control structures (diversion weirs), supply channels, cross-masonry structures, de-silting

8
 of 

feeder and supply channels, construction of recharge well structures and strengthening and up-gradation of tank 
bunds, installation of flow measurement devices, up-gradation of distribution systems, improvements of irrigation 
and drainage canals, and introduction of modern quality testing devices to determine soil compaction parameters, 
as well as modern quality testing devices for meticulously maintaining specified cover to reinforcement steel in the 
construction of reinforced concrete structures for long term durability.In addition, relevant catchment treatment 
approaches will be considered for reduced siltation, reliable and dependable flow to cascade SSCBI systems. 

 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Water Productivity and Efficiency 
 
33. The objective of this sub-component will be to promote water saving technologies such as drip and 
sprinkler systems, and for implementing Participatory Groundwater Management (PGM) at assessment unit level. 
The investments will include catchment and command area treatment of SSCBI systems, including construction of 
group based mini-irrigation schemes (dug wells, shallow tube wells, water harvesting and groundwater recharging 
systems).For drought proofing and capturing flood waters, cascades will be linked. Robust automation systems will 
be demonstrated, which will enable spatial homogeneity in water delivery in these systems.  
34. Conjunctive use of surface and groundwater will be coordinated with crop planning and water budgeting. 

                                            
8
Considering economic and environmental perspectives, desilting of the tank will be limited only to remove silt from the tank bed to 

use for raising and strengthening tank bund during the rehabilitation of tank bund in such a way that sufficient area upstream of 

sluices is de-silted on priority to ensure free flow of water towards the sluices. 


Water sharing by groundwater users (with surplus water) with those without irrigation source will be promoted; and 
pipelines provided for efficient water distribution (as implemented in APCBTMP). Consolidation and linking of 
groundwater sources piloted in Anantapur district under the World Bank supported AP Drought Adaptation 
Initiative will be encouraged. All development and improvement activities will be included in an Integrated Water 
Resource Conservation and Management Plan (IWRCMP). A basin level ridge to valley treatment for water 
conservation and management in convergence with the activities of all the primary stakeholders and implementing 
departments will be undertaken. 

 
Sub-component A.4: Building Synergy with Primary Sector Mission 

 
35. For effective service delivery to farmers, various departments and entities involved in water, agriculture 
and related sub-sectors need to collaborate. For achieving this GoAP is working towards forming a consortium of 
knowledge stakeholders, including relevant state line departments, knowledge institutions, civil society 
organizations and other relevant national and international organizations to support planning, implementation and 
monitoring the activities of the Primary Sector Mission. The project will provide support to policy and institutional 
reforms for enhancing institutional capacities of relevant departments. The sub-component will provide incentives 
for capital investments, including through unlocking opportunities for crowding-in private sector investments. 
Support will also be provided for guiding, designing and implementing holistic strategy for the Primary Sector 
Mission.  
 

36. As an innovative design feature, the project will use information and communication technology (ICT) 
tools, sensors and remote sensing in two ways – (i) leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) technologies combined with 
sensors to remotely capture data and information on various aspects pertaining to minor irrigation systems such as 
water flows, water quality and (ii) use ICT and remote sensing products for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
 
Component B: Promoting Adaptive Sustainable Agriculture Practices (approx. US$ 79 million) 
 
37. This component aims to improve productivity of the tank systems and enhance resilience of agriculture 
production systems for increasing production and managing risks associated with climate variables. This would be 
achieved by diversification of farm production, introduction of climate resilient solutions, improving value 
realization at the farm level through improved post-harvest management, and strengthening farmer-market 
linkages. The component will provide incentives for capital investments by unlocking opportunities for crowding-in 
private sector investments. This component will have three sub-components: (i) Promoting climate smart 
diversified agriculture production systems; (ii) Innovation and technology transfer for fishery production; and (iii) 
Post-harvest management, marketing and agribusiness promotion.  
 
Subcomponent B.1: Climate Smart Diversified Agriculture Production Systems  
 
38. Sustainable intensification and diversification of crop and horticulture production systems will be achieved 
by awareness creation, on-farm demonstrations on new seeds and promising technologies, capacity building and 
training activities; and by leveraging private sector investments in water management and farm mechanization. 
Climate risk resilience will be built in agriculture production systems by promoting crop diversification from rice to 
low water requiring pulses, maize, oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; cultivation of high yielding, short 
duration, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crop varieties/hybrids; complementary agronomic practices; and 
building ability to withstand biotic and abiotic stress through a large scale program of demonstrations, and training 
activities as well as investments in farm implements and resource saving technologies like micro irrigation systems 



to enhance water use efficiency and land productivity.  Component interventions will focus on irrigated command 
areas of the project, and   will also cover the rain fed areas in the project villages and cascades. The project will 
support operationalization of web-based integrated weather forecasting and water management system to 
provide real time crop advisories, including water, pest and disease stress, and implementation of mitigation 
measures and contingency plans. A baseline of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture production 
systems will be established and would be regularly monitored for changes during the project period.  
 
39. The project will focus on increasing farm productivity by reducing ‘input’ costs and enhancing ‘output’ 
from farming systems on a sustainable basis. This will be achieved by (a) adopting diversified cropping system on 
‘navdanya’

9
 pattern to buffer weather anomalies; (b) promoting comprehensive, crop specific sustainable 

agricultural package of practices; (c) installation of integrated weather forecasting systems to provide weather-
based crop advisories in selected smallholder irrigation cluster areas; and (d) developing a mechanism to quantify 
crop resilience to climate variability, and creating a baseline for quantifying soil organic carbon and GHG emission 
from crop production systems. 
  
Subcomponent B.2: Innovation and Technology Transfer for Fishery Production 
 
40. Fish production has registered an average annual growth rate of 9.92 per cent in AP. Building on this, the 
component aims at improving fish productivity and profitability in the project tanks and ponds which offer high 
economic opportunities and benefits. The GoAP accords top priority to fisheries development in the state, and has 
released the Fisheries Policy and Plan for 2015-2020. Under this policy, the government has approved the fiscal 
benefits covering several sections of the industry, including production, processing, marketing and disease 
management for stimulating development of the fishery sector. 
 
41. The subcomponent will focus on strengthening research-extension linkages in order to improve farmers’ 
access to technology, and support participation of fish farmers in value chains. Project aims to promote innovative, 
climate resilient, and modern technology packages in production, post-harvest management and marketing. The 
project will (i) support multiplication of improved germplasm for quality seed production, (ii) introduce suitably 
formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; (iii) demonstrate semi-intensive and intensive production 
models at appropriate locations in ponds; (iv) promote improved fish production techniques in irrigation tanks 
including innovative technologies such as cage culture in an environmentally sustainable manner; and build 
institutional capacity of the fishery sector. The project will facilitate suitable linkages for better access to markets, 
and support measures for maintaining hygienic conditions throughout the fish value chain. 
 
Component C: Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion (approx. US$ 32 million) 
 
42. This subcomponent will enhance farmers’ linkages to markets by providing alternate marketing channels 
and promoting farm level aggregation, post-harvest management and value addition. The project will support 
organizing producers into farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and companies (FPCs); develop their capacity and 
skills for accessing wider input and output markets; and investment support to the FPOs for establishing common 
service centers for aggregating grains and horticulture produce. The expected benefits to the FPO members are 
higher prices through a combination of larger critical mass of saleable produce, thereby providing economies of 
scale, savings in transaction costs, and strengthened negotiation positions, coupled with the added value achieved 

                                            
9
‘Navdanya’ means nine seeds (a traditional diversified cropping system which includes cereals, millets, and pulses), a system of 

farming that produces food while enhancing biodiversity, building soil fertility and conserving water. 



through primary grading and packing. The project will support integration of producer organizations in commercial 
value chains of agricultural commodities, and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying 
arrangements.  Key strategy will be market oriented agricultural production through collective marketing by 
farmer producer organizations. 
 
43. For mitigating price risks the project will support operationalization of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts in 
AP. For promoting agri-business ecosystem in the state, an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will be 
established. The ABPF activities will include conducting market and value chain studies on the identified 
commodities; establishing and operating mentorship programs; scouting new technologies (including climate 
resilient technologies); assisting small and medium private entrepreneurs to prepare business and financial 
proposals; and providing business planning and incubation services to emerging agri-entrepreneurs.  
 
44. The value chain for selected commodities will help to increase the share of farmers in wholesale and retail 
prices of the commodity. Some of the measures to achieve this include farmers’ participation in commodity 
exchanges, establishing storage infrastructure starting from primary, intermediate and transit warehouses for 
value addition. For high value crops, emphasis would be laid on demand based production, post-harvest 
processing, and creating forward linkages for direct marketing. Such a production and marketing system would be 
aimed at encouraging farmers to diversify into high value crops for additional income. 
 

Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building (approx. US$ 16 million) 
 
45. The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities, as well as 
monitoring of, and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up, 
supporting and capacity building of project management unit (PMU) to align with the project components at the 
state and district level; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and promotion of learning culture at the PMU level; (iii) 
documentation of project processes and experience on a rolling basis, and its dissemination to the wider 
development community for cross-learning and sharing; (iv) hiring services of an external M&E agency as 
consultants for the duration of the project for creating a feed-back loop for improving project thrust and 
implementation; and (v) providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; and 
networking with partner organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank. 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)     

 
Andhra Pradesh is located on the east coast in peninsular India facing the Bay of Bengal. The State has three 
physiographic zones, the hilly region (having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of 500 
to 1400 m); the plateau (having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m) and the deltas of rivers (between the Eastern Ghats 
and the Sea Coast).  It has a coast line of 974 km and its major rivers are   Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra. It has about 
21% of the geographical area under forest cover with 6 National Parks and 21 Wildlife Sanctuaries. It has an ancient 
religious/cultural heritage and Tirupati is one of the most popular temples in the country. 
 
The state is drained by three major perennial rivers viz. Godavari, Krishna and Pennar, several other medium and small 
rivers. In total 40 rivers drain into the sea. Rainfall varies from 560 mm in the Rayalaseema region to about 1200 mm in 
the northeastern coastal part of the state. The State receives about 66% of rainfall from south-west monsoon (June-


\and about 25% from north-east monsoon (October-December). The stage of ground water development is 
around 70%. Six Agro-Climatic Zones are recognized – Scarce Rainfall Zone, Southern Zone, North Coastal Zone, 
Godavari Zone, Krishna Zone and High Altitude Zone. The state experiences frequent storms, floods particularly in 
coastal areas and drought in the Rayalseema region 
 
The project activities will involve investing on repair and rehabilitation of about   1200 tanks spread across the  state.  
The interventions will include: improving water assets, modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving water 
productivity, promoting adaptive sustainable agricultural practices, enhancing fisheries production and climate friendly 
agri business promotion.  Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile undivided) is known to be a leading consumer of agrochemicals in 
the country with 24% share and 21% share in pesticides alone. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies     

 
Safeguard issues revolve around augmenting and/ or re-engineering the existing minor irrigation tanks along with 
water conveyance system and other associated activities related to enhancing production, productivity and incomes in 
the spheres of agriculture and fisheries.  The key intervention relates ensuring bridging of the gaps between designed 
and actual irrigable area with participation by the local water using communities.  Major challenge thus lies in 
mobilizing the local tank based community towards group action and establishing linkages with other public and 
private sector institutions. This has been addressed successfully under the first project (Andhra Pradesh Community 
Managed Tank Project) with the help of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The proposed 
project would build on the same, but taking into account the latest legislative developments and expanded scope of 
the interventions, into agriculture and fisheries. Environment Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for tanks that 
are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. In addition, the project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP). All this 
points to adequate capacity for safeguards management with the borrower.  
 
The previous project has put in place a robust systems   in place and capacities are developed for managing the social 
and environmental impacts. Adequate number of experienced professionals too have been deployed for managing the 
ESMF.  However, as the follow on project’s scope is enhanced both in terms of the number of tanks and the 
interventions, GOAP has already initiated efforts towards re-visiting the ESMF. The learnings drawn the 
implementation experiences of the first project will be fed into this revision.  

 
D. Policies that might apply     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would be 
largely on rehabilitation of existing water assets 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under productivity 
enhancement through sustainable agriculture 
practices could result in positive impacts with 
effective planning an implementation. 


An Environmental and Social Assessment will be 
undertaken and a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework will be developed for 
managing risks and maximizing the environmental 
and social opportunities. These will take into account 
experiences and learnings from the previous phase.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
The rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural 
habitats such wetlands, which will be determined 
during EA. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project interventions are not expected to impact 
the forest areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides but the 
improved irrigation and crop diversification may 
result in increased use of pesticides. The project will 
work in synergy with the state primary sector mission 
and focus on climate smart agriculture production 
system which will promote the non-chemical package 
of practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA and appropriate measures will be put in place to 
deal with any chance findings. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

AP state has a tribal population of 2.7 million 
amounting to 5.5% of the total population. A few 
pockets in three districts are predominantly inhabited 
by tribals and are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. So, project areas is likely to 
have tribal population. However,   investment plans 
are currently not known. Hence, to address such 
situations wherein the project is likely to be taken up 
in tribal areas, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework 
(TPPF) will be prepared. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will not and need not resort to 
involuntary acquisition of lands as the existing 
irrigation tanks will focus of repair and rehabilitation. 
However, cases of encroachers on /within the Tanks 
cannot be ruled out. To address this, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Some of the tanks could be large with high 
embankments above 10 m. The heights of the 
embankments will be known by appraisal for 
ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are 
put in place for addressing any potential adverse 
environmental impact. This policy was also triggered 



 

during the previous phase and arrangements were 
put in place.  Already, a robust mechanism exist in 
the state, which will be further strengthened. Three 
region-wise Dam Safety Panels (DSPs) were 
constituted by the Government to function with 
technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, Central 
Designs Organization. 
The project will seek better coordination with the 
Dam Safety Panel and processes. The project will also 
support safety enhancement of tank systems as part 
of tank rehabilitation. 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not fall on any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project is not in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan      

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

May 31, 2017 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
GoAP will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to revise the existing environmental and social 
management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank policies as well as the national and state legal 
stipulations. EMPs will be prepared for tanks that are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. Apart from the 
comprehensive ESMF, the following independent documents-- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal People 
Plan Framework (TPPF) – will also be prepared. These are expected to be completed by end August 2017. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23462 

 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Myanmar P164448  Myanmar National 
Food and Agriculture 
Systems Project 
(P164448) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 01, 2019 Apr 22, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of the Union of 
Myanmar 

Ministry of Agriuclture, 
Livestock, and Irrigation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The political reforms of 2011-2015 in Myanmar and economic liberalization coincided with strong economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability, followed by a slowing of economic activity since 2015.  After reaching 8.5% annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2014/2015, economic activity began to slow down with growth reaching 7% and 
5.9% in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, respectively, due to (i) a challenging macroeconomic environment characterized by 
high inflation, and a reduction in government spending; (ii) a decline in commodity exports (gas and agriculture); (iii) 
constrained private and public investments; (iv) contraction of the agriculture sector due to the extreme weather shocks 
of the 2015/2016 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event; and (v) a decline in industrial output.  Expectations of strong 
exports, industry and services activities contributed to a positive growth forecast for 2017/2018 at 6.4%, counterweighing 
a slow agricultural recovery1. The agriculture sector continues to be vulnerable to supply shocks and demand fluctuations 
from major trading partners (e.g., China and India) affecting the sector’s potential to significantly and sustainably 
contribute to growth and poverty reduction of Myanmar. 
 
2. Despite a decline in poverty in Myanmar over the last decade, poverty remains high and inequality is increasing.  
Nearly 70% of Myanmar’s population lives in rural areas where poverty is prevalent.  The poverty incidence fell from 48.2% 
in 2004/2005 to 42.4% in 2009/2010 to 32% in 2015, making it today one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia 2.  The 
decline in poverty was rapid in urban than rural areas with the urban-rural gap being substantial in 2015, i.e., 38.8% of the 
rural population are found to be poor relative to 14.5% of the urban population.  In addition, one in ten households fail to 
meet their basic food needs.  In addition to the 32% of the population identified as poor, 14% are categorized as near-
poor making them vulnerable to shocks from crop failures, natural disasters, and health setbacks.  A sizable proportion of 
Myanmar’s poor rely on agricultural activities as smallholder farmers or casual employment with low income 
diversification and high reliance on paddy production.  Female headed households are not identified as being poorer than 
male headed households irrespective of level of profit making, the poor have limited dietary diversity, and have weaker 
productive and financial asset base.  Although living standards of the poorest in Myanmar improved, greater 
improvements were noted among richer households contributing to inequality increase.  There were no significant 
changes in the welfare of the poorest 10% of the population relative to the obvious welfare changes of the average 
household.  
 

        e variations in poverty incidence across the agro-ecological zones (AEZ)3 of Myanmar.  The poverty 
headcount rate in the Hills & Mountains AEZ is 40%, in the Dry AEZ the rate is 32.1%, in the Delta AEZ, the rate is 26.2%, 
and in the Coastal AEZ, the poverty headcount rate is 43.9%.  The Hills and Mountains and the Coastal AEZs have a lower 
share of the population living in them, yet they comprise 47% of the food poor, and 38% are in the bottom quintile of the 
expenditure distribution.  These two AEZs combined have 40% poverty rate and one in six will struggle to meet their basic 
food needs.  Nearly 65% of the poor reside in the densely populated Dry AEZ and Delta AEZ.  Even though the Delta AEZ 
has the lowest poverty head count rate, the number of poor in this area is significant due to its high population density 
(5.5 million poor which also includes Yangon) relative to the 2 million poor in the Coastal AEZ4. 

 
4. Myanmar’s human development faces numerous challenges.  While net primary education enrollment is high 
(93%), there is substantial student drop-out in enrollment at the secondary level resulting in net total enrollment of 55% 
in 2015.  Gender enrollment gaps have been narrowing over time.  On health outcomes, 41% of children under the age of 
five are stunted, 30% are underweight, and 11% are wasted.  In addition, 40% of the population between ages 5 and above 
are overweight or obese, and close to 1 in 7 infants are born with a low birth weight.  It was estimated that on an annual 
basis, Myanmar loses nearly US$400 million in GDP to Vitamin and mineral deficiencies.5  Overall, Myanmar’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) is 0.556, well below the average for East Asia and Pacific (0.720), ranking it 145 out of 188 
countries.  As a result, Myanmar is on a slow path towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) health 
outcomes. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Despite Myanmar experiencing rapid structural change over the last decade, it is still an “agri-based” economy.  
Agriculture’s share of GDP declined from 52% to 32% during 2000-2015, while manufacturing share increased from 11% 
to 28%.  Nevertheless, the sector shares of employment remained constant over the last decade.  Agriculture continues 
to be the largest employer with agriculture’s share of jobs registering nearly 52%.  More than one-third of workers (nearly 
8.5 million jobs) identified farming as their primary source of employment through work in own family farms, and 16% 
(equivalent to 2.6 million people) are agricultural laborers.  The employment share in services and industry were 36% and 
12%, respectively.  The formal modern sector in Myanmar contributes to only 11% of the jobs.  
 
6. Agricultural growth relative to other sectors is low and volatile in Myanmar.  In 2011/12, agriculture growth was 
-0.7%, 1.7% in 2012/13, 3.6% in 2013/14, 2.8% in 2014/15, 3.4% in 2015/2016, and 4.3% in 2016/17 respectively.  The 
average sector growth during the period 2011/2012-2016/2017 was 15%, which is substantially lower than the 55% and 
59% growth seen in the industry and services sectors, respectively6.  Hence, contribution of the agriculture sector to the 
growth of Myanmar’s economy over time has been small.   

 
7. Low agricultural growth in Myanmar is attributed to low productivity7 with varying degrees across the agro-
ecological zones.  Paddy land and labor productivities in Myanmar are among the lowest in Asia.  In 2013/2014, the 
average land productivity for paddy was 2.7 tons/ha in Myanmar, 3.9 tons/ha in the Philippines, 2.8 tons/ha in Thailand, 
6.7 tons/ha in China, and 5.8 tons/ha in Vietnam.  Within Myanmar, paddy productivity and profitability are the lowest in 
Ayeyarwady and Sagaing States, and highest in Shan State.  Average paddy yield was 2.7 tons/ha (dry paddy equivalent) 

                                            
3 There are four agro-ecological AEZs in Myanmar: (i) Hills and Mountainous AEZ (covers Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, and Shan States); (ii) Coastal AEZ 
(covering Rakhine and Taninthayi); (iii) Delta AEZ (covering Ayeyarwady, Bago, Mon, and Yangon); and (iv) Dry AEZ (covering Mandalay, Magwe, Nay 
Pyi Taw, and Sagaing).  
4 “An Analysis of Poverty in Myanmar: Part 02-Poverty Profile”. December 2017. World Bank. 
5 “Nutrition at a Glance”. World Bank. 
6 “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”. 2017. World Bank. 
7 Productivity estimates are derived from the “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”.  

or 3.5 tons/ha (wet paddy equivalent).  This puts Myanmar on the lower end of rice production relative to rice producing 
Asian countries.  Labor productivity for paddy is also low.  For example, in monsoon season, the labor return from one 
day’s work yields 23Kgs of paddy, relative to 62Kgs in Cambodia, 429Kgs in Vietnam, and 547Kgs in Thailand.  Although 
Myanmar’s labor productivity is higher during the dry season, it is still considered very low in comparison with other 
countries.  Paddy production in Myanmar is still labor intensive (farmers in Ayeyarwady spend more than 100 days/ha of 
monsoon paddy relative to 52 says in Cambodia, 22 days in Vietnam, and 11 days in Vietnam).  
 
8. Productivity of non-paddy crops are also low but generally higher than paddy productivity also with varying 
degrees across the agro-ecological areas.  Myanmar’s farming systems are diversified and produce a range of non-paddy 
crops with higher productivity than paddy.  The labor productivity (value of crop per day of labor) of black gram, green 
gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds ranged from $9.29/day to $15.92/day, while for both monsoon 
and dry season paddy labor productivity was $4.75/day and $9.20/day, respectively.  The productivity of non-rice crops 
also varied across the agro-ecological zones depending on the production potential of each area.  For example, the 
productivity of green gram in Ayeyarwady (Delta AEZ) was $13.39/day while in Sagaing (Dry AEZ) productivity was at 
$17.69/day.  
 
9. Low earnings for both paddy and non-paddy production, although earnings from the latter are higher, reflects 
on the low agricultural competitiveness of Myanmar relative to its regional neighbors.  In 2013/2014, the net margin 
($/ha) from producing monsoon paddy averaged $114/ha (ranging from $88/ha in Ayeyarwady to $337/ha in Shan State 
due to proximity to China, resulting in higher farm-gate prices and lower input prices relative to other areas in Myanmar).  
Although the profitability of the dry season paddy was higher at $246/ha, this is still considered low relative to the earning 
of farmers in neighboring Asian countries.  In addition, male-headed households accrue higher profits than female headed 
households for many crops (for few crops the gender differentials in earning is insignificant).  On the other hand, the 
profitability of non-paddy crops (black gram, green gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds) is higher 
and ranged from $141/ha to $581/ha.  The earning differentials between paddy and non-paddy is due to the higher 
production cost of the former crop.  The low earnings raise alarming concerns about the potential of agriculture at its 
current state and a primary focus on paddy alone to achieve agricultural growth and uplift rural households from poverty.   
 
10. The inferior performance of Myanmar’s agriculture sector is first a legacy of past agricultural policies and 
investments centered on rice to attain primarily food security.  This was conducted through input intensification mainly 
for rice.  Public agricultural investments neglected undertaking “Resilient”, “Inclusive”, Competitive”, and 
“Environmentally” (RICE) sustainable investments that takes advantage of Myanmar’s diverse farming systems.   
 
11. The undersupply of quality agricultural public goods plays a significant role in Myanmar’s low agricultural 
productivity and weak support for diversification.  According to the 2017 World Bank Agricultural Public Expenditure 
Review8, the most underfunded function in the sector is agricultural research while there is compelling evidence of high 
returns to investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages and 
infrastructure, especially when augmented by policy and institutional reforms.  Undersupply of public goods: first, 
agricultural extension services are limited in number and have weak capacity to provide outreach to farmers.  The ratio of 
extension staff and farm family is very low (nearly 1 to 585)9.  Given the 3,819,1925 acres covering major crops, this means 
on average 1 extension worker covers 5,081 acres.  In addition, extension outreach was geared mostly towards paddy; 
second, farm management is poor.  Farmers have weak knowledge about the appropriate application of production 
technologies such as fertilizers, seed varieties, and pesticides; and third, agricultural research is underfunded, fragmented, 
and suffers from weak human resource capacity.   

                                            
8 World Bank 2017. Myanmar Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Increasing the impact of public spending on agricultural growth. WB/LIFT.  
9 “Current Status of Agricultural Extension in Myanmar”. 2017. MOALI 



 
12. Private sector engagement in agricultural value chains is low. In addition to the constraints mentioned above, 
several other factors are adversely affecting the private sector’s full participation in agricultural value chain development.  
Infrastructure challenges such as post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities, and testing laboratories restricts them 
from contributing to the downstream side of the value chain.  Poor accreditation of services geared towards the regional 
and global export markets is also a constraint. 
 
13. Climate variability and extreme weather events have also significantly impacted performance of the agricultural 
sector.  In 2012, Myanmar was ranked the country most at-risk to climate shocks within Asia-Pacific, due to the wide range 
of hazards including, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis.  In addition, it ranks 2 out of 187 countries 
in the Global Climate Risk Index.  However, there are regions and states that are more vulnerable than others.  In 2015-
2016 ENSO event and the accompanying drought in the Central Dry Area decreased production and export of traditional 
crops such as sesame, beans and pulses.  Overall the drought from El Niño affected more than 15 million people in the 
Delta and Dry areas affecting livelihood, food access, decreased productivity and farmer income. 
 
14. Improving nutritional status of Myanmar’s population remains a significant challenge.  Rice continues to be the 
key staple crop consumed in Myanmar.  However, rice lacks nutritional value in terms of the minerals and vitamins typically 
found in a meal with dietary diversity.  A 195-gram serving of long grain cooked brown rice provides 11% of the 
recommended daily calorie value and provides no vitamin A, C or D intake, has only 5% of recommended daily iron value, 
2% of daily calcium and no vitamin B12 value10.  In addition, sufficient knowledge on dietary intake is lacking, especially 
among the rural population.  One way to tackle this challenge is to promote agricultural diversification and increase the 
knowledge of rural households about dietary diversity and importance for improved health outcomes, and productivity. 
 
15. Despite the significant sector challenges, Myanmar’s agriculture has ample potential for growth and rural 
poverty reduction.  Myanmar has abundant natural resources, youthful workforce, and diverse faming systems.  Myanmar 
is the world’s second largest exporter of beans and pulses (after Canada) and the largest exporter in the ASEAN region.  
For example, in 2014, the export earnings from beans and pulses was $835 million (exported to India, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, China, and UAE) which is higher than the export value of rice valued at $630 million during the same year.  In 
addition, urbanization and income growth amongst segments of the population are translating into changing dietary 
preferences and food spending patterns.  All these developments are expected to accelerate and expose enormous 
opportunities for farmers, and private sector across all segments of the value chain, and overall sectoral growth. 
 
16. Leveraging agriculture for sector growth and rural poverty reduction is a top government priority, and this is 
recognized in the 2017 Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).  The ADS accept limitations of past approaches to ensure 
food security for promoting agricultural transformation and rural poverty reduction.  The strategy identified three priority 
areas requiring support: (i) Governance; (ii) Productivity; and (iii) Market Linkages and Competitiveness.   
 
17. The 2018 Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (MSDP) recognized the agriculture sector challenges and 
proposed action plans.  The MSDP recognizes the high dependence of Myanmar’s economy on agriculture and its 
significance for poverty reduction, as noted under “Pillar 2: Prosperity & Partnership”. Under this Pillar, “Strategy 3.1: 
Creating a diverse and productive economy with rural development and agriculture as the foundation” stresses on 
addressing Myanmar’s low productivity to support value chain development, increase private sector participation and 
eventually boost agricultural competitiveness.  
 

                                            
10 “Crop Diversification and Nutrition”. 2014. Partners.  



Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The proposed project is aligned to the 2015-2017 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the 
two years extended partnership framework. Rural poverty reduction is outlined as a focus area with several objectives, 
including increased productivity in farming and agribusiness, and addressing critical infrastructure and service gaps for the 
rural poor.  The extended CPF continues its support for rural poverty reduction through rural growth. 
 
19. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the identified pathways for poverty reduction as outlined in 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).  The SCD identified improvements in agricultural productivity as necessary for 
poverty reduction and as an opportunity for short term gains.  The SCD recognizes the immense potential for 
improvement in Myanmar by addressing yield gaps, diversification, and value-addition. 

 
20. The proposed project is also aligned with the World Bank’s Twin Goals.  The proposed project activities are 
intended to increase the income of the rural poor and generate shared prosperity by building the capacity and knowledge 
of farmers to undertake enhanced farming practices that increases the resilience of their diversified farming systems as 
well as increase their agricultural competitiveness.   

 
21. This proposed project concept has benefited substantially from ongoing and completed analytical and 
investment activities.  The experience from the ongoing Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP) in project 
management and implementation (fiduciary aspects), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be used 
extensively for the proposed NAFSP.  Successful instruments of the ADSP such as Project Working committees (PWCs) 
that meets bi-monthly to improve collaboration and monitoring across participating departments and divisions and 
implementation through existing MOALI decentralized bodies such as Agricultural Consultative Committees (ACCs) at 
district and village track levels will be applied to this project.   

 
22. Insights on the status of Myanmar’s agriculture sector performance were drawn from two recent completely 

analytical activities.  The first study is “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”. This was funded by LIFT 

(Livelihood and Food Security Trust Fund) to address existing agriculture data constraints using a 2013/2014 Myanmar 

Agricultural Survey of 1,728 farm households in four regions/states across three Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs) in 

Myanmar: (i) Ayeyarwady and Bago (Delta AEZ), Sagaing (Dry AEZ), and Shan (Hills and Mountains AEZ).  The study did 

not cover the Coastal AEZ.  The survey covers crops produced during two main seasons i.e., monsoon and dry seasons. A 

follow-up survey is currently ongoing to assess changes in farming practices since the 2013/2014 survey.  The second 

study this concept note benefited from is the “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”.  Several insights on the 

status of Myanmar’s food system were highlighted during the recent “Workshop on Modern Food Systems in Myanmar” 

(February 2018).  The workshop discussions noted the ongoing challenges and opportunities for the development of 

Myanmar’s food systems, and these were captured in this concept note.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
23. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 
 


Key Results (From PCN) 
 
24. The key results of the proposed project are: 

 
i. Increase in production volume and yields of selected commodities 

ii. Change in agricultural land productivity of targeted farmers supported by the project (percentage) 
iii. Increase in sales of farm produce as a share of production among targeted farmers supported by the project 

(percentage, disaggregated by gender male- and FHHs) 
iv. Increase in efficiency of processing facilities supported by the project (percentage) 
v. Increase in linkages between producers and buyers 

vi. Increase in dietary composition of targeted households (percentage, disaggregated by gender) 
 

 
25. The key project beneficiaries are: (i) smallholders in four agro-ecological zones (Dry, Delta, Hills and Mountains, 

and Coastal); (ii) extension workers; (iii) agricultural researchers; (iv) buyers for value chain development; (v) MOALI 

departments and units participating in the project. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
1. Once the priority agro-ecological zones and high value / potential commodities and value chains are determined, 
the proposed project will adopt the “Theory of Change” and “Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) for Agricultural 
Value-Chains” frameworks for the identification and selection of project activities within each component and 
subcomponents.   
 
2. The proposed project areas and interventions will be made with close consideration provided to the following: (i) 
promotion of improved nutritional outcomes; (ii) inclusiveness of minorities and other marginalized groups; and iii) 
implementation in conflict and non-conflict areas.   

 
3. The proposed project is envisaged to have the following three components (with interventions tailored to the 
specific context of the selected commodities / value chains): 

 
4. Component 1: Development of Value Chains (US$ 20 million) – The objective of this component will be to support 
mechanisms by which public sector services are improved in collaboration with the private sector where opportunities 
exist to promote the development of selected agricultural commodity value chains, innovative modalities to better link 
farmers to markets, and improvements in the enabling environment for agro-enterprise.  This component will explore 
opportunities (including pilots) for private sector engagement on capacity strengthening to add value for key commodities, 
provision of equipment and infrastructure using out-grower schemes, and matching funds for farmer organizations and 
commodity specific associations.  This component will also include improvements in the enabling regulatory / legal 
environment for agro-enterprise (support to farm inputs and products) including food quality and food safety.  The 
infrastructure investment needs based on business plans and cost sharing mechanisms may include, (i) product collection 
centers, (ii) drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, (iv) micro irrigation; (v) improved information technology 
service facilities, (vi) cold chain facilities, and (vii) facilitating a conducive policy environment, among others. 

 
5. Component 2: On-farm Agricultural Investment Support (US$74 million) – This component has two sub-
components: (i) On-farm Infrastructure Investments (US$54 million) and (ii) Agricultural Support Services (US$20 million).  



The objective of the first sub-component is to improve the production volume of selected commodities and crop 
diversification by providing support for infrastructure investments in priority farming systems.  The activities may include 
upgrading/constructing of critical infrastructure for increased productivity, crop diversification and/or competitiveness 
such as in existing and new research/ experimental stations, seed multiplication farms, laboratory buildings and 
equipment, border post quarantine and testing service centers; irrigation systems on-farm/ downstream; and 
decentralized training centers / information centers.  Capacity building related to optimizing infrastructure investments 
and operation and maintenance will also be included.  This sub-component will prioritize infrastructure investments in 
high-value commodities and areas where the level of engagement of the private sector is low or nonexistent.  The 
objective of the second sub-component is to ensure and enhance the provision of key public agricultural services such as 
agricultural research and innovation, extension services, institutional development and farmer training.  This component 
will provide capacity building and policy support to the national agriculture research and extension system with the aim 
to improve service delivery in the agriculture sector.  This component will also focus on services related to on-farm 
management practices which will include the adoption of climate smart production practices, crop diversification, and 
integration of nutritional and gender-sensitive activities. 
 
6. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million) - The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
project management.  This component will support carrying out of the day-to-day project management activities, including 
project administration and implementation, procurement, financial management and audit, social and environmental 
safeguards (including peace and inclusion filters, marginalized/vulnerable population groups, gender etc.), and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E). 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
At concept stage, location for project interventions have not been determined.  
 
Myanmar is characterized by its central lowlands along the Ayeyarwady river, which flows from north to south through 

the Central Burma Basin and ends in a wide delta. These areas are its well-established agricultural production areas, 
which the current Agricultural Development Support Project (ADSP) (P147626) supports. The Central Valley Region is 
bordered by steep, rugged highlands in the north, the Arakan Mountains in the west and the Shan Hills, Karen Hills and 
Tenasserim Hills to the east. As a result, physical characteristics vary significantly across the country, as well as ethnic, 
social and cultural characteristics. 
 
Once project locations are identified, further information will be provided. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Under the current ADSP project, the project management has hired one environmental and one social safeguards 

consultant, who have the skills and experience to manage the environmental and social risks of the project. The project 
management unit overall has been gaining knowledge and experience on World Bank safeguards policies and their 
implementation. However, without the consultants, the project management unit does not have dedicated staff who has 
backgrounds and experience in environmental and social risk management. As a part of the project’s environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) preparation, a capacity need assessment will be conducted to identify areas for 
improvement and measures to increased capacities. 




 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project will focus on activities that (i) 
improve farm management and value chain 
development which include upgrading testing 
laboratories and upgrading/building post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities; (ii) strengthening 
capacities of agricultural extension officers and 
researchers; (iii) improve farm management which 
includes support of seed multiplication and 
procurement and distribution of seeds and seedlings 
as well as supply of biological control; and (iv) ensure 
effective project management. 
 
Under Component 1, the proposed project will fund 
specific investments on infrastructure for improved 
farm management such as (i) research, ((ii) seed farms, 
(iii) national service laboratories, (iv) off-site and on-
site service and testing laboratories and centers, (v) 
border post quarantine and testing centers, and (vi) 
training centers and other high priority infrastructure 
to support improved farm management in selected 
agro-ecological zones.  
 
The project will also fund infrastructure for value chain 
development such as (i) product collection centers, (ii) 
drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, 
(iv) improved information technology service facilities 
and (v) cold chain facilities intended to support 
downstream agricultural value chain development. 
 
Main potential environmental impacts are related to 
construction activities, maintenance and operation of 
the post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities (e.g. 
hygiene, reliable and adequate water and power 
supply). In regards to seed farms, waste management 
on the use of polythene plant bags for 
seedlings/nursery will be the main issue.  

Main potential social risks are related to land 
acquisition, contested land ownership and land 
conflict, and potential exclusion of ethnic minorities, 
landless farmers, women-headed households or other 
vulnerable groups. Any social assessment conducted 
during preparation or implementation will cover these 
social risks.  
 
Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined; therefore an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The 
Framework will include the following: 
 
1. Guidance for screening of subprojects, 
ensuring that relevant safeguard policies (natural 
habitats, forests, and projects in disputed areas) are 
adequately addressed.  
 
2. Assessment of environmental and social 
impacts of various activities related to Component 1 
and Component 3. Component 2 of the proposed 
project will focus on capacity building. The component 
will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards 
specialists into TA’s Terms of References to ensure 
safeguards aspects are mainstreamed. 
 
3. Details on the type, level and depth of 
environmental and social impact assessments 
(SAs/EMPs/SOPs/ECoPs) required for each of the 
investments/activities. 
 
4. Environment Health and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines for reference as a generic environmental 
management plan, particularly for construction 
related activities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), particularly on the following issues: 
construction related activities, maintenance and 
operation (hygiene, reliable and adequate water and 
power supply) issues related to the post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities (Component 1), and 
waste management on the use of polythene plant 
bags for seedlings/nursery as well as implication of the 


supply of biological control as part of the integrated 
pest and disease management (Component 3). 
 
Overall, the proposed project is expected to deliver a 
number of environmental benefits, such as improved 
soil and water management practices considering the 
agro-ecological context of the project intervention 
area. The project will also contribute to an integrated 
pest and disease management through the adoption 
of sustainable practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms.  
 
Considering the type of investments and activities, 
scale of the proposed project, as well as the nature 
and magnitude of its potential impacts, an 
environmental Category B operation is proposed. 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered to ensure that any affected 
natural habitats are adequately protected, because 
some of the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas. The proposed project’s ESMF will 
screen out and exclude any subprojects that would 
involve clearing of new land for agriculture. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a precaution, because 
pesticide use is a necessity in agricultural activities in 
the region. The ESMF will promote Integrated Pest 
Management as standard practice. A screening 
mechanism will be included in the ESMF to determine 
if there are any sub-projects or activities with 
significant pest management issues; if so, then a 
separate Pest Management Plan will be required to 
ensure that these materials are well managed for 
those subprojects and/or activities. 
 
Under Component 3, the proposed project will fund an 
integrated pest and disease management which will 
support the adoption of sustainable pest and disease 
management practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms. The ESMF will provide 

more detailed information on the application of this 
method. 
 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered to ensure that any “chance 
finds” or other physical cultural resources during 
excavation or other earth-moving activities are 
adequately protected. Project’s ESMF will consist of a 
chance find procedure which requires that should any 
areas of potential cultural importance or artefacts be 
identified, works should stop and the government 
related agencies (to be identified at appraisal stage) 
should be contacted. No work should continue until 
approval has been sought from these agencies. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse 
countries in Asia, and the project will likely fund sub-
projects where ethnic minorities are present. Both 
under Component 1 (rehabilitation and construction 
of infrastructure) and Component 2 (formation of 
farmer groups), there may be risks that ethnic 
minorities do not have equal and culturally 
appropriate access to benefits, and may not be 
adequately consulted in decision making. 
 
Since project sites are not known at this time, MoA 
will prepare an IPPF as part of the ESMF in order to 
ensure that in sub-projects are screened for ethnic 
minorities, and sub-project areas where ethnic 
minorities are present, MoE will conduct a social 
assessment and ensure that free, prior and informed 
consultations are held to reach broad community 
support. If target project locations are identified 
during preparation, a social assessment will be 
prepared by appraisal, and free, prior and informed 
consultations will be held. If locations and location-
specific activities are not identified during preparation 
and this is left to project implementation, the social 
assessments under the current ADSP project will be 
combined and updated as an assessment of social risks 
in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project 
activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Rehabilitation and construction of test laboratories, 
post-harvest storage units and cold chain facilities are 
not expected to result in significant land acquisition 
impacts, especially since siting should be flexible for 

construction of new facilities. The impacts should be 
moderate and manageable. 
 
Since siting of sub-projects is not known at this time, 
MoA will prepare a RPF in order to ensure that sub-
projects are screened for land acquisition, and 
appropriate plans are prepared in cases where land 
acquisition is necessary. The RPF will also include 
protocols for voluntary land donation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project will not finance construction of new dams, 
however, it is yet to be determined during project 
preparation whether it will include repairs / 
maintenance / rehabilitation  of existing dams in which 
case the dam safety measures would be applied. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined. ESMF will cover the provision of OP/BP 
7.50 should project preparation discussions determine 
that the locations or activities subject to the policy are 
within the international waterway. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any projects in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 10, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
MoALI- Department of Agriculture will prepare an ESMF, including a pest management plan, IPPF and RPF, before 

appraisal. If target project locations are identified during preparation, a social assessment will be prepared by appraisal, 
and free, prior and informed consultations will be held. If locations and location-specific activities are not identified 
during preparation and this is left to project implementation, the social assessments under the current ADSP project will 
be combined and updated as an assessment of social risks in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project activities. 
These will be disclosed and consulted on after being cleared by the Bank. These instruments will be informed by the 
documentation and implementation experience of the on-going Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP). 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 1 of 25  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC24140 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cameroon P166072  Valorization of 
Investments in the 
Valley of the Benue 
(P166072) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Sep 16, 2019 Dec 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing MINEPAT MEADEN  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To contribute to the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan by improving irrigation services and sustaining climate 
resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 200.00 

          IDA Credit 200.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 


A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 

 
Regional Context  

The Niger Basin, located in West and Central Africa, is one of the major transboundary basins in Africa. Its 
1.5 million km2 active hydrographic basin spans over the territory of nine countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Chad, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria. Its population of 130 million inhabitants is 
growing rapidly, expected to reach 180 million people by 2025. Except for Nigeria, most of the population in 
the basin is rural and depends on agriculture, animal husbandry or fishing for its livelihood. 
 
The value of the Niger River System resides in its contribution to water, food, energy, and job security, to 
transport and to biodiversity. For thousands of years, the river, its tributaries and connected lakes and 
wetlands have supported local populations with diverse water-dependent livelihoods such as flood-recession 
agriculture, cattle grazing and drinking, fishing and hunting. In the Niger Basin Countries, agriculture (including 
farming, livestock husbandry and fisheries) contributes 20 to 50 per cent of GDP and roughly two-third of the 
population depends on it for its livelihood. Moreover, those mostly family fishing and agro-pastoral systems 
are labor intensive and generate significant indirect employments (processing, trade and crafts). In a region 
with a structural deficit in food production and increasing temperature and rainfall variability and uncertainty, 
the river, its tributaries and connected groundwater resources are key to increase agricultural productivity and 
resilience to climate change. In addition, the river system is important for the energy security of the region, 
with an installed, partially integrated, hydro-power capacity of 2,000MW1. Finally, the Niger hydro-system 
sustains some of the most significant biodiversity areas in the World, notably the Inner2 and Maritime Deltas 
in Mali and Nigeria respectively, both Ramsar sites. 
 
Yet the Niger hydro-system and the population, economies and biodiversity relying on it are vulnerable to 
several climate and water-related shocks and stresses, many of them transboundary in nature. Managing 
competing water demands, notably between upstream and downstream users and between different sectoral 
will be one of the basin’s main development challenges in the coming decades as intensifying water use, while 
necessary, will not be without impacts. Notably, it will be important to strike a balance between the regulation 
of river flows (i.e. reservoirs) and increased water withdrawals for irrigation, hydropower and navigation, as is 
the case of the Upper Niger, Medium Niger and the Benue (i.e. Chad, Cameroon and Nigeria) and the 
preservation of the Maritime Delta ecosystem (i.e. biodiversity and ecological services: fishing) in Nigeria. 

                                            
1 World Bank, 2006: Water Resources Management & Development Opportunities in the Niger River Basin. Policy Note. Economic 
and Sector Work. Washington, DC: World Bank. Nigeria is exporting electricity to Niger and Benin in the Niger Basin. 
2 During the rainy season, the Inner Delta forms a large flood plain of 20,000 to 30,000 km2, facilitating the cultivation of rive, cotton 
and wheat as well as cattle herding and fishing. The size of the flooded area is subject to strong annual variations, depending on the 
discharge in the Upper Basin.  

Priority should therefore be given to increasing the performance of existing infrastructure; 
reducing/postponing the need to build new dams; as well as strengthening the Niger Basin authority (NBA)’s 
capacity in its water allocation, planning and coordination of transboundary projects function.  
 
In this context, the Government of Cameroon has made a request to the Niger Basin Authority to incorporate 
the Lagdo dam into the Niger Basin Master Plan. The WB is currently supporting the master plan through a 
Niger Basin regional program using the Series of Project (SOP) instrument. Phase 1 (Building Climate Resilience 
in the Niger Basin, P161262) objective is to strengthen the Niger Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, 
transboundary water resources management, while subsequent phases/projects, including the proposed 
operation, would be for country-level investments. Within the master plan integration, the development of 
irrigation from the Lagdo dam is indicated for Cameroun.  

Summary of regional potential water issues, per section of the Niger basin and country 

Section of the Niger Basin / countries Main transboundary issues 

Cameroon, Lower Niger and Benue (Chad, 
Nigeria)  

- Flood risk in Cameroon and Nigeria 
- Land degradation in Cameroon and Chad, 

contributing to sedimentation in 
Cameroon and Nigeria 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Nigeria (i.e. Kainji and 
Jebba) and Cameroon (i.e. Lagdo) 

-  

Inner Delta (Mali): Wetland of international 
significance (RAMSAR), providing fish, 
pasture land and flood-recession agriculture 
for more than 2 million people 
 

- Vulnerable to a reduction of annual flood 
and overall yearly inflows, that could result 
from an increase in water withdrawals 
from irrigation (i.e. “offices”); river flow 
regulation from future dams (i.e. Fomi) 
or/and climate change 

Middle Niger (Mali, Niger, Benin, Burkina 
Faso) 

- Flooding particularly in Niger and Benin 
- Erosion and Sedimentation in all countries 
- Invasive Species (Water Jacinth) 

Upper Niger (Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali) - Moderate degradation of land and forest 
cover (Guinea and Ivory Coast) 

- Contamination from informal mining 
(Guinea, Mali and Ivory Coast) 

- Low water productivity in the “Offices” of 
Mali, largest water user in the basin 

- Sub-optimal power generation from 
existing dams in Mali 

Maritime Delta (Nigeria): wetland of 
international significance, source of livelihood 
to about 1 million fishermen 

- Vulnerability to increase water 
withdrawals and regulation from upstream 
countries 

- Invasive Species (Typha, Water Jacinth) 


The proposed project is therefore proposed as the second of a Series of Projects under the Regional 
Program. Through in country investments it will contribute to the implementation of targeted, interventions 
for transboundary, integrated water resource management. 
Country Context 

 

A lower middle income country of about 24 million people, Cameroon is strategically located on the gulf of 
Guinea. It is naturally well placed to play the role of a regional hub. With its 600 kilometer coastline, Cameroon 
borders with six Central Africa countries3 which, with the exception of Nigeria, are members of the Economic 
and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC by its French acronym). Its regional port of Douala serves 
as an entry point to two strategic road corridors to Bangui and Ndjamena. Cameroon’s Far North region shares 
with Chad, Niger and Nigeria access to Lake Chad, a basin traditionally important for livelihood in the region, 
but also an area of competition for scarce resources including between farmers and pastoralists. Cameroon is 
endowed with ample arable land, water, energy, and oil and mineral resources.  
 
With a per capita Gross Domestic Product of US$1,374 (current prices) in 2017, the economy is largely driven 
by its primary sector, agriculture and mineral resources, and benefits from its location in the Congo Basin, the 
world’s second largest tropical forest zone, which provides an exceptional ecological diversity. The country’s 
mineral wealth includes deposits of oil, natural gas, gold, iron, manganese and uranium. Crude petroleum is an 
important resource accounting for 10 percent of GDP and being the main export product by value. Timber is the 
second largest export product. Imports are dominated by manufactured goods and come mainly from Europe. 
 
Despite having one of the most diversified economies in the CEMAC region, Cameroon’s economic activity 
slowed in 2016. Growth has dipped to 3.7 percent by the end of 2017, compared to 4.4 percent in 2016. This 
outcome is due to slower growth in oil production (+3 percent in 2016 against 37 percent in 2015) resulting from 
the maturity of the main oil fields, and to the avian flu epidemic that has damaged the local poultry industry, 
particularly in the West, which accounts for 80 percent of production. However, continued implementation of 
the Government’s ambitious infrastructure plan and interventions to boost the agriculture and forestry sectors 
have significantly contributed to sustained strong growth in public works and construction and services. Inflation 
rose to 1.6 percent at the end of June 2016, largely based on the increased tax rate on alcohol (7.4 percent) and 
tobacco in the 2015 budget law, and the 4.9 percent increase in prices for services, restaurants, and hotels. 
 
Cameroon’s ruling party, the Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM), has long dominated the 
country’s political landscape and currently occupies 148 of the 180 seats in the National Assembly and 81 of 
the 100 seats in the Senate, which was created in 2013.  Presidential elections are scheduled for 2018.  While 
Cameroon has enjoyed peace for many decades in spite of its highly diverse population, it now faces an 
increasingly challenging situation in its northern regions, where Boko Haram is waging a low intensity war.  This 
has resulted in high levels of insecurity and violence, involving 2,276 fatalities in 2014-2015 alone, loss of 
livestock, and risks associated with normal economic activities such as farming. Cameroon’s northern regions 
are facing a humanitarian and economic challenge: The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) estimated the number of food insecure people in the northern regions to have increased from one 

million in 2014 to 2.4 million in August 2016, including 253,000 children suffering from severe or moderate acute 
malnutrition. The year 2017 has also been marked by high tensions in the northwest and southwest Anglophone 
regions, which feel marginalized by the rest of the country. 
 
The Government of Cameroon (GoC) long-term vision, Cameroon Vision 2035, is of an emerging, democratic 
and united country in diversity. To operationalize this Vision, the Government adopted a Growth and 
Employment Strategy (DSCE –Document de Stratégie pour la Croissance et l’Emploi) in 2009 and defined specific 
objectives to be achieved by 2020, like to reduce poverty by less than 29 percent and by 10 percent in 2035. 
The GoC has further adopted the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It also endorsed 
the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and published 
Cameroon’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) setting out its contribution to climate change mitigation 
and priorities for adaptation.  
 
The DSCE identifies inadequate infrastructure and an unfavorable business environment as the main factors 
impeding economic growth and employment creation. The agriculture sector, which currently employs about 
70 percent of the active population in Cameroon (primarily in the informal sector), is regarded as the engine for 
economic growth and job creation if it can be transformed from traditional farming to diversified and 
commercially viable farming (see below). The DSCE recognizes the need for agricultural diversification, increased 
productivity, and large-scale public investment projects in the sector. In fact, notwithstanding Cameroon’s 
abundance of natural assets and tremendous climatic and land potential, the primary sector’s contribution to 
growth is very limited, about one percentage point of GDP p.a., and is dominated by food crops grown by 
smallholder farmers.  
 
As population growth outpaces poverty reduction, the number of poor increased between 2007 and 2014 by 
12 percent to 8.1 million people, with important regional disparities. The northern regions exhibit by far the 
highest poverty rates in Cameroon, with an estimated 56 percent of the poor living in the North and Far North 
regions alone. In these two northern regions poverty and inequality levels have steadily increased over time 
relative to the rest of the country where poverty and inequality have declined. They are subject to multiple 
poverty traps, which are documented extensively in the World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, Report 
103098-CM)4, including low agriculture productivity, increasing vulnerability to climate change, poor 
infrastructure, and limited access to health and education services.  
 
Poverty incidence is correlated with agro-ecological zones. The northern regions of Cameroon, i.e., the four 
poorest regions (the Far-North, the North, the North-West and the Adamawa), belong to three agro-ecological 
zones – the Sudano-Sahelian, the Western Highlands, and the Guinea Savannah zones which together account 
for 80 percent of all poor (see figure below). In the largely arid Sudano-Sahelian zone, comprising the Far North 
and North regions, agricultural output (millet, maize, peanuts, and cotton) depends heavily on rainfall. Animal 
production is also vulnerable to drought. In this zone 72 percent of the population or 56 percent of all poor live 
below the poverty threshold. In the Western Highlands, comprising the North-West and West regions, there is 
a cattle and coffee based system with corn, (coco) yams, potatoes, and peanuts as the main food crops. Thirty-
nine percent of the population in this agro-ecological zone (but as much as 55 percent in the North-West region) 



live below the poverty threshold representing 18 percent of all poor. Twenty percent of the poor live in the 
remaining two agro-ecological zones. 
 
 
Figure 1: Cameroon: incidence of poverty by agro-ecological zone  

Social and economic gaps between 
regions are likely to worsen as a result of 
climate change. The Sudano-Sahelian area 
(North and Extreme North) is the most 
environmentally fragile zone in Cameroon. 
It is particularly exposed to drought and 
increased temperatures with serious 
implications for the majority of inhabitants 
who depend on agriculture and livestock 
for their livelihoods. Regional climate 
change projections suggest that an overall 
decrease in the quantity of the water 
available could exacerbate water 
shortages in many rural areas of northern 
Cameroon. The quality of water will also be 
affected. An increase in temperatures and 
greater dryness are likely to result in net 

capillary movement and the salinization of both water and soils. Rice, one of Cameroon's main food imports, 
grown in the north by both traditional and modern methods, will particularly be affected, but also other food 
crops such as millet, sorghum and maize.  
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture remains the backbone of Cameroon's economy, employing 70 percent of its workforce, while 
providing 42 percent of its GDP and 30 percent of its export revenue. Blessed with fertile land and regularly 
abundant rainfall in most regions, Cameroon produces a variety of agricultural commodities both for export and 
for domestic consumption. Coffee and cocoa are grown in central and southern regions, bananas in 
southwestern areas, and cotton in several northern provinces. In addition to export commodities, Cameroonian 
farmers produce numerous subsistence crops for family consumption. Principal food crops include millet, 
sorghum, peanuts, plantains, sweet potatoes, and manioc. Animal husbandry is practiced throughout the 
country and is particularly important in northern provinces. The great majority of Cameroonian farmers are 
small-holders, generally obtaining low yields from small plots of land using traditional methods: handheld hoes 
and animals for draught power. Cash crop production is also done by small holders. Food crops contribute 64 
percent to agricultural GDP, followed by livestock (13 percent), forestry (9 percent), industrial and export crops 
(8 percent), and fisheries (6 percent). About 54 percent of all households have at least one member who owns 
a crop field of about 2.4 hectares (ha) as documented in the DSCE.  
 

Yet, a series of constraints have led Cameroon’s agriculture sector to be characterized by low productivity 
and low-production subsistence farming. Declining soil fertility, limited use of fertilizer, low adoption of high 
yielding varieties and improved farming techniques are among the core reasons for constrained yields. 
Techniques and approaches to address these constraints exist, and Cameroon is blessed with a multitude of 
high quality agricultural research institutions. Nevertheless, the adoption of improved practices remains limited, 
as no functional extension system is in place, as evidenced by the size of the yield gaps. The main constraints 
are: (i) Limited access to inputs (less than 7 kg/ha of fertilizers are used; the use of improved seeds is lower than 
30 percent); (ii) Very limited mechanization: Cameroon has a ratio of 0.1 tractor/1,000 ha and a mechanization 
ratio of only 0.1; (iii) Weak institutional capacity of Producer Organizatons (POs) associated with limited 
storage/processing capacity and marketing infrastructure; (iv) Lack of storage and marketing infrastructure, 
aggravated by the isolation of agricultural production areas because of the poor quality of rural roads, which 
comprise 80 percent of the national network (only 5.2 percent or 4,200 out of 81,000 km are in good condition); 
(vi) Limited access to credit/rural finance: POs and SMAEs have limited access to credit/ rural finance because 
of their inability to present viable projects for financing, the (perceived) high cost of financing, and the absence 
of specific financial services/instruments for their segment; and (vii) The size of traditional family farm 
enterprises, of which 63 percent are too small (less than 2 ha) to profit from non intensive agriculture.  
 
Meanwhile costly and poorly targeted subsidies do not benefit the poorest, distort the market and increase 
food dependency. In an effort to mitigate the negative effects of the 2008 rise in food and fuel prices, the 
Government launched a universal subsidy program (food and fuel), which by 2011 was costing the Government 
around 2.7 percent of GDP. In 2013 more than US$100 million was spent to subsidize fish, wheat and rice alone. 
These subsidies benefit the urban middle and upper class and only very small amounts (between 2 percent and 
27 percent depending on the food item) benefit the poorest 40 percent. These persistent subsidies and the 
attempts to stabilize the market through interventions act as a disincentive for local food production and not 
only aggravate rural poverty, they also sustain the country’s dependency on food imports. In addition, as 
Cameroon is well placed to serve a sub-region that has high purchasing power and is structurally deficient in 
food, distortionary policies impact negatively on trade competitiveness. 
 
Agriculture, livestock management and agro-forestry are not only sectors in which the majority of the poor 
are engaged, they are also sectors of competitive advantage. This is based on three observations. The first is 
that Cameroon has factor endowments rich in unskilled and semi-skilled labor and natural resources. Cameroon 
has a unique bio-diversity and is the custodian of global public goods such as the rainforest in the Congo Basin. 
Only 29 percent of arable land is cultivated, and below 3 percent of irrigable land is irrigated. It thus has a 
comparative advantage in primary products, agriculture, environment and mining. The second is that high 
indirect costs on doing business are less limiting on agriculture, pastoralism and agro-industry than they are on 
more sophisticated manufacturing or high-tech, tradeable services. The third is that Cameroon does not meet 
the internal nor regional demand for cereals, meat and animal products and the agricultural trade balance is 
negative. 
 
Improving the functioning of value chains for staple food crops is particularly important for poverty reduction. 
Poor households spend a larger share of their budget on food than non-poor households do. Moreover 
households in the two poorest wealth quintiles ‘specialize’ in the cultivation of food crops like maize, millet, 


     

sorghum, yams, banana, cassava, and beans. These crops are also the staple foods for the poorest households, 
implying that improvements in production and commercialization for these crops would have the double benefit 
of increasing farm incomes and reducing food prices for the urban poor who rely on food purchases. Many rural 
poor will benefit from lower food prices as many are net food purchasers. Good results are already being 
achieved by linking farmer cooperatives producing millet and sorghum with large industrial enterprises like 
Guiness. The value chain for milk similarly offers great opportunities, as does the value chain for poultry, meat, 
eggs or chickenfeed. 
 
The presence of significant yield gaps for the most popular crops suggests scope for productivity increases. 
Assessing actual crop yields against maximum attainable levels offers important insights into the performance 
of agriculture and the potential for yield growth and expected productivity gains from agricultural investments 
and policies, including land and water resources management. The yield gap for Cameroon is substantial. The 
largest differences are for sweet potato, rice and cassava, with yield gaps of 78, 75 and 73 percent. Sorghum, 
maize and potatoes also have sizeable yield gaps of respectively 63, 67 and 64 percent.5 
 
In a context of improved yields, there is significant potential for the (domestic and regional) markets to absorb 
increased food production. Already the demand for food in Cameroon exceeds supply as evidenced by the large 
amount of food that is imported. Also the high levels of chronic malnutrition –particularly in the north of the 
country, point in the direction of an unmet demand for food. Moreover, there is a large demand for food in the 
region. Nigeria is a huge market and rice, maize and onions already find their way to markets in Nigeria, but also 
in Gabon and the Democratic Republic of Congo. But even domestically the demand for food will rise rapidly 
due to an annual population growth rate of 2.8 percent and increased urbanization. However, the formation of 
a middle class will be accompanied by the demand for food products with a high income elasticity such as rice, 
milk and milk products, eggs and meat. 
 

On land issues, a main principle is lands belong to the State. The Government of Cameroon (GoC) has initiated 
a land reform process over 10 years ago and a draft land law is currently being reviewed at the presidency 
level. While the proposed law is not yet being shared outside the Government, preliminary analyses suggest 
that it does not contain any major innovations likely to address the dysfunctions of the land sector. It does not 
seem to be based on the definition of a fundamental land policy addressing issues across the various sectors 
(agricultural, pastoral, forestry, environmental, industrial, urban). Moreover, the proposed law barely seems to 
address the issue of recognition of customary land rights but rather there seems to be a desire to strengthen 
the role of the State in land ownership and the constitution of public land reserves. It is, however, questionable 
when the new land law would be adopted given the political sensitivity of land issues in a context of upcoming 
presidential elections in 2018 and increasing tensions and fragile situations in several regions of the country. 
 
Despite the many challenges it faces, the GoC is committed to increase investment in the agriculture sector 
for poverty reduction and economic growth. A growth strategy that focuses on products cultivated by the 
poorest has a greater likelihood of successful poverty reduction, and as the majority of the poor can be found 
in the rural areas of northern Cameroon, a poverty reducing growth strategy would focus on the value chain 
development of coarse grains (rice, maize, millet, and sorghum) but also livestock, beans and cotton, which is 

     

the main cash crop grown in the Northern regions. In this context, the GOC’s agriculture strategy is expressed 
in three key national strategy and planning documents: (i) «Vision 2035» envisages agricultural growth beyond 
5 percent by 20209; the DSCE foresees significant productivity increases in agriculture and livestock farming; (ii) 
the 2005 - 2009 Rural Development Strategy and its 2013 update (“Document de Stratégie de Développement 
du Secteur Rural,” - DSDSR) commit to a modernization of rural infrastructure and agricultural production and 
sustainable management of natural resources; and (iii) Cameroon has engaged in the African Union’s 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), and with CAADP support, Cameroon is 
currently finalizing its 2014-2020 National Agriculture Investment Program (“Plan National d’Investissement 
Agricole,” - PNIA11).  
 

Cameroon aims to articulate and implement a more robust public expenditure program to improve sector 
performance. This would necessitate an examination of the national budget level benefiting the sector, which 
currently remains below 5 percent of the total budget (compared with the CAADP target of 10 percent), as well 
as a review of the quality of expenditure planning, allocation, and implementation. To this effect, the agriculture 
sector ministries (MINADER and the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries, and Animal Production) with support from 
the Bank are currently finalizing an agriculture sector public expenditure review to identify bottlenecks, 
inefficiencies, and deviations from the policy goals. The review, which is expected to be completed by the 
effectiveness of the proposed project, will analyze growth of agriculture on a macroeconomic scale within the 
framework of a computable general equilibrium model. This model will analyze the role of relative prices, public 
expenditure, and exchange rates on the growth in the sector. This tool will also development partners to help 
decide how to increase the financial resources dedicated to agricultural development. 
 
Within this framework, the Government of Cameroon asked support from the World Bank to improve 
irrigation services and sustain climate resilient agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley, in the North 
of Cameroon. One of the poorest regions in the country, highly populated, and with a history of immigration 
pressure from the extreme North, the North region is within the Sudano-Sahelian Savanah agroecological zone. 
Of the five agroecological zones of Cameroon, the Sudano-Sahelian (North and Extreme North) is the one with 
the shortest rain-fed season (March to September, Figure 2 below).  
 

     

In this zone, the potential Evapotranspiration (ETP) is never fully satisfied by the amount of monthly rainfall, 
inducing a permanent deficit (figure 3 below). This translates into water stress and reduced photosynthesis and 
therefore yields. In this zone improved water storage, water harvesting, and irrigation are critical to improving 
farm production. Improved water management also enhances the ability to withstand climatic shocks and is 
commensurate with a strategy whereby the production of staples is promoted in rain-fed systems and 
production of high value cereals (e.g.  rice), horticultural cops, and industrial crops in irrigated systems. With an 
enormous untapped potential for irrigation (a 5,900 million m3 Lagdo reservoir) the Benué Valley if correctly 
developed will have a significant impact in improving the life of hundreds of thousands of people through 
economic growth, poverty reduction, social stabilization, and reduced vulnerability. 
 

Figure 3 Thornthwaite water budget: annual data at Maroua-Salack, (1970-1985) 

 
 

 

Different groups of poor people can be expected to benefit from increases in agricultural productivity in the 
Benué Valley. Poor farmers will benefit from higher incomes brought about by productivity gains while non-
farmers in rural areas benefit from spill-over gains. When increased agricultural productivity leads to increases 
in food production, lower food prices will benefit the urban poor and net food buyers in rural areas, often the 
poorest. This is not inconsequential. High transportation costs make food an imperfectly tradeable commodity. 
An important transmission mechanism from agricultural productivity to aggregate growth is through the price 
of food, as it allows sustaining lower labor costs in the rest of the economy. 
 
The proposed project may qualify for a high adaptation and mitigation co-benefits in the form of adoption of 
Climate Smart practices, reduction in irrigation energy use, reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation and agricultural management activities that improve carbon pools. Project activities proposed 
under components 1, 2 and 3 are included on the “List of activities eligible for classification as climate mitigation 
finance” in the 2016 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate Finance under category 4, sub-
     

category 4.1 and 4.2. In compliance to the corporate mandate included in the Environment Strategy endorsed 
by the board in 2012, a preliminary GHG assessment using conservative boundary values has been performed 
for this project using the Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT).  Preliminary results show that the project 
creates a total net carbon sequestration of 337,558 tCO2-eq. Watershed management provided the largest 
potential for mitigation co-benefits. An updated GHG assessment will be performed during the appraisal stage. 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

The project objective is fully consistent with the Cameroon Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2021 
to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Cameroon. The FY17-FY21 CPF succeeded the Cameroon 
Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-FY13, report number - 52997), which was extended until FY14 by the 
Progress and Learning Report considered by the Executive Directors in October 2012. The CPF draws on a 
comprehensive Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, report 103098-CM), completed during FY16, which 
identified constraints to achieving the World Bank’s Twin Goals of eliminating poverty and fostering shared 
prosperity in a socially and environmentally sustainable way. Despite more than a decade of economic growth, 
national poverty incidence has remained almost unchanged.  Poverty decreased slowly as a percentage of 
population, from 40.2 percent in 2001 to 37.5 percent in 2014, and its incidence declined in urban areas from 
17.9 percent to an estimated 8.9 percent during the same period.  In rural areas, on the other hand, the 
percentage of poor increased from 52.1 percent to 56.8 percent.  Even though urban poverty declined 
significantly in relative terms, the absolute number of urban poor declined only slightly, by 300,000, because 
the urban population increased by approximately 4.1 million since 2001. In rural areas, higher poverty incidence 
resulted in 1.1 million additional poor people. Overall, the absolute number of poor in Cameroon increased by 
approximately 800,000 since 2001. 

 
The CPF has concluded that in the short-term, the largest opportunity for increasing shared prosperity and 
reducing acute poverty in Cameroon is an improvement in rural livelihoods, largely based on agriculture.  Eighty-
five percent of all poor people live in the countryside. Of these a majority live in the Sudano-Sahelian areas of 
the North and the Far North regions. Cameroon has a strong potential to increase agriculture productivity. It 
has a comparative advantage in primary products based on a relative abundance of natural resources and 
unskilled and semi-skilled labor. There is also significant unmet internal demand for cereals, meat and animal 
products. The development of labor-intensive agro-industry could offer a path towards more diversified, 
complex and higher value forms of manufacturing. Key issues include low agricultural yields, limited 
infrastructure for transportation, delivery, and storage, as well as the need for improved irrigation and water 
harvesting to improve farm production in some areas.  
 
The proposed project addresses the key issues identified in the CPF and promotes natural resources and water 
management, irrigation, and agriculture under a participatory landscapes approach, with a specific focus on 
land tenure rights security.  Irrigation (as major investment component) will be expanded from reservoirs 
already developed on the Benue River which would provide safeguard against climate change impacts and 
increased occurrence of droughts. The supporting project components are aligned to development and 
dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient rainfed agriculture, enhanced market linkages 
for small and marginal farmers, and improved natural resource management in the upper catchment areas of 

the Benue River. Further the project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, particularly for high value crops, 
which significantly reduce water consumption. The proposed project would also improve the sustainability and 
reliability of rainfed agriculture and small-scale irrigated agriculture in the Benue River Valley downstream of 
the Lagdo dam with better flood protection features. Thus the proposed project will be closely aligned to the 
findings and recommendations contained in the CPF. 
 
Link with other existing projects. The proposed Project builds on previous work and results of the Flood 
Emergency Project (PULCI - P143940) for component 2 and 4, and will closely coordinate with the Agriculture 
Investment and Market Development Project (PIDMA - P143417) for component 3. PULCI, following previous 
work from PACA (P112635), is working to improve irrigation and flood protection in a sustainable manner for 
the riverine population of the Far-North. Furthermore, the Bank is currently undertaking a AAA for increasing 
climate smart agriculture in Northern Cameroon. In addition, the project will collaborate with the regional 
initiative Building Climate Resilience in the Niger Basin (P161262) whose objective is to strengthen the Niger 
Basin Authority’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water resources management, being the Benue valley 
part of the Niger basin.” 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
I. The Overall Series of Project Program  

  

The Program Development Objective is to strengthen NBA’s capacity for integrated, transboundary water 
resources management and support the implementation of the Regional Climate Resilience Investment Plan 
(CRIP).   
  
The program activities focus on two broad areas:   
  
Strengthening of ABN’s capacity for transboundary, integrated water resource management (WRM) investing 
in Planning and feasibility studies, Environmental Information System and associated decision making tools, 
Operationalization of the Water Charter, and Strengthening NBA’s operational capacity, dissemination of good 
practices and project implementation support; and  
  
Support of the implementation of the CRIP focusing on transboundary activities. Among the numerous activities 
planned in the CRIP two types of activities have been selected: activities aimed at improving the performance 
and safety of large, existing transboundary infrastructure (mostly for hydropower and irrigation) in order to 
postpone the need to develop further large dams and their potential damages on riparian countries and 
measures to manage transboundary contributions to flood and sedimentation.   
Among the potential activities are the following: (i) Improving the performance and safety of key existing 
hydropower dams, such as, for example, the Kainji and Jebba dams in Nigeria, the Sotuba and Selinge dam in 
Mali, and the Lagdo hydropower dam in Cameroon, with its interconnection to Chad; (ii) Improving water-use 
efficiency of the “Office du Niger” in Mali; and (iii) Addressing Niger River sedimentation and recurrent flooding 
in the “Moyen Niger” and “Benoué tributary” through water conservation measures in Burkina Faso, Cameroun 


and Benin among others.  
 
 

 
II.  Proposed Development Objective(s)  

  

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve irrigation services and sustain climate resilient 
agricultural productivity in the Benue River Valley located within the administrative region of North, in 
Cameroon.   
  
This would be achieved through sustainable management of the water resources generated in the Benué River 
catchment area and flowing to the reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo dam, as well as of the regulated river 
flows downstream of the dam for irrigated agriculture. In addition, flood mitigation and protection measures 
on the Benue River system downstream of the Lagdo dam will enable sustainable rain-fed agriculture in the river 
valley. Support to livelihoods in the Lagdo reservoir and improved feed availability for livestock due to increased 
production of crops would improve off farm rural incomes resulting in shared prosperity.   
  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  

a) Area provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services (in Has, Core Indicator); 
b) Increase in irrigated  area (hectares) under vegetables as well as cereal crops; 
c) Increase in climate resilient agricultural productivity (yield/ha) of various crops grown in the project 

areas; 
d) Number of farmers reached with agricultural assets or services.   

 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

1. Description 
 
Introduction/Background: The project area covers the Benue river valley located in North Cameroon 
Administrative Region, one of the poorest regions of the country. The Lagdo multipurpose dam was 
constructed on the Benue River over the years 1978-1982. At completion, the storage volume in the reservoir 
impounded behind the dam was about 7,700 million cubic meters. A hydropower plant was established with 
72 MW installed capacity and allowance was made for provision of water for irrigation of about 11,000 ha 
(about 6,000 ha along the right bank of the river and about 5,000 ha along the left bank of the river). The 
hydropower station has been operating since 1982 but the irrigation development did not take place as 
originally envisaged. About 800 ha were developed on the right bank in 1992. The reservoir storage volume 
has been impacted over the last 30 years by sedimentation and currently the storage volume available is 



 
The World Bank  
North Cameroon Agriculture and Water Smart Landscapes Project (P166072) 

 
 

  
Jan 28, 2018 Page 15 of 25  

     

estimated to be about 5900 million cubic meters based on bathymetric surveys completed in 2005. The project 
would support the sustainable management of the Benue watershed, the development of irrigated agriculture 
on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river as well as in the river valley below, and the 
improvement of agriculture practices in the valley, including land tenure right management. In accordance with 
World Bank OP 4.37, project financing would include aspects related to safe operation of the dam and 
appurtenances. The total project cost is expected to be about US$ 200 million for a duration of seven years. 
The project will have the following components. 
 

Component 1: Watershed Management (US$ 5M IDA, US$ 10M regional IDA, US$ 15M Total) 
 

The primary goal of this component is to reverse the process of degradation of the natural resource base and 
improve the productive potential of natural resources and incomes of the rural households in the watershed 
sustaining the Lagdo reservoir while improving the operation and safety of the dam. The secondary goal is to 
maintain the quality and quantity of water of the reservoir through sustainable operation and maintenance. It 
will finance watershed interventions, consulting services, technical assistance and equipment along the 
following.  
 

Watershed management: Prior to the construction of the dam and impoundment of the reservoir at Lagdo, the 
population farmed the reservoir area after the recession of flood flows each year. After the impoundment some 
of these farmers have moved to the periphery of the reservoir and have been cultivating there. Tillage of lands 
and cultivation induces soil erosion in these areas resulting in sediment deposition in the reservoir. In addition, 
the reservoir is an important source for fisheries development. Cutting of firewood to smoke the fish, a common 
practice in Cameroon, resulted in deforestation further contributing to erosion and sedimentation in the 
reservoir. This subcomponent will introduce sustainable practices to manage the watershed. It will mobilize 
community participation in watershed development and management aimed at integrating land-water use to 
reduce soil erosion, retain moisture and produce biomass, while enhancing incomes and livelihood options. 
Non-arable land development: interventions will be aimed at (i) ecological rehabilitation of the catchment by 
carrying out soil and water conservation measures through site specific treatment plans, and (ii) narrowing the 
gap between biomass production and consumption in degraded areas. Arable land development: This 
subcomponent will improve cropping systems through promoting adoption of new agronomic practices, and 
fisheries, crop diversification, water harvesting technologies and optimal use of natural sources. Effort for 
improving land tenure security as an incentive to use these new agronomic practices and technology will be 
included in this subcomponent. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate expertise in this regard and to 
implement the measures described above as appropriate. Funds would be provided to secure appropriate 
expertise in this regard and to implement the measures described above as appropriate. This subcomponent 
can be assigned Mitigation co-benefits as financed activities will lead to net reduction in GHG emissions. 
 
Component 2: Water Infrastructure rehabilitation, development and maintenance (US$ 45M IDA, US$ 90M 
regional IDA, US$ 135M Total) 
 
The goal of this component is to rehabilitate and develop water infrastructure that will ensure dam operation 
and safety downstream of Lagdo and allow irrigated agriculture in 11,000 ha, a potentially game changer for the 
rural economy of the North of Cameroon. It will finance studies, consulting services, works and equipment along 


     

the following three subcomponents. This component may qualify for both climate change adaptation and 
mitigation co-benefits . 
 
Subcomponent 2a:  Sustainable operation and maintenance of Lagdo Dam and Reservoir Complex: The Lagdo 
Reservoir impounded behind the Lagdo Dam provides water for power generation and irrigation of lands located 
immediately below the dam on both banks of the river, and is designed to provide flood modulation as well. The 
lake is also a resource for fisheries. Funds would be provided to improve the water inflow forecasts through 
provision of updated electronic meteorological equipment in the catchment and to improve the modeling 
capabilities of Eneo, the operator of the dam. (Eneo, the Energy Company of Cameroon, is responsible for power 
generation and distribution in the country but has also been given the overall responsibility of Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, flood releases, and safety of the dam).  The dam is owned by 
the Government of Cameroon (MEADEN) with Eneo operating under an umbrella contract for energy generation 
and distribution throughout the country with other assets as well.  Currently the dam is being inspected 
periodically by a national expert panel. Funds would be provided to set up an independent dam safety panel 
with specific Terms of Reference in accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World Bank. The Dam was 
built in early eighties. The international standards for design floods and flood evacuating mechanisms have 
changed substantially during the last four decades. The Hydrologic computations for the dam/reservoir complex 
would be revisited and if required the design floods would be revised on the basis of today’s standards. Hydraulic 
computations would also be revised to ensure flood handling mechanisms are adequate to meet current 
standards. Funds would be provided to carry out the required studies and analysis using reputed firms. Funds 
would be provided to make any structural modifications required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. Improved emergency preparedness plans would be prepared using up to date maps and technology for 
a flooding early warning system. This sub-component may qualify for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 
 
Subcomponent 2b: Irrigation infrastructure to utilize direct water releases available from the Reservoir 
(11,000ha) – Provision was made in the original design of the Lagdo Dam Complex to provide irrigation water 
to irrigate lands situated on both banks of the river immediately downstream of the river. Original designs 
allowed for gravity irrigation of about 6,000 ha on the right bank and about 5,000 ha on the left bank. However, 
only limited irrigation infrastructure was built along the right bank covering about 1,000 ha and no infrastructure 
including release offtake was built on the left bank. In order to utilize the water resource asset already provided 
for in the reservoir for agriculture development, funds would be provided to update the feasibility studies 
carried out earlier covering the irrigation areas on both banks and to prepare detailed designs, cost estimates 
and bid documents for the left bank infrastructure in its entirety. Notional cropping patterns will be developed 
during project preparation on the basis of soil suitability, climate factors and irrigability. Funds would be 
provided for the construction of all requisite infrastructure for the development of the 5,000 ha on the left bank 
including the offtake at the dam.  
 
On the right bank, infrastructure developed for the 1,000 ha requires rehabilitation and modernization.  Funds 
would be provided to update the feasibility studies carried out earlier for the right bank as well as detailed 
designs and cost estimates covering the total gravity command of 6,000 ha. Funds would be provided for 
rehabilitation/modernization of irrigation infrastructure covering 1,000 ha. On the left bank the GoC intends to 
have private-sector led commercial investors. Options of IFC supporting this investment are being considered 


and will be further developed at preparation. The project will propose some legal mechanism to improve land 
tenure right security for all the stakeholders involved in the irrigation schemes. Funds would be provided for 
the construction of primary irrigation infrastructure covering the remaining 5,000 ha on the right bank.  
 
Subcomponent 2c: Technical Assistance for Irrigation Management. This Subcomponent will address the 
daunting challenge of ensuring the long-term viability of the irrigation and drainage services delivered on the 
irrigation schemes.  The approach will be to implement a progressive management transfer to users’ regulated 
bodies in the form of WUAs and to autonomous professional operators, either public or private.  The approach 
will be first piloted in the right bank, which is the ‘first mover’, starting with the areas to be rehabilitated.  The 
investments under this Subcomponent would support the development of a detailed training strategy with 
associated learning materials to re-align existing WUAs and establish new ones to achieve a transformed 
institutional structure for effective water management.  
 
Component 3: Agriculture Production (US$ 40M, IDA) 
 
The fundamental needs of Cameroon to increase production and enhance productivity in the North (especially 
with irrigation and particularly of smallholders), reduce vulnerability, boost rural employment, and provide 
environmental services come in a context where agriculture is challenged by extreme weather, increased 
market risk, too-slow progress in raising rural incomes in some regions, and too-slow progress in improving 
nutrition, especially for women and infants. Agriculture is the main activity of the households (88%) of the area. 
Globally it is extensive agriculture with low production dominated by cereals (maize and sorgho), groundnut 
and cowpea as food-crops and cotton as cash-crop. Within the riverbanks, small plots of onions, tomatoes and 
other vegetables can be found. Social studies show an abundance of labor force. The markets are in Lagdo and 
Ngong, being also intermediaries that re-sell the primary products in Garoua and Ngaoundere. This component 
will focus on production, linking farmers to markets, and support services. It will finance grants, training, works, 
equipment, workshops and studies along the following sub-components. 
 
Subcomponent 3a: Climate Smart Agriculture – Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) is an approach for reorienting 
agricultural systems under the new realities of climate change: (i) sustainably increasing agricultural productivity 
to support equitable increases in incomes, food security and development; (ii) adapting and building resilience 
to climate change; and (iii) developing opportunities to reduce GHG emissions from agriculture compared with 
past trends. Activities will focus essentially on enhancing climate proofing while improving water and agriculture 
productivity. Examples of these activities are the dissemination of Systems of Rice Intensification (SRI) 
techniques, water saving technologies such as low pressure irrigation, mechanization services, improved soil 
management, urea-deep placement, drought-resistant and hybrid seed varieties, Integrated Nutrient 
Management (INM), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), organic farming techniques, and diversification into 
high value crops such as pulses and millets, vegetables and other horticulture crops. The project will provide 
farmers with training and technical assistance. A grant facility will finance small equipment, inputs, services 
and/or activities to: (i) promote the adoption of priority technologies, (ii) strengthen producer-based 
organizations, transfer knowledge and technologies; (iii) improve food safety and quality standards, and (iv) 
improve handling, packaging and post-harvest management at the farm level. This sub-component may qualify 
for climate change adaptation co-benefits. 

Subcomponent 3b: Agribusiness and linking farmers to market – This subcomponent will focus on value 
addition and forward linking farmers to markets under a productive alliance approach. Productive alliances are 
collaborative arrangement between groups or producer organizations (POs) and an agribusiness within 
particular value-chains for provision in a specified quantity, quality and time.  Four elements define the nature 
of a Productive Alliance (PA), namely: a group of organized producers, a buyer, an investment in production and 
marketing, and technical assistance. The project will finance outreach and promotional activities to identify POs, 
commercial partners and private financing entities to form alliances, and formulate business proposals and 
business plans. In order to become eligible for financing under the project, a business plan will have to be 
financially feasible, and support one or more productive alliances. Grants would be that portion of the alliance’s 
business plan that would be: (i) financed with proceeds from the proposed project; (ii) implemented by POs; (iii) 
governed by agreements signed between the PO and the project; and (iv) include fixed capital (e.g., plant and 
equipment, minor infrastructure), working capital and technical assistance expenditures. Examples of business 
plans to be financed could be the following: the establishment of PO managed collection, dehusking and 
processing center for rice or cereals, a sorting, grading and packaging facility for fresh vegetables, a grading and 
processing center for cashew nuts. 
 
Subcomponent 3c: Farm Service Centers – The project will finance a TA to promote a local network of private, 
retail supply and farm service businesses Farm Service Centers (FSCs) throughout the project area. An 
enterprise-based delivery of farm supplies and services, FSCs will be one-stop-shops that provide smallholder 
farmers with agricultural and veterinary inputs, services and technologies that will help production and linkages 
to markets. This highly adaptable model, has already been proven successful in several countries worldwide and 
in the region, notably in Senegal and Ethiopia. Grants will be provided and applications reviewed and ranked on 
a competitive basis to evaluate technical capacity, proposed business plan, and potential impacts.  FSCs can be 
privately owned or owned by cooperatives or other types of producers associations. In addition, this 
subcomponent will promote mechanization providing on-demand tractor services for smallholder farmers who 
are relying on expensive and often unavailable manual labor through low-cost “Smart Tractor owners” that pairs 
better off local tractors owners with labor-constrained farmers willing to pay for tractor services (tractor 
“Uberization”). A booking system will allow farmers to request, schedule and prepay for tractor services, from 
nearby Smart Tractor owners, through SMS messaging and mobile money. The subcomponent will provide 
grants, studies and consultant services. Technical inputs and knowledge sharing for this component will be 
provided (tentatively) by the Syngenta Foundation.  
 
Component 4. Implementation (US$ 10M IDA) 
 
Subcomponent 4a: Institutional Strengthening – The primary institution responsible for water resources 
development and management in the North of Cameroon is MEADEN reporting to MINEPAT. The Government 
has constituted a multi-disciplinary team to formulate this project. In order to formulate this project well and 
implement it, MEADEN staff structure has to be modified and modernized. The current organogram of MEADEN 
is being studied in detail to identify gaps and areas for strengthening in order to develop over the coming years 
a modern up to international standards MEADEN, similar to the SAED (Société Nationale d’Aménagement et 
d’Exploitation des Terres) approach in Senegal. MEADEN presently is a state-owned entreprise in charge of 

irrigation service delivery as well as land allocation to farmers and land preparation  TORs are being prepared 
and positions will be filled based on Job Descriptions acceptable to the Bank after the approval of the PCN. 
Funds would be provided to support the training required to strengthen the skills of MEADEN staff both in the 
country, and abroad.  
The operation and maintenance of the new and rehabilitated/modernized irrigation systems would be carried 
out jointly by MEADEN and the Water Users Associations to be set up under the project. MEADEN would be 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the primary canals and drains while the WUAs would be 
responsible for the secondary and tertiary systems. For irrigation services to be effectively delivered, WUAs will 
have to rely on a participatory design and the cooperation of all member farms, which entails paying irrigation 
and WUA membership fees, signing water contracts with WUAs and attending WUA planning meetings.  
 As several farms are headed by women, a study will be carried out during preparation to find the social 
implications for female irrigators to honor their farm’s financial obligations to WUAs, attend WUA planning 
meetings, and sign an annual contract for water delivery with the WUAs. The study will provide analyses and 
recommendations to improve land tenure rights as well for both female and male irrigators. In addition, the 
concept of WUAs is new to Cameroon. Funds would be provided to train the WUAs as well as to develop 
appropriate legislation for the creation of the WUAs (this is already on-going with the PULCI project).  
Government of Cameroon authorities undertook a study visit in January 2018 to visit the SAED  operations in 
the Senegal river’s delta, where such WUAs are operating efficiently. Following the same model, funds would 
be provided to develop similar arrangements between MEADEN and the WUAs. Irrigation infrastructure would 
be provided with required instrumentation to enable MEADEN to monitor the performance of the WUAs on a 
regular basis to ensure irrigation water is supplied to the farmers on a timely basis and agreed quantities are 
delivered. 
Subcomponent 4b: Project Implementation and M&E support – This subcomponent will set up a Project 

Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. Proposed structure 

of the PMU with job descriptions will be developed and agreed with MEADEN before appraisal.  The core PMU 

will be set up in MEADEN soon after the PCN approval. Funds would be provided to meet salaries and allowances 

of PMU staff and to cover operation expenses. The GoC expressed interest in requesting a Project Advance. 

These funds will be used among other things to make progress in setting up and strengthen the PMU 

accordingly. In addition, baseline information will be collected before the start of the management of the 

watershed and before the starting of the production activities in the area to allow an impact evaluation at the 

end of the project life. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project is located in the Sudano-sahelian zone of Cameroon, it is presumably the driest zone of the country. Rainfall 

in this zone is highly variable with its onset very erratic and last for about 5 months (May-September). This zone is mostly 
affected by land degradation. Land disputes and agropastoral conflicts are of a major concern because there are no 


defined routes for cattle migration, and thus animals. Land degradation is due to pressures such as deforestation due to 
expanding agriculture, fuel wood harvesting, bush fires, semi-intensive and extensive cattle rearing and farming. National 
Park belongs to this zone and it is home to elephants, black rhinos, cheetahs, hyenas, population of hippos and other 
wildlife. Porous borders and poor park protection make Faro extremely vulnerable to poachers, livestock, and habitat 
destruction. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Cameroon has a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) law and regulations as well as 

occupational safety regulations. The framework law No 96/12 of 5 August 1996 on environmental management highlights 
in its article 17 the principle of environmental impact assessment. Two forms of public participation-stakeholder 
engagement are required for ESIA by law: public consultations during the assessment stage and public hearings during the 
review stage. Legal and administrative appeals are possible at all stages and for all decisions relating to ESIA. A relatively 
mature central (Ministry of environment, interministerial Committee on the Environment, CIE decentralized 
(municipalities, Divisional Committees for technical and administrative supervision of ESMP and ministry of environment 
decentralized units) ESIA authorities are in place but they are understaffed. The CIE gives an opinion on the quality of 
reports prior to their approval by the Minister. The decentralized units don’t have adequate financial provision. They lack 
adequate equipment for fieldwork, and Senior staff lack personal vehicles. In 2017, the ESIA sub-directorate and 
Environmental & Social Management Plan (ESMP) sub-directorate in the Ministry of Environment consist of six full-time 
staff and 2-4-part time staff, of whom many are knowledgeable about the national ESIA system and the World Bank 
Safeguards for which they received a substantial training. MAEDEN is not familiar with the World Bank operational 
policies as this is its first Bank financed projects. It has an institutionalized GIS unit but does not have the necessary 
technical knowledge and expertise in environmental and social issues in the region and as such has the technical capacity 
to identify and flag any safeguards related concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for national-
level investments, should any arise during project implementation. To bridge this gap, the project will set up a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to assist MEADEN in the day-to-day implementation of the project. At the early stage of 
preparation, two safeguards specialists (Social and Environmental) will be hired for the PMU. They will oversee the 
preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with local consultants, and coordinate the organization of the necessary 
consultations with key concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards instruments. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
FNU Owono Owono, Social Specialist 
Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is proposed to be classified as Category 
OP/BP 4.01 “A” due to potential downstream impacts 
and negative potential environmental and social 
impacts associated with development and/or 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure. A basin level 
ESIA report that will include Cumulative Impact 
Assessment (CIA) will be prepared during 
implementation. However, a specific ESIA for the 


n irrigation scheme (11,000 ha) will  be prepared 
and disclosed before the decision meeting. The 
specific ESIA will include a Gender Based Violence 
assessment and occupational safety. These ESIAs will 
inform the notification to Nigeria Government by the 
GoC; ToRs of these studies are consulted upon in-
country and cleared by the Bank. For the subprojects 
to be implemented under the small grants of 
component 3, which are not identified before 
appraisal, an ESMF will be prepared and it shall 
describe the roadmap for preparing sites specific. 
Finally, a GRM will be prepared, consulted upon and 
disclosed before project effectiveness.  
  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Although the project is not expected to intervene in 
any critically important natural habitats, downstream 
impacts, development of irrigation infrastructure may 
affect areas requiring specific management 
considerations such wildlife migration corridors. In 
addition, this policy is triggered due to the presence of 
three cynegetic zones (Campement des éléphants, 97 
920 ha; ZIC 8 : Mayo Boulel, 35 040 ha ; ZIC 8 bis: 
Louga, 8 320 ha) in the project area of influence. 
Specific guidance will be provided to avoid significant 
conversion or degradation of rivers and the EA will 
identify and delineate areas of critical habitat and 
ensured application of the mitigation hierarchy in 
accordance with this policy for all project works. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project does not support commercial forest 
exploitation. However, the Massif Forest of Ouro-
Doukoudje may be affected due to the presence in the 
project area of influence. Mitigation measures are 
thus proposed as part of the ESMP. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Major interventions are planned to enhance 
agricultural productivity and this may lead to an 
increased use of pesticides and other agrochemicals. 
An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before 
appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Previous studies in the Region revealed local 
significant heritage places such as graveyards. 
Mitigation measures will be incorporated into the 
disclosed ESMP including provisions for a detailed 
Cultural Heritage Management Plan. A comprehensive 

chance find procedure will be prepared as part of the 
ESIA reports, embedded in the overall ESMPs, to that 
end. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas, 
as defined by OP/BP 4.10. 
 
  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The client will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for all the entire project. The project 
through its component 2 is likely to involve land 
acquisition / involuntary resettlement and/or possible 
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.  
There are 3 clear distinct irrigation areas: (i) right bank 
rehabilitation (1,000 ha), (ii) right bank new area 
(5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new area (5,000 ha). 
Therefore:  
(i)           a RAP will be prepared for the rehabilitation 
area prior to appraisal.  
(ii)          for the rest eventual new irrigation areas, the 
resettlement process is at an advanced stage. The list 
of people affected by the project (PAPs) already exists, 
PAPs have received pecuniary compensation, a PAP 
resettlement site is being developed and a Declaration 
of Public Utility (DUP) exists for the eventual new 
perimeters. The Government of Cameroon elaborated 
the list of PAPs in 2010, a total of 1442 household 
affected were recorded for 3093 properties (fields and 
boxes) as provided in the decree n°2010/3445/PM of 
December 15, 2010 relating to the compensation of 
the victims by incorporating to the private domain of 
the state lands downstream from the Lagdo 
perimeters. All this documentation is being reviewed 
and updated by a social audit that the client will 
present to the World Bank team for review and 
clearance prior to appraisal. In case, there will be new 
households settled after 2010 (after the DUP), PAPs 
will be compensated for those new assets (except 
land) prior to resettlement. In case there will be new 
constructions (houses, community infrastructures, 
etc.) different from those already compensated in 
2010 in the DUP area, PAPs will also be compensated 
for these assets prior to resettlement. It is highly 
expected social audit’s recommendations will propose 
specific measures related to assistance for 
resettlement (transportation costs coverage and 
livelihoods assistance) to all PAPs to be resettled. 



Upon approval, the final RAPs of these two new zones 
(right bank new area (5,000 ha) and (iii) left bank new 
area (5,000 ha)) in Lagdo will be prepared during 
project implementation and cleared by the WB prior 
to any works commence. 
In addition, a GRM document for the project will be 
prepared and disclosed before project effectiveness. 
Finally, all subprojects under component 3 will be 
submitted to an environmental and social screening 
during the implementation stage and based on results 
this would lead to Environmental and Social Impacts 
assessments (ESIAs) or Environmental and Social 
Impacts Notice (ESIN). 
  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

 
This policy is triggered because funds would be 
provided to make any structural modifications 
required to the dam and spillway arising out of these 
studies. In addition, the project infrastructure 
investments, including irrigation, will rely on the 
performance of this existing dam. An independent 
Panel of Experts with Dam Safety and Environmental 
and Social expertise will be hired by MEADEN in 
accordance with Dam Safety Guidelines of the World 
Bank. The panel will comprise five specialists 
(geotechnical, Hydrological, hydro-electro-mechanics, 
environmental and social). Improved Emergency 
Response Preparedness plans (ERP) would be 
prepared using up to date maps and technology.  (i) 
The draft TORs for the ERP will be ready before 
appraisal; (ii) GoC will notify Nigeria and (iii) the Bank 
will review existing dam auscultation reports, and any 
other dam safety documents including the accessible 
sections of the OM before the decision meeting. ENEO 
established in 2010 a structured CSR including 
Hygiene, safety and Environment Central Unit. It aslo 
has an environmental and social policy (ESP #42 Rev 2 
09/14) and has developed Safety and Environmental 
and social performances for its operations. However, 
the ERP and ESIA processes will assess the technical 
capacity of ENEO at Lagdo Dam and Regional levels to 
identify, flag and manage any safety, environmental 
and social related concerns to the Lagdo dam 
operation – power generation, irrigation releases, 
flood releases, and safety of the dam. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

This policy is triggered because the Benue river  flows 
over the Nigeria–Cameroon border, and the 
Government of Cameroon (GoC) will notify Nigeria 
before negotiations. There is a memorandum of 
understanding on the need to maintain water in the 
Benue Basin was signed between Cameroon and 
Nigeria in 2016. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There are no disputed areas in the project areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 28, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
In the previous stages PID/ISDS, the documents to be presented will be: 1) Resettlement Policy Framework for the whole 

project and 2) Resettlement Action Plan and list of PAPs of the area  to be rehabilitated(1000ha). The other RAPs will be 
prepared under project implementation.   
GRM document for the project need to be prepared and disclosed before project approval.  
 Consultants in charge of safeguard should be on board prior project appraisal, for insuring consultation and validation of 

safeguards instruments. 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Burkina Faso Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project (P167945) 

 
 

  
Apr 22, 2019 Page 1 of 27  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Burkina Faso P167945 Burkina Faso Agriculture 
Resilience and 
Competitiveness Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 30-May-2019 30-Aug-2019 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing MInistry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture 
and Irrigation 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity and market access for small producers and small 
and medium agribusiness entrepreneurs for selected values chains in Project Areas. 

 
Components 

Enhancing Agriculture Productivity 
Improving Competitiviness and Fostering Market Access 
Promoting Private Sector-Led Agribusiness Development 
Project Coordination, Institutional Strengthening and Contigent Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 


     International Development Association (IDA) 200.00 

          IDA Credit 200.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

A-Full Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Burkina Faso (274,000 km2) is a landlocked, low-income country with high demographic growth and poverty 
levels. With a Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$610 in 2017, Burkina Faso is amongst the 20 poorest 
countries in the world. The population of about 19.6 million (2017) is young (46 percent under 15), with high growth 
rate (3 percent) and the majority (70 percent) lives in rural areas. Poverty continues to be overwhelmingly concentrated 
in rural areas, which are home to 90 percent of the poor. The country was ranked 185 out of 188 countries on the 2015 
overall UN Human Development Index (HDI). Non-income indicators of poverty and welfare, particularly in the areas of 
education and health, are among the lowest in the world, and most of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
appear out of reach.   
 
2. Economic performance has been relatively strong in the past decade; but growth has levelled off recently. 
Over the past fifteen years, economic growth has averaged about 5.5 percent per year (IMF, 2018). Burkina Faso’s 
economy is still heavily reliant on agriculture (especially cotton) and mining (especially gold), which contribute the bulk 
of its export revenues. The recent fluctuation in gold and cotton prices, combined with drops in grain production and 
political instability, have contributed to the slowdown in economic growth. The country has made progress in 
implementing structural reforms, sound economic policies, increased cotton and mining production, steady 
investments, and a stable macroeconomic environment. Monetary and exchange rate policy has been well-managed, 
and inflation has been kept at a low level (less than 3 percent over the past decade and 0.4 percent in 2017).  Burkina 
Faso has a relatively healthy banking sector. The country is also working toward an integrated and open regional 
economic space through the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), the Economic Community of West 
African States (ECOWAS), and other African cooperation initiatives notably the Africa Food Security Leadership Dialogue 
on Adapting African Agriculture to Climate Change in support of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development 
Program (CAADP) Food Security Commitment.  In 2017, the country was ranked 74 in the world, one of the best rankings 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, according to the Corruption Perception Index. 
 
3. The country faces many socio-political and security challenges which have impeded a full economic recovery; 
the harsh climate and environment degradation are making these challenges even more acute. Burkina Faso has 
recently experienced internal unrest fueled by the unequal distribution of resources and a perceived lack of 
accountability in the management of public resources. This situation has been exacerbated by insecurity in neighboring 
Mali, and the Sahel region in general. Burkina Faso hosts more than 25,000 Malian refugees. The security situation has 
worsened significantly since June 2018 due to an upsurge in violent attacks by terrorists and criminal groups in the 
Eastern and Northern regions. If not addressed adequately, security challenges are expected to continue to impact the 
country's socioeconomic prospects in the years to come.  The harsh climatic conditions which hinder efforts to reduce 
vulnerability and extreme poverty are compounding the security challenges. 
 
4. To confront these challenges, the Government is implementing the National Program for Economic and Social 
Development (Plan National de Développement Economique et Social – PNDES). The PNDES lays out the Government’s 
vision and action plan for the period 2016-2020. It emphasizes the structural transformation of the economy with 
agriculture playing the key role as a driver of growth. Its priority interventions are to increase productivity, improve the 
management of water resources for agriculture, develop market infrastructure and support institutional 
transformation. It also highlights the challenges related to climate change and the degradation of soils, with the 
objective to support a transition towards a green economy and the sustainable management of natural resources. 



B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Burkina Faso’s agriculture sector is still one of the main pillars of the national economy, although its 
contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has decreased recently. Farming and livestock activities still occupy 
about 86 percent of Burkina Faso’s workforce and constitute the main source of income for the poorest populations. 
The sector’s contribution to GDP, however, has declined from 35 percent in 1999 to 32.6 percent in 2013 (FAOSTAT, 
2014), due to the diversification of the economy into areas such as mining. Most crops including cereals (millet, 
sorghum, maize and other cereals including coarse/feed grains), and commercial crops (mainly cotton), as well as 
legumes (cowpeas, groundnuts) are produced under rainfed conditions with low yields, with high vulnerability to 
climate change. As part of the traditional Sahelian parkland landscape, those crops often are produced in systems that 
also include useful trees, such as shea, baobab, locust-bean trees and others. Other crops, including rice, onions, 
tomatoes, and other horticultural crops, are cultivated under full irrigated (full water control) or semi-irrigated 
(bottomland) conditions. The yields of irrigated crops are also still below potential. An extended household may farm 
around 9.6 hectares (24 acres) in total, but plot sizes are small, with each plot averaging only 0.4 hectares, producing 
mostly for household consumption with little marketable surplus1. The production of food/ feed grains, of which by-
products are used for animal feeding (e.g., shredded millet/corn stalks), is common and remains the customary crop-
livestock mixed production model.  
 
6. Agriculture faces difficult agro-ecological conditions which are getting harsher due to climate change and 
increasing human pressure, leading to a situation where vulnerability and food insecurity remain key issues.  Along 
the Southern edge of the Sahelian band, the country faces the arid to semi-arid climate typical of the region. The rainfall 
is low overall (400 mm per year average in the Sahelian zone and 800-1000 mm in the Sudano-Sahelian zone), irregular 
and poorly distributed; and it is experiencing a downward trend. Some estimates indicate that more than 3.5 million 
people, roughly 20 percent of the population, are food insecure and/or suffer from inadequate nutrition. Like in much 
of the Sahel region, the increase of the population is both an asset and a challenge for agriculture, as demand for food 
increases and the needs for proper nutrition and food security must be addressed. The country’s rural areas are 
experiencing changes in land occupation patterns, with many former pastoralists becoming sedentary farmers and 
growing crops but also retaining roaming livestock herds. Therefore, pressure on land has increased, and there are 
increasing conflicts between pastoralists and farmers.  As a result, improved land management practices are 
increasingly required to secure land tenure, to optimize crop yields and to conserve land as a viable resource for the 
long run, including maintaining the carbon sequestered in the soil and landscape. 
 
7. The transport sector in Burkina Faso suffers from numerous constraints which hinder economic development, 
reducing the competitiveness of the tradable sectors of the economy including agriculture production. The state of 
transport infrastructure is poor, and the provision of transport services, hampered by road blocks and poor 
management, remains inefficient. The rural roads network is not sufficiently dense to permit access to all potential 
agriculture production areas. Key production areas remain enclaved, especially since many roads are not passable by 
regular vehicles during the rainy season. This is a major constraint to both providing the required production inputs at 
farm-gate and accessing market outlets to dispose of marketable production.   
 
8. Burkina Faso has substantial assets to develop its agriculture, both on the supply and demand side: 

i. On the supply side: (i) substantial land and agro-ecological potential, yet unexploited, offers opportunities to develop 
diversified agriculture systems; the country is endowed with 9 million ha of farmland, of which less than one-half (46 
percent) is currently under cultivation; (ii) traditional know-how and good experience of producers in certain 
production systems (flood recession cultivation, livestock fattening, poultry production, collection of agroforestry 

 

products) and existence of many technological packages ready to be disseminated and applied; and (iii) substantial 
potential for irrigated farming using ponds and rivers, as well as underground water; and 

ii. On the demand side, agriculture development is spurred by: (i) a sizable and increasing domestic demand for food, 
particularly processed food, in tune with the nutrition needs of a rapidly increasing population overall, and with 
changing consumer preferences shifting towards greater diversification of diets and more value being attributed to 
convenience and quality; and (ii) the increasing demand for key export commodities (horticultural crops, shea nuts, 
cattle/meat) on regional and international markets. 

9. To transform its agriculture, Burkina Faso needs to address key constraints: 
a. Regulatory and institutional constraints: the legal texts governing the sector’s regulatory 

framework are not always adequate, and those existing are often insufficiently used or 
enforced2, and the means and capacity of intervention of the State services are limited, 
including planning and programming, statistical services, monitoring and evaluation, and 
information systems; 

b. Weakness of extension services: there are limited agriculture extension and outreach 
services to disseminate innovations, with consequent low expertise of producers and other 
operators in the value chains;  

c. Limited access to irrigation water resources and improved inputs: There is insufficient access 
to irrigation water resources (both through gravity and pumping) and improved inputs 
(fertilizers, phytosanitary inputs, mechanized implements, feed supplies, certified seeds, 
etc.); 

d. Poor management of natural resources: both climate change and anthropic pressure are 
leading to widespread land degradation. About 170,000 hectares per year of natural 
vegetation are lost because of land degradation and deforestation. At the current pace, 
Burkina Faso will lose approximately 15 percent of its agricultural land within 10 years; 

e. Limited competitiveness and weak connection to markets: poor public infrastructure, and 
insufficient private investment for production, processing, storage, transport and 
marketing, as well as the low valorization of by-products, insufficient market information 
and capacity to adhere to commercial norms and standards, and the low degree of 
organization of sector actors, all contribute to marketing inefficiencies; and 

f. Limited access to financing: commercial banks and micro-finance institutions, are reluctant 
to lend to agriculture given the high level of risk involved in the sector. 

 
 

10. Despite a large potential, irrigation remains underdeveloped and underexploited; tapping irrigation water 
resources is crucial to improve agricultural performance. Despite low and erratic rainfall, Burkina Faso enjoys relatively 
abundant water resources, with current agricultural withdrawals for irrigation representing a fraction of total renewable 
water resources and annual recharge. Irrigation development, in the context of erratic weather conditions currently 
amplified by climate change, has the potential to increase the resilience and productivity of the agriculture sector. 
Moving from rainfed crops to irrigated crops, as possibly feasible, is the strategy emphasized by PNDES for the 
agriculture sector. The irrigation sector in Burkina Faso, like in most Sahelian countries has experienced different stages 
of development. Following the limited success of the large-scale public irrigation schemes in the 1980s, institutional 
reforms refocused the role of public irrigation companies on irrigation development, with partial management transfer 
to water users’ associations. This has required that the management (operation and maintenance) of the irrigation 

       

systems be carried out by institutions equipped with the necessary technical/ managerial capacity, with enough 
autonomy and flexibility, and with accountability to both the Government and users. In this respect, the project will 
provide support to Water User Associations (WUAs) so that they play an effective role in water management. 
 
11. There is large untapped potential for the development of Burkina Faso´s agro-industrial sector; but currently 
the country’s agro-processing base is weak. Only about 12 percent of agriculture commodities are processed before 
being sold on the market3. Many bottlenecks in the various value chains limit value addition, such as lack of conditioning 
or processing units. Linkages between farmers and downstream industrial and market operators are weak. Despite 
these constraints, agri-food systems are quickly changing in Burkina Faso like many other Sub-Saharan Africa countries, 
in response to changing demographic patterns coupled with economic growth. Fast-increasing population, urbanization 
trends and income growth are changing food demand in unprecedented ways, with large increases in total quantities 
demanded, growing preference for convenience, diversification of diets towards more fresh products, and an increased 
demand for product quality4. Food demand is growing particularly for items that are more processed, increasingly 
purchased on the market (instead of grown for self-consumption) and perishable (i.e., meat, dairy and fresh produce). 
A small but growing middle class already spends a significant fraction of its income on processed food. Demand for 
processed foods is thus expected to grow in Burkina Faso and neighboring countries, leading to sizable market 
opportunities for increased value addition through agro-processing. 
 
12. The weak enabling environment and limited access to commercial credit are major constraints for agriculture 
and agribusiness development. The 2017 World Bank Group Enabling the Business of Agriculture (EBA) report shows 
that Burkina Faso’s regulatory framework is impeding private investment in agriculture and agribusiness, all along the 
value chain. Significant weaknesses have been identified in regulations related to seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery, 
water and market access. Public services, as well as professional organizations, need to be strengthened to address 
these weaknesses. Regarding credit, the agriculture sector receives only eight percent of commercial bank lending (of 
which 4.2 percent is for financing cotton) and fifteen percent of lending by Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs). Access to 
finance by smallholder farmers is constrained by the following factors: low degree of organization of the value chains 
(except cotton), lack of bankable projects, limited exposure to financial entities, and lack of acceptable collateral. In 
addition, there are very few financial products whose terms and conditions would be adapted to the seasonal 
production cycles. Credit is mainly earmarked for production and trading of agricultural products, but very limited for 
agro-processing activities. The fact that agriculture is exposed to significant weather shocks increases the volatility of 
revenues and the risk due to drought, and hence the attendant risk faced by banks. The development of irrigation under 
the project, with provision of irrigation water year-round, will lessen this risk. This is important in the context of Burkina 
Faso where the use of suitable risk management instruments is lacking. 
 
13. Agriculture institutions exhibit major weaknesses. The primary institution in charge of crop production and 
irrigation development in Burkina Faso is the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Hydraulics (MAAH). MAAH carries out its 
operations through five core directorates dedicated to irrigation (Direction Générale des Aménagements of Hydo-
Agricoles et du Development de l ’Irrigation - DGAHDI), agricultural extension (DGPV), rural economy and sanitary & 
phyto-sanitary control (DGPER), land tenure and producer organizations (DGFOMR), and Monitoring & Evaluation and 
statistics (DGESS).  MAAH field operations are implemented through a network of decentralized branches including 
regional and provincial directorates, and regional technical support units. MAAH’s other decentralized institutions of 

MAAH include seed production units, rural promotion centers, and regional laboratories for seed quality control. The 
following other ministries share responsibilities for agriculture in different areas: (i) the Ministry of Infrastructure (MI) 
for rural roads and tracks, (ii) the Ministry of Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change (MEEVCC) for 
environmental matters, including management of non-timber forest products and productive parklands such as shea 
parks, and (iii) the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Handicrafts for the promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), agro-processing and trade. There are other specialized semi-autonomous structures attached to MAAH with 
responsibility for specific interventions, as well as several private, consular or non-profit institutions active in agriculture 
such as the network of chambers of agriculture (Reseau des Chambres Agricoles - RECA) which provides general support 
to its private membership, the Maison de l’Entreprise which supports SMEs. The above institutions represent a fairly 
comprehensive set-up with good potential as framework to support agriculture development. However, as a general 
rule, most of these institutions display major weaknesses which prevent them from being fully effective, including 
insufficiently skilled staff and weak managerial and technical capabilities. This situation is compounded by limited 
operating budgets and/ or insufficient financial support from stakeholders and membership, lack of office and technical 
equipment, poor working conditions including office buildings which need renovation or upgrade. 
 
14. Gender gaps persist in Burkina Faso, particularly in farming activities. In the 2016 Human Development Report, 
the country ranked 146th out of 149 countries in gender inequality owing to gender disparities in a number of socio-
economic aspects. Female-headed households have 14 percent lower per capita food consumption and are more food 
insecure than male-headed households.5 Women's access to agricultural extension services, credit and productive 
resources such as agricultural inputs and equipment remains limited. Agriculture plots managed by women produce 
less per hectare than plots managed by men. The primary factors that contribute to the gender productivity gap in 
agriculture in Burkina Faso are essentially three fold: (i) women face constraints because of their duties in two economic 
spheres: the productive and the reproductive tasks in the household; (ii) women have limited access to farm labor, 
particularly male farm labor; and (iii) their productivity is limited by weak access to credit for agricultural inputs, 
improved farming equipment and labor.  

 
15. Youth unemployment is acute; it undermines the political and economic stability of the country. Rural youth 
(18 to 35 years) face challenges similar to those faced by women producers. They are mostly un-educated and lack 
professional qualifications. Their low social status and the difficulties they encounter to access economic resources limit 
their participation in productive activities.  In Burkina Faso, 68 percent of the population is under 24 years of age6. The 
problem of youth unemployment is severe: in 2014, 25.2 percent of youth were unemployed7. Given the lack of job 
opportunities, particularly in rural areas, youth unemployment threatens to undermine the country’s political stability, 
particularly within the present context of the influence of religious and other forms of extremism8. Hence, to avoid the 
instability and violence currently experienced by Burkina Faso, the focus should be on providing economic opportunities 
for young people. The focus on youth requires a gender perspective to develop effective and well targeted programs. 
Unless young women receive adequate training and have prospects of steady employment, the possibility of higher 
birth rates will undermine the country’s economic gains. Similarly, technical training and the creation of viable jobs for 
young men, in the agriculture sector particularly, is a precondition for sustainable development and peace. Ensuring 
that Burkina Faso’s youth are directly empowered with income earning activities, have access to education and training 
opportunities, and a voice in local decision-making is critical for the country’s stability and sustainable development. 
 
  
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
16. The PDO is to increase agricultural productivity and market access for small producers and Small and Medium 
agribusiness Entrepreneurs (SMEs)9 for selected value chains in project areas.  

PDO Level Indicators 

17. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) include: 

(i) Increase in yield of targeted crop achieved by primary project beneficiaries (disaggregated by 
commodities); and 

(ii) Increase in the volume of market sales of targeted crop commodities produced by primary project 
beneficiaries (disaggregated by commodities). 

18. In addition, the project M&E system will measure the following four Core Results Indicators (CRIs):  

(i) Number of farmers reached with project agricultural assets or services (including women and youth 
targeted at 30 percent); 

(ii) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with the quality of project-supported services (disaggregated by gender and 
age); 

(iii) Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services; and 

(iv) Number of km of roads and tracks constructed or rehabilitated. 
a)  

 
D. Project Description  

 
19. The proposed project with a total cost of US$259.6 million will be structured as an Investment 
Project Financing (IPF) implemented over a period of six years. It will be funded by (i) two IDA credits for 
a total amount of US$200 million - a regular IDA credit of US$50 million and a Scale Up Facility (SUF) of 
US$150 million, (ii) a GoBF contribution of US$13.0 million, (iii) beneficiary contributions for US$29.4 
million, and (iv) Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) credit of US$17.2 million. The project has three 
technical components structured around three core activity clusters: raising productivity in irrigated 
production systems; improving competitiveness and linking farmers to markets; and promoting private 
sector-led agribusiness development. A fourth component will cover project coordination activities 
capacity strengthening as well as establishment of a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC).  

COMPONENT 1 – ENHANCING AGRICULTURE PRODUCTIVITY (US$108.9 million of which US$97.2 million 

IDA and US$11.7 million GoBF) 

20. Component 1 aims to remove constraints to farm productivity, mainly in irrigated production 
systems. It will have three sub-components: (i) irrigation development, including attendant land-tenure 
arrangements and support to the input supply chain; (ii) agriculture advisory services; and (iii) support to 
producer groups. The project will mainstream gender and youth dimensions in all its activities, giving them 
preferential treatment particularly in project-provided agriculture training and services, as well as funding 

                                                           
9 Agribusiness entrepreneurs are defined as economic operators intervening both at production level as well as downstream of 
production, i.e. post-harvest, storage, processing and marketing including input suppliers and service providers. 



 
of investment initiatives. This will be achieved by targeting economic activities in which women and youth 
predominate.  

21. Sub-Component 1.1: Irrigation infrastructure and land tenure (US$86.7 million of which US$75.0 
million IDA and US$11.7 million GoBF). Sub-Component 1.1 aims at supporting productive land 
development by increasing the provision of irrigation water and securing land tenure on project sites. 
Irrigation infrastructure will focus on both rehabilitation and development of irrigated perimeters. 
Emphasis will be placed on climate-proof design and construction to ensure efficiency and climate 
resilience. Sub Component (SC)1.1 will be implemented in close liaison with the Bank-financed PARIIS 
project (FY17). 

22. Irrigation development and rehabilitation. This activity will consist in rehabilitating and 
developing the irrigation and drainage infrastructure on five selected sites the project area (see annex 2, 
appendix 1), and supporting the attendant collective institutional and organization arrangements. 
Irrigation infrastructure works will cover a total of 4,497 ha over five collective irrigation schemes to be 
either fully developed (2,947 ha) or upgraded/ rehabilitated (1,550 ha), for both smallholders and 
agriculture entrepreneurs10. The project will not finance activities related to construction and/or 
rehabilitation of dams.   

23. Land tenure. The project will support arrangements to ensure proper rights to cultivate for 
farmers benefiting from irrigated land allocation, and due compensation (to be funded by the GoBF) for 
those who will lose their lands or income losses in the process of land reallocation. It will support MAAH’s 
dedicated land tenure services (DGFOMR) at the central level and in the seven communes adjacent to the 
project irrigated perimeters. Secure land tenure will also incentivize the adoption of new technology to 
increase productivity and climate-smart practices to provide adaptation and mitigation co-benefits.  

24. Sub-Component (SC) 1.2: Agriculture advisory services (US$4.1 million IDA). Sub-Component 1.2 
aims to improve the delivery of advisory and outreach services, with a focus on extension activities 
regarding more productive and sustainable agricultural practices under irrigation conditions. This will be 
achieved by providing catalytic support towards strengthening the capacity of MAAH’s services 
(Directorate General for Agricultural Extension, DGPV) and other relevant institutions dedicated to 
delivering demand-driven agri-food-oriented extension and outreach services. In doing so, the project will 
scale up results achieved by the WAAPP project to enable a wider adoption of Good Agriculture Practices 
(GAPs). This Sub-Component will provide funding for the following activities inter alia: (i) preparation of 
specialized extension guides and provision of training regarding different Good Agriculture Practices GAP), 
e.g., the use of the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) techniques 
(including bio-compost), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), System of Rice Intensification (SRI) and/or 
gender-oriented practices; (ii) capacity building and dissemination of the related knowledge regarding 
production and certification of improved seeds and planting material; (iii) development of an e-extension 
platform, using digital solutions and applications to modernize and increase the outreach of advisory 
services; (iv) training for DGPV staff through participation in specialized forums, provision of scholarships 
for diploma courses in selected fields, organization of exchange trips, etc. SC1.2 will also finance 
investments to support extension services such as office rehabilitation and equipment (including 
computer equipment), technical equipment and vehicles for DGPV and its communal offices in the project 

                                                           
10 Smallholders will be allocated plots of 0.5 or 1.0 ha each for a total of 3,497 ha, and agricultural entrepreneurs tracks of land of at 
least 10 to a maximum of 50 ha each for a total of 1000 ha.  NB. The project will also develop, in the form of individual investment sub-
projects under Component 3 private sites intended for arboriculture, for a total of 1,000 ha under small irrigation systems (pumping, 
Californian, drip, and solar powered irrigation systems that reduce energy use, etc.) 


areas. 

25. Sub-Component (SC) 1.3: Support to producer organizations and input supply (US$18.1 million 
IDA). Sub-Component 1.3 has a two-pronged objective: (i) to strengthen and/or facilitate the creation of 
Agricultural Producer Organizations (OPAs), including economic interest groups, and cooperative societies 
of different types, and (ii) to facilitate the supply of inputs required for targeted crops. Objective (i) will 
be achieved through MAAH’s dedicated services (DGFOMR)11, as well as the assistance of specialized non-
government organizations (NGOs) or service providers. SC1.3 will place special emphasis on developing 
Water Users Associations (WUAs) to strengthen water management. Strengthened institutional and 
organizational arrangements will allow farmers to have greater participation in decisions, leading to more 
sustainable water use and more equitable sharing of the benefits. This will also contribute to enhance 
resilience through promoting a stronger sense of ownership, and greater efficiency and accountability, in 
water use and land development. Under objective (ii), input supply to farmers will include the provision 
of the required means of production to develop cropping systems on irrigated land. This will follow the 
technical guidance of extension services received under Sub-Component 1.2. The project will make 
available to smallholder farmers the package of inputs, improved seeds and small implements through 
the current national programs for a period of two years under the same subsidy conditions as those 
granted under these programs.   

COMPONENT 2 – IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS AND FOSTERING MARKET ACCESS (US$34.6 million of 

which US$33.7 million IDA and US$0.9 million GoBF) 

26. Component 2 aims to improve competitiveness and foster access to markets through three sub-
components aimed at (i) capacity building of MAAH central directorates regarding sanitary and phyto-
sanitary control, development of quality norms and standards, and support to market knowledge; (ii) the 
provision of marketing facilities; and (iii) construction/ rehabilitation of rural road infrastructure. 

27. Sub-Component (SC) 2.1: Sanitary and phyto-sanitary control, development of quality norms 
and standards, and support to market knowledge (US$5.2 million IDA). Sub Component 2.1 will focus, 
firstly, with regard to sanitary and phyto-sanitary control, on the regulatory framework to ensure that 
appropriate food safety regulations and means are in place to enable the country to serve the needs of 
the agriculture domestic and export markets. To that end, it will provide support to MAAH’s dedicated 
services (DGPV), including its decentralized phyto-sanitary control posts in the project area. Capacity 
building will focus on specialized areas such as food safety analysis and control. The project will also 
provide funding for logistical support and equipment of the Laboratory for Agri-food Analysis (LAPA) (e.g. 
for control of aflatoxin in maize, pesticide content in agricultural products, herbicide control, etc.) and for 
the rehabilitation of the two regional laboratories for seed control in the project area. Concerning the 
shea sector, the project will support the Institute for Research in Applied Science and Technology (IRSAT) 
for the definition of semi-industrial technological packages to reduce energy (fuelwood) consumption. 
Secondly, with regard to the promotion of the quality of agricultural products, the project will focus on 
the technical norms and trading labels so that they conform to international standards (HACCP, ISO and 
others).  To this end, it will provide training and technical assistance to MAAH’s dedicated services 
(DGPER). For the shea butter value chain, the support will aim at developing a national standard of 
production to ensure quality consistency along the chain. Thirdly, in terms of market knowledge, the 

                                                           
11 Regarding the shea nut value chain and other carbon-related activities, support to producer organizations (TFK) and biodigester 
compost suppliers will be done through the dedicated services of the Ministry of Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change 
(DGEVCC) 

 

project will finance the collection of market information regarding the project-supported commodities. It 
will support the strengthening of MAAH’s Agricultural Market Information System (SIMA), including data 
collection on specific targeted markets. Information and awareness workshops on SIMA will be organized 
throughout the project area, including radio broadcasts, so that potential users are aware of SIMA 
existence and know how to access it. MAAH’s dedicated services (DGPER), as well as the Network of 
Chambers of Agriculture (RECA) will be supported so that they can contribute to SIMA data collection and 
diffusion efforts.  

28. Sub-Component (SC)2.2: Marketing infrastructure (US$7.2 million IDA). SC2.2 aims to strengthen 
the link between producers, off-takers and processors to ease access to market outlets. The project will 
support marketing and storage infrastructure, essentially the construction/ rehabilitation of sixteen 
purchasing counters (PCs), as well as 117 small storage facilities in strategic areas in the four regions 
covered by the project.  PCs are marketing platforms, the purpose of which is to avoid direct field 
purchases from farmers and reduce asymmetric information that expose producers to buyer pressures. 
PCs will meet the required criteria of relevance, viability, cost-effectiveness, as well as job creation, 
especially for women and youth. Attention will be paid to the management and maintenance of these 
counters in collaboration with the end-users and local authorities (see Annex 2, Appendix 3). 

29. Sub-Component (SC)2.3: Rural tracks and roads (US$22.2 million of which US$21.3 million IDA 
and US$0.9 million GoBF). SC2.3 aims to reinforce the connection of producing areas targeted by the 
project with the supply sources for productive inputs and market outlets for commodities produced. It 
will include the construction and rehabilitation of rural roads and tracks to ensure all-weather access 
throughout the year to all the project-targeted irrigated areas. A total length of about 344 km of tracks 
and road sections have been selected in concert between MAAH and the Ministry of Infrastructure (MI). 
SC2.3 will finance the technical, socio-economic and environmental studies, road works, as well as 
maintenance over a period of two years. The implementation of SC2.3 will be carried out under MI’s 
supervision through its Directorate General of Rural Tracks (DGPR). The execution of road works will be 
entrusted to private civil engineering companies, and/ or projects as part of their interventions in the 
producing areas targeted. Attention will be paid to the planning and maintenance of tracks and roads 
using national norms.  SC2.3 will provide technical assistance and training to DGPR, its decentralized 
structures and local communities involved in the project area as required to oversee the construction and 
maintenance of the project rural roads and tracks. 

COMPONENT 3: PROMOTING PRIVATE SECTOR-LED AGRIBUSINESS DEVELOPMENT (US$89.5 million of 

which US$42.9 million IDA, US$29.4 million beneficiaries and US$17.2 million PFIs) 

30. Private sector development is the major thrust of the project strategy for developing value chain 
activities. Accordingly, Component 3’s objective is to enable the country’s private agriculture and agro-
processing sector to become more competitive on domestic and external markets, by helping producers, 
processors and off-takers/ traders develop and finance their investment initiatives. Component 3’s 
activities will have a two-pronged focus on: (i) the development of business plans; and (ii) the provision 
of investment financing under the project’s Cost-Sharing Facility (CSF) for project-supported crop 
production, value addition and commercialization.  

31. Sub-Component (SC)3.1: Development of business plans (US$4.5 million IDA). The objective of 
this sub-component is to support eligible beneficiaries in developing business plans which can be eligible 
for funding under the project Cost Sharing Facility (CSF). It will assist eligible value chain operators to (i) 
identify potential investment activities aligned with the project’s objectives, (ii) select potential partners 
  

 

with whom they can establish partnerships; and (iii) develop viable business plans to secure access to 
project funding; these business plans will include the required specifications to conform to the eligibility 
criteria for the CSF, including the fiduciary and safeguards aspects. The above support will be provided 
through technical assistance (TA). The TA providers terms of reference will include organization of 
sensitization campaigns to inform potentially interested operators, support for the development of 
investment sub-projects eligible for CSF funding, training as needed and assistance for the beneficiaries’ 
selection process and subsequent implementation of the selected sub-projects. 

32. Sub-Component (SC)3.2: Private investment financing (US$85.0 million of which US$38.4 million 
IDA, US$29.4 million beneficiaries and US$17.2 million PFIs). This sub-component will address the 
financing constraints of the agribusiness sector by improving access to finance. It will fund a Cost Sharing 
Facility (CSF) to provide partial support to agriculture and agri-business operators in the form of Matching 
Grants (MGs) to finance their investment Sub-Projects (SPs). The MG mechanism will target (i) individual 
smallholder producers, Agriculture Producer Organizations (OPAs), cooperatives, and Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) that need financing to create, upgrade and/ or modernize their production, storage 
and processing facilities, as well as (ii) all other private sector players and entrepreneurs involved in the 
targeted agriculture value chain (e.g. traders, transporters, equipment manufacturers, service providers, 
compost providers) with similar needs. MGs will be provided under two windows, for micro and medium/ 
large sub-projects respectively, under different terms and conditions with the MG representing between 
30 to 80 percent of eligible costs. PFIs will provide a minimum of 15 to 35 percent of sub-project funding, 
except for micro sub-projects which will not require supplementary PFI funding.  In partnership with the 
DGEVCC, all MG proposals will be assessed through an ex-ante calculation on the carbon impact and the 
most effective projects may be supported to access carbon finance12. Women and youth (18 to 35 years)13, 
will receive special treatment, especially as regard their very small and/ or start-up enterprises; their 
personal contribution requirement to the funding of sub-projects will be lower than for their male and 
adult counterparts. The initial permanent working capital requirements will be eligible for MG funding. 
The funds will be disbursed directly on behalf of the beneficiary from the project account to a dedicated 
account for SP implementation opened with the PFI. The beneficiary will have the fiduciary responsibility 
regarding the use of the funds. The eligibility and selection criteria of the beneficiaries, as well as 
procedures to be followed all along the investment cycle, will be detailed in the specific project 
implementation manual (PIM) of the CSF. Goods to be funded under sub grants will be procured in 
accordance with the provisions of Financing Agreement, the PIM, the Procurement Guidelines and the 
Anti-Corruption Guidelines, and should not include any expenditures on the negative list set forth in the 
ESMF or the IPMP. 

COMPONENT 4: PROJECT COORDINATION, INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY STRENGTHENING AND 

CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT (CERC) (US$26.6 million of which US26.2 million IDA 

and US$0.4 million, GoBF) 

33. Component 4 will (i) support project coordination and institutional strengthening of MAAH; and 
(ii) include a CERC.  

34. Sub-Component (SC)4.1: Project coordination and institutional capacity strengthening (US$26.6 

                                                           
12 DGEVCC in currently working on carbon projects regarding (i) soil carbon increase through the use of agroforestry technics and bio-
compost (from biodigesters) and (ii) the decarbonization of the shea butter production chain. This is part of the collaboration with the 
REDD+ Program (P149827) and Biodigester carbon project (P156413). 
13 The MG target for women and youth is 30 percent. 



 

million of which US26.2 million IDA and US$0.4 million GoBF). The Project will be managed by a Project 
Management Unit (PMU), housed within the Coordinating Unit of the Budget Program for Hydro-
Agriculture and Irrigation Development which is one of the six MAAH budget programs. Hence, the PMU 
will be integrated into the MAAH administrative structure as part of the sector-wide approach recently 
adopted by the Government under the budget programs. SC4.1 will fund (i) the establishment and 
operation of the PMU through provision of appropriate staffing and operating resources to take charge 
of project management including resources for fiduciary management, safeguard compliance, Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E), knowledge management and communications, and (ii) institutional capacity 
strengthening (training, equipment, office rehabilitation, etc.) for the key MAAH directorates and services, 
including their decentralized services, and the National Council for Food Security (NCFS); this will also 
include construction of an office building to host all projects under the Budget Program for Hydro-
Agriculture and Irrigation Development. To promote consultations at the grassroots, the sub-component 
will also fund a full set of Citizen Engagement activities. The general intervention principle under SC4.1 
will be to harmonize and/or pool resources with other similar externally-funded projects. In this respect, 
the PMU may share staff and operating resources with other units whenever possible to economize 
resources and take advantage of economies of scale14. 

35. Sub-Component (SC)4.2: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0.0 million). 
Component 4 includes the creation of a project CERC under the oversight of the NCFS at MAAH. The CERC 
will be a mechanism to provide funding for emergencies. It will have a zero initial funding allocation. In 
the event of a crisis, the Government will be able to request the World Bank to reallocate project funds 
to the CERC to cover the costs of the emergency response and recovery. Detailed operational guidelines 
acceptable to the World Bank for implementing the project CERC activities will be prepared during the 
first six months of project implementation. All expenditures under the project’s specific CERC will be in 
accordance with World Bank OP 10 (Investment Project Financing). They will be appraised and reviewed 
in order to be acceptable to the World Bank before any disbursement is made. Disbursements will be 
made against an approved list of goods, works and services, required to support crisis mitigation, 
response, recovery and re-construction. 
 
Project Beneficiaries 
 

36. The project is expected to benefit directly and indirectly all economic agents in the project areas 
operating along the targeted value chains from production to market, including at the processing, storage, 
transport and trading stages. The total number of project beneficiaries is estimated in the order of 150,000 
individuals (see Annex 2, Appendix 4). 

37. Direct project beneficiaries are first and foremost all the smallholder crop farmers, processors, 
traders and marketers who will be involved in project-supported activities at farm-gate level and 
downstream of production. These include prominently the smallholders and entrepreneurs who will 
benefit from irrigation development, extension and subsidy for the new technology packages, and the 
project matching grants as part of project financing windows. Other direct beneficiaries will include: (i) 
the staff of MAAH agricultural extension support services and other services directly targeted by project 
activities who will receive technical support and training, and (ii) the off-takers and transporters who will 

                                                           
14 A collaboration with DGEVCC is expected for the screening of the carbon impact of the matching grants as well as the valorization of 
the project activities on the carbon market whenever they fit under one of the existing or future carbon projects developed in the 
country. 


use the purchasing counters, and tracks and roads. The project will mainstream gender and youth 
dimensions in all its activities, giving them preferential treatment particularly in project-provided 
agriculture training and services, as well as funding of investment initiatives. This will be achieved by 
targeting economic activities in which women and youth predominate. These include small-scale agro-
processing activities such as mango drying, and activities in value chains dominated by women such as 
shea nut collection and processing. Youth will be targeted for any project activities focused on training to 
upgrade their skills, and activities generating jobs such as high labor intensity methods.  

38. Indirect project beneficiaries include all stakeholders who will benefit from project spillover 
effects both at national and local level, i.e., (i) at farmgate level regarding production: other crop farmers 
neither directly involved in project-supported irrigation perimeters, nor targeted by the project extension 
activities being outside the production basins; they will benefit particularly from project spillover effects 
regarding improved crop management, higher quality crop inputs and services, better defined market 
norms and standards and improved financing conditions as a result of the project; (ii) at post-harvest and 
market level: buyers and processors, value chain service providers, including private inputs providers 
(seeds, fertilizers, feed, equipment suppliers) who will benefit from overall increased supply of 
commodities produced and traded due to better roads and tracks; and (iii) on the consumption side: 
domestic consumers in Burkina Faso who will benefit from increased quantity of food and attendant 
nutritional benefits at household level. 
 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
. 

39. The MAAH will have overall responsibility for project implementation, including management of 
environmental and social risks; it will liaise closely with the MI for implementation of rural tracks and roads 
activities, MEEVCC for the shea nut value chain development and with the Ministry in charge of Commerce, 
Industry and Handicraft (MCIA) for private sector development and agro-processing. The project’s governance 
structure will be modeled after the PARIIS project arrangements, including a Review Committee15 (RC) and a 
Project Management Unit (PMU) at the central level as well as three regional units based at MAAH’s regional 
offices and one regional unit hosted by AMVS. The RC will meet at regular intervals, at least once a year. It will be 
chaired by MAAH’s Secretary General and serve as guidance body. It will approve the Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets and progress reports. The PMU, based in Ouagadougou, will be fully mainstreamed into MAAH’s structure 
as advocated by authorities alongside other national project implementation units. It will come under MAAH’s 
Budget Program for Hydro-Agriculture and Irrigation Development which is one of the six MAAH budget programs.  

40. Details regarding PReCA’s organizational arrangements are presented in Annex 1. The PMU will sign 
partnerships or technical agreements with MAAH’s and other ministries’ directorates to carry out project activities 
within their respective mandates. The National Coordinator of the project will be de facto the head of Budget 
Program for Hydro-Agriculture and Irrigation Development as per the new decree organizing the budget 
programs16.. The National Coordinator will delegate the management function of the project to a Project Manager 

                                                           
15 The RC will include representatives of the MAAH (General Secretary-SG, Cabinet, General Directorate of Studies and Sector Statistics-
DGESS, DGPV, DGFOMR, DGPER); the Ministry of Economy and Finance (DGCOOP, DGEP, DGB); National Agriculture Chamber; Coordinators 
of projects and programs in the agriculture sector; representatives of financing partners, DCMEF/MAAH, DAF/MAAH, DGEVCC/MEEVCC  
and DMP/MAAH will also be invited to participate as observers. 
16 Decree no. 2018-092/PRES/PM/MINEFID dated Jan. 17, 2018 regulating development projects and programs.   

 

who might be competitively recruited or appointed following the World Bank non-objection. His/her signature 
will be required to commit project financing. S/he will be assisted by a team of high caliber who might be 
competitively recruited or appointed, covering technical, fiduciary, social and environmental safeguard functions 
deemed critical for proper project implementation and management. As needed, some staff may be shared with 
other projects under the budget program. 

41. MAAH has been responsible over the past decade, and is still responsible currently, for implementing 
several important World Bank-funded projects. It has acquired capacity to support the different PMUs from 
technical, financial management, safeguards and M&E viewpoints. Similarly, the other ministries which will be 
involved have enough capacity to implement project activities. This is the case of MI which has managed several 
externally-funded projects related to road infrastructure. Detailed implementation arrangements will be worked 
out as part of the PIM to ensure that MAAH and other ministries maintain enough implementation capacity, 
promote complementarity and avoid overlap between the different projects under their watch. The PIM will 
compile all procedures for PReCA’s operational implementation, encompassing the administrative, fiduciary, 
M&E, procurement and social and environmental safeguards procedures. It will include detailed TORs for all PMU 
staff. Drawing on the experience of other World Bank-financed projects, specific sections of the PIM will be 
prepared for (i) the Cost Sharing Facility (CSF) and (ii) the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). 

 
    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Four administrative regions have been selected for project implementation in the Western part of the 
country: Douna in Léraba province, Banzon in Kénédougou Province), Dourou in Passoré province and Bissan 
and Dangoumana Mouhoun in Mouhoun province. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist 
Leandre Yameogo, Environmental Specialist 
Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The operation will finance the rehabilitation and 
development of irrigated perimeters. It is also 
expected the construction or rehabilitation of all-
weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout 
the year all the project-targeted producing basins. In 
addition, the project will fund the construction of 


 

market facilities of public interest at national and/ or 
regional level. Furthermore, the Banzon's irrigation 
scheme will be rehabilitated. Consequently, an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
was developed for that irrigated perimeter and an 
Environmental and Social Management 
Framework(ESMF) was produced for investments 
that detailed studies are not available and locations 
unknown to date. Thereafter, both instruments were 
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed publicly. 
The ESIA was disclosed in Burkina Faso on April 4 
and at the World bank website on April 5, 2019 
while the ESMF was disclosed in Burkina on March 7 
and at the bank's website on March 27, 2019. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This policy is not triggered by the project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Irrigation schemes are potentially known for hosting 
natural habitats, more specifically aquatic species 
habitats. However, it is not anticipated that planned 
investments will impact negatively natural 
habitats.This policy is  triggered to draw the 
attention of the Project Management Unit (PMU) 
when civil works are going to be undertaken in 
irrigation schemes areas. The ESMF prepared in line 
with the OP4.01  includes a section for a proper 
management of Natural habitats that might be 
located irrigation schemes areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

This policy is not triggered since the Project will not 
affect forests nor forest-dependent communities, 
and the Project will also not involve or support 
changes in the management of forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project intends to support agricultural 
intensification. That may lead the producers to the 
use of chemical products such as pesticides. To 
anticipate and prevent any wrong use of pesticides 
with their adverse impacts on environment and 
communities, an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
(IPMP) was developed as a separate instrument. Like 
the ESMF, this safeguard tool once prepared, was 
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed in Burkina 
Faso on March 7 and at the World bank website on 
March 27, 2019. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the 
precautions have been taken to protect and 
safeguard physical cultural resources, a section 



 

addressing these concerns has been included in the 
ESMF. This section will show how to handle chance 
finds of cultural assets within the project area. This, 
because activities related to the construction and 
rehabilitation of irrigated perimeters, feeder roads, 
markets facilities and other infrastructure works will 
induce excavations with potential discoveries of 
physical cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous People as defined by the 
policy in Burkina 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance activities that could induce 
potential adverse social impacts that may lead to 
land acquisition and/or restrictions on access to 
resources and sources of income or livelihoods: 
rehabilitation and development of irrigated 
perimeters, construction or rehabilitation of all-
weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout 
the year all the project-targeted producing basins, 
construction of market facilities of public interest at 
national and/ or regional level. Furthermore, the 
Banzon's irrigation scheme will be rehabilitated. 
Consequently, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was 
developed for that irrigated perimeter and 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was produced 
for investments whose detailed studies are not 
available and locations unknown to date. Thereafter, 
both instruments were reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed publicly. The RPF was disclosed in 
Burkina on March 22 and at the Bank's website on 
March 27, 2019. As for the RAP, it was disclosed in-
country and at the bank's website on April 5, 2019.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered because the project will 
intervene in irrigation schemes that rely on existing 
dams. The project will not have direct intervention 
on dams. The situation of existing dams is described 
as follows: 
 
Dourou dam: This dam is located upstream of 
Dourou irrigation scheme and has a capacity of 83 
Hm3 and a 10.5 m height. A review of Dourou dam 
safety conditions was commissioned by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and financed by the WBG project 
PARIIS in 2017. The report was approved by the 
Ministry and the World Bank in February 2017.  The 
remedial works related to the structural stability of 


 

the dam identified in this study were carried out in 
2018 under the State budget as evidenced during a 
WBG mission in November 2018. Further studies 
shall be carried out to assess the suitable  option for 
increasing the discharge capacities of the spillways. 
The hydrological risk has been identified as one of 
the most critical dam safety risks by the independent 
dam safety assessment in 2017. 
 
Mouhoun / Léry dam: Regarding the Sourou Valley 
where the project will finance the construction of 
Dangoumana and Bissan schemes, the 
Mouhoun/Léry dam (580 Hm3 / 8 m) was 
rehabilitated in 2014 through the project “Projet de 
Développement de l ’Agriculture (PDA)” financed by 
the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) with 
complementary works financed by the Government 
in 2017 and 2019. The MCA project also financed, in 
2014, a review of the Operation and Maintenance of 
the Mouhoun /Léry dam and recommended 
procedures for the O&M during the different 
seasons and in case of extreme events (floods); 
these recommendations are currently followed by 
the entity in charge of the dam operation, the 
Mouhoun Water Agency (Agence de l’Eau du 
Mouhoun). The O&M Plan should be updated along 
with a comprehensive dam safety assessment  taking 
into account the reservoir operation of the recently 
constructed  Samendéni dam in the upstream of the 
river 
 
Samendéni dam: Two hundred kilometers upstream 
Mouhoun/Léry dam, on the Mouhoun river, the 
Government of Burkina Faso has built in 2017 
another large dam, with a capacity of 1,050 Hm3 and 
a height of 23.9 m. The reservoir has been filled for 
the first time in 2018. The overall impacts of this 
dam on the WBG investments in Bissan and 
Dangoumana would be positive: (i) the dam will 
contribute to better control flood during the rainy 
season which will reduce the risks downstream and; 
(ii) the Samendéni dam will increase the flow on the 
dry season, which will increase the water availability 
for irrigation in the Sourou Valley. The independent 
dam safety assessment and preparation of dam 
safety plans; i.e.  O&M Plan covering  


 

Instrumentation Plan, and Emergency Preparedness 
Plans, shall be undertaken in an expeditious manner.  
 
During project implementation, dam safety risk 
assessments and dam safety plans (including O&M 
plans, Instrumentation plans and Emergency 
Preparedness Plans) will be carried out as well as 
periodic dam’s safety inspections for the Dourou 
dam, the Mouhoun/Léry dam and the Samendéni 
dam and have been included in the Financing 
Agreement as Disbursement Conditions before the 
start of irrigation schemes’s construction. If some 
additional remedial works are identified for the 
dams, the Government will finance such 
complementary remedial works or safety-related 
measures. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project finances the rehabilitation and 
development of irrigation schemes that will draw on 
an international waterway and its tributaries. In 
accordance with the policy, riparian countries and 
the Volta Basin Authority were notified in April 2019. 
The Volta Basin authorities and riparian countries 
expressed their no-objection to the project. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project coverage is not located in a Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The operation will finance the rehabilitation and development of irrigation schemes. It is also expected the 
construction or rehabilitation of all-weather rural roads to fully opening up throughout the year all the project-
targeted producing basins. In addition, the project will fund the construction of market facilities of public interest at 
national and/ or regional level. Some of these infrastructures may have major environmental and social impacts. 
Irrigation investments may have adverse but limited environmental impacts on water resources, for the most part, 
and will require the resettlement of some local communities. The main environmental safeguards issues for the 
project relate to water pollution, construction waste management, water abstraction and changes to water outflows 
from the rivers and associated impacts on downstream human needs and aquatic habitats, and biodiversity. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Irrigation investments in the project area may have a medium to long term impact on water cumulative off-takes from 
the waterways. The long-term social impact is also of importance, as agricultural development may lead to intense 

 

migration within the Project intervention area. Among the more beneficial potential indirect long-term impacts are 
the use of more water-saving irrigation systems and technologies. This will be further supported by sustained dialogue 
on water management in the project area and the proposed measures aimed at reducing water consumption for 
irrigation. This will include different measures and incentives to facilitate the adoption of water saving techniques, as 
well as a more transparent planning of public and private investments in the coming years. Lastly, in compliance with 
the triggering of OP7.50, a notification letter was sent to each of the other five riparian countries and the Volta Basin 
Authority (VBA).  The countries and the VBA expressed their no-objection to the project 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The rehabilitation of the irrigated perimeters and of the access roads are crucial to the achievement of the project 
objectives and they will be done with minimal effect to the environment and all precautionary measures will be taken 
to avoid causing any irreversible damage to the environment. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is rated as Environmental Assessment Category “A”, requiring a full environmental assessment. The 
following environmental safeguard policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/ BP 4.01); Natural habitats 
(OP/ BP.04); Dam Safety (OP/ BP 4.37); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Physical 
Cultural Resources (OP/ BP4.11) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/ BP 7.50). 
 
The project has adopted a framework approach to deal with environmental matters. This is justified since exact 
locations for a substantial number of program activities, particularly those of the sub-projects, which may have 
environmental potential adverse impact, have not yet been determined with certainty. Therefore, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in line with OP/BP4.01. This ESMF includes specific 
chapters on Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources in compliance with OP4.04, OP4.37 and OP/BP4.11 
respectively. With respect to Pest Management in line with the OP4.09 triggering, a Pest Management Plan has been 
developed as a stand-alone document. In addition to the above-mentioned documents, the Borrower has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for developing and expanding the Banzon irrigation scheme as 
part of project investments. Lastly, with the aim of being in full compliance with the triggering of OP7.50, a notification 
letter was sent to each of the five other members countries of Volta Authority Basin that replied positively, granting 
their agreement for the project approval. 
 
The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation 
schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) 
procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social 
considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project 
activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical 
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against agriculture predators. In 
addition to that, it sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect population health and environment 
integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of chemical products. 
 
The RPF document outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement and or compensation of subproject-
 

affected people, and establishes standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program 
supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of RAPs for each individual 
sub project that triggers the involuntary resettlement policy. Specific ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared for relevant 
activities before project implementation along with Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESIAs 
will provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result of the triggering of the above-mentioned 
safeguard policies. 
 
In addition to these above mentioned 03 documents, the borrower has also prepared 01 ESIA and 01 RAP for Banzon’s 
irrigation scheme that was clearly identified as being part of futures investments. 
 
All of these 05 safeguard instruments have been reviewed by the banks’ specialists, consulted upon and disclosed in 
Burkina Faso and at the Bank’s website as follows. 
 
-ESMF, disclosed in Burkina Faso on March 7 and at the World bank website, on March 27, 2019.   
-PMP disclosed in Burkina Faso, on March 7 and at the World bank website on March 27, 2019.  
-RPF disclosed in Burkina Faso, on March 22 and at the World bank website on March 27, 2019.    
-ESIA disclosed in Burkina Faso on April 4, and at the World bank website, on April 5, 2019.   
-RAP disclosed in Burkina Faso and at the World bank website on April 5, 2019.   
 
The Project Management Unit (PMU) carry out the screening for all investments will determine the actions necessary 
to comply with environmental and social safeguard policies and national legislation. It will determine whether an ESIA 
and/or RAP, or both, will be required and will prepare appropriate safeguards instruments for each of the sub-
projects.  The PMU will commission the preparation of detailed ESIAs and RAPs to be carried out by independent 
consultants, based on terms of reference (TORs) to be reviewed by BUNEE and the Bank. The PMU will be responsible 
not only for the overall implementation of the PMP, ESMF, RPF and specific safeguard instruments required for 
specific Project activities (i.e. ESIAs and/or RAPs), but also for the internal monitoring of proposed mitigation 
measures. All site-specific safeguard instruments will be submitted to BUNEE for decision before submission to the 
Bank for review, clearance and disclosure in-country and on the Bank’s website. 
 
Responsibility and oversight of the Project’s overall compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies will be 
devolved to the environmental Safeguards Specialist and social Safeguards specialists within the PMU, as the main 
persons in charge of project implementation and monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close 
collaboration with BUNEE. BUNEE will not only conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance with proposed 
mitigation of changes, but also changes in environmental resources (i.e., water and soil quality, flora and fauna, vector 
ecology, soil erosion etc.) from the baseline. 
 
Further, all civil works, for developing or expanding irrigation schemes; construction and rehabilitation activities of 
other types of infrastructure, will be contingent on broad-based and sustained consultation with local communities in 
project’s intervention area. Mitigation measures for identified environmental and social impacts, including avoiding or 
sparing cultural and historical resources and other environmental clauses, will be properly implemented by 
contractors and sub-contractors, as specified in the safeguard instruments and bidding documents. Selected 
contractors and their Resident Engineering Teams will be required, each, to hire an environmental and social experts 
with strong skills in Occupational Health and Safety issues for the environmental specialist and Labor influx and 
Gender Based Violence (GBV) for the social specialist, whose roles are to ensure specific Environmental, Safety, Health 
and Social clauses are fully and adequately implemented and reported on. 
 


The BUNEE will be responsible for ensuring the Project activities are implemented in accordance with national laws 
while the World Bank’s specialists will make sure that all investments that may have potential adverse impacts are in 
full compliance with environmental and social safeguard policies triggered by the project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e. ESMF, PMP, RPF, ESIA and RAP) followed a broad-based and in-
depth consultation approach with and interviews of relevant stakeholder groups in the public and private sectors and 
civil society. These consultations include Producer Organizations, particularly those within or in the vicinity of the 
Project intervention area, key Ministries and Government agencies, in particular Ministries of Agriculture, Water 
resources, Environment, Health, the Plant Protection Agency, pesticides wholesalers and retailers; BUNEE, the 
national agency in charge of review and enforcement of environmental legislation and regulations; health care 
personnel and NGOs.  
 
While local populations were enthusiastic about and confirmed their interest in the proposed investments, they 
nonetheless raised a few issues that prevail in current exploitation and management practices in the project area. 
Producers and local Government representatives have requested to be fully involved in the design and 
implementation of land allocation process; fostering marketing and commercialization of agricultural produce 
domestically, as well as in the sub-region; Fostering a dynamic framework for dialogue and consensus building 
between crop producers and livestock producers, strengthened by binding laws and regulations designed to 
avoid/minimize conflicts between them; concerted efforts and synergy among sectoral agencies for environmental 
sustainability in the project intervention area. In particular, participants wished close involvement of the forestry and 
nature conservation departments in the project implementation, in order to minimize deforestation, river banks 
degradation; proliferation of water borne diseases; existence of prohibited pesticides, inadequate storage and misuse 
of pesticides; lack of opportunities of women in productive agriculture. These concerns have all been reflected in the 
safeguards documents and appropriate recommendations have been formulated. 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
State of Maharashtra's Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P168310) 

 
 

  
Sep 18, 2018 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25483 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P168310  State of Maharashtra's 
Agribusiness and Rural 
Transformation Project 
(P168310) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA May 13, 2019 Aug 12, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value chains , 
focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra. This would be achieved by expanding access 
to new and organised markets for producers and enterprises with complementary investments in technical services and 
risk management capabilities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 210.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 210.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 80.00 

          Borrowing Agency 80.00 



     Other Sources 10.00 

          Foundation/s (identified) 10.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest-growing large economies and has experienced a substantial 
decline in poverty. The Indian economy’s annual growth rate grew from 5.5 per cent in 2012-13 to 8 per cent in 2015-
16, supported by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. In recent 
times, temporary disruptions from demonetization and uncertainty surrounding GST slowed India’s economic 
momentum; real GDP growth declined to 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 and further to 6.5 per cent in 2017-18. Private 
investments have remained subdued. Economic activity is expected to stabilise in 2018-19 and growth will resume 
gradual acceleration in the near term. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty, 
declining sharply from 38.9 to 21.6 per cent at the international poverty line (US$1.90 PPP/day) between 2004 and 2011. 
With over a 100 million people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing 
world as well as that of Middle-Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, a rapid rise in rural wages, 
greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, were the key drivers of poverty 
reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the 
construction sector and rural wages suggest that the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated.  

 
2. Agriculture plays a vital role in India’s economy and is central to policies aimed at alleviating poverty. 
Increasingly, the potential role of the sector to expand growth, create jobs and support the ongoing rural-urban 
transformation is becoming evident. More than 54 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied 
activities (census 2011), and the sector contributed 17.1 per cent to the country’s Gross Value Added (GVA) for the year 
2017-18 (at current prices). As expected in a fast-growing economy, there has been a continuous decline in the share of 
agriculture and allied Sectors in the GVA from 18.6 per cent in 2013-14 to 17.4 per cent in 2016-17. The annual agriculture 
growth rate was around 3-3.5 per cent in the 1990s and 2000s and dropped 3below 2 per cent per annum during 2013-
15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, rising labour costs, and declining commodity prices. This 



 

has led to an agrarian crisis with a growing emphasis on improving the ecological sustainability of the resource base and 
the socio-economic potential of the sector to increase farmer welfare and rural growth opportunities1. 

 
3. Rapid urbanisation in India is driving change in the agriculture value chain, deepening linkages between urban 
food systems and producers. This urbanisation leads to (i) an increased uptake of agricultural produce from rural to 
urban areas; (ii) changes in the farm production to reflect the food marketed and consumed; and (iii) larger and changing 
role of food supply chains in meeting urban food needs2. However, the current urban food system is in disarray with 
limited or no focus on food safety, food security to urban poor and multiplicity of authorities handling food related issues. 
 
4. Over the years India has developed export competitiveness in certain specialised products, making it the 
world’s 10th largest agriculture exporter.  Leading exports consisted of basmati rice, the meat of bovine animals, marine 
products, cotton, and sugar. However, India’s agriculture export basket accounts for only about 2 per cent of world trade. 
and the share of India’s high value and value-added agriculture produce in its agriculture export basket is less than 15 
per cent compared to 25 per cent in the US and 49 per cent in China.  This low share and low value are contributed mainly 
by (i) inconsistent policies in the areas of farm production, support prices and R&D (all focused on food security); (ii) poor 
inland transportation, exit point infrastructure; and (iii) export restrictions which results in uncertainty among the 
stakeholders. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
5. Maharashtra has a high agricultural growth rate, agricultural transformation toward higher value crops is 
underway, and the state is relatively integrated into global commodity markets.Agriculture has grown at an annual 
average of 6.4 per cent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, and the area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, 
reflecting a shift from food grains towards cash crops. Food grains (rice, wheat, and millets, excluding maize) account for 
about 25 per cent of the gross cropped area, contributing only 7. 7 per cent of agricultural GDP3.  Since 2000, with the 
upsurge in the production of high-value crops, the state has emerged as one of the country’s largest producers and 
exporter of fruits, vegetables, pulses, cotton, and soybean. Many of these changes in the sector have led to positive 
developments because production is labour intensive (e.g., horticulture and floriculture), climate resilient (pulse-based 
cropping systems increase resilience, e.g. pigeon pea intercropping leads to higher soil carbon sequestration than 
monocrop system), and responds to market needs, both domestically and globally.  The food processing industry is 
dynamic in the state with increasing value addition, and it employs approximately 240,000 workers, about 15 per cent of 
the total formal sector employment. However, agriculture growth and structural transformation are not spread evenly 
across the state with some areas, notably the north and east, lagging behind.  Likewise, around 57 per cent of all industries 
are concentrated in only three districts4.  
 
6.  Small and marginal farmers5 dominate Maharashtra's agriculture and commodity downturns significantly 
impact them as the state’s agriculture is diversified and relatively integrated with the global value chains. Commodities 
like soybean, cotton, and sugar (covering 44 per cent of the cropped area in Maharashtra) are strongly influenced by 
global price movements. Commodities with little footprint outside India are mainly influenced by trade policies. For 
example, over the past few years, the price of pulses (where pulses cover about 20 percent of the total cropped area in 

                                            
1 Annual Report, 2017-18. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
2 India is the fifth largest online grocery market in the Asia Pacific region and one of the fastest growing.  India’s online food and drink market grew to $135 million in 
2016 and is expected to cross $464 million in 2021. Likewise, the emergence of larger chains and stores which began around 2005 and has grown to over 3,000 modern 
retail outlets in 2016. 
3 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, 2017-18, GOM. 
4 A Report Based on ASI 2010-11, GOM. 
5 With average farm size of 1.44 ha. 


Maharashtra), while influenced by domestic consumption, were largely affected by the inconsistent trade policies of 
India. This is reflected in periodic farm distress in sectors linked to domestic and global markets, with broad shifts in the 
global prices of commodities such as pulses, soybean, sugar and milk leading to farmers not even being able to cover the 
cost of production in many cases. 
 
7. In response to these emerging production and market-related challenges, the Government of India (GOI) and 
Government of Maharashtra (GOM) have launched a number of programs, policies, and reform initiatives under the 
overarching vision of “Doubling Farmer’s Income by 2022”. New initiatives to address the production risks include a 
crop insurance scheme with enhanced coverage and use of technology; and a dedicated long-term irrigation fund with 
an initial tranche of US$3 billion. Additionally, to liberalise the regulated agriculture market, the GOI launched, and GOM 
adopted, second-generation marketing reforms, including the move towards integrating the country into a unified 
national market; and 100 per cent Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed to enhance investments in agribusiness/food 
processing sectors. A new agricultural export policy is in the final stages of approval and proposes doing away with 
arbitrary export quotas, and price restrictions.  Through this policy, India is targeting a doubling of agriculture exports to 
4.00 per cent (US$ 60 billion) by 2022.  
 
8. Women face a number of additional barriers to the transition to high value agriculture (HVA) and agribusiness. 
While India’s farmers are increasingly likely to be women, they are less able to transition to HVA than men, and their 
ownership of agricultural assets has stagnated. Unlike men who, in addition to production, also serve as the actors in the 
upper levels of the value chains, including intermediaries or village-level traders and processors, wholesalers, retailers, 
or exporters, women are generally concentrated at the lower levels of the value chains. This division of labour is mostly 
a reflection of social and cultural norms, which discourage women to travel by themselves or own land. These factors 
curtail women’s access to resources and services, including credit, training, extension, inputs, and trading and marketing 
networks. Women do not have collateral to apply for loan or opportunities to participate in extension training because 
selection for these opportunities is often based on land ownership titles or other formal records. More than 2 million 
poor women have been mobilised into Self Help Groups (SHGs) and federated organisations in the state.    These SHGs 
and federated organisations can serve as an important pillar to substantially enhance inclusion of rural poor women into 
agribusiness transformation and related entrepreneurship opportunities.   
 
9. The state also faces significant adverse risks from climate change:   As part of the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC), the Government of Maharashtra has formulated the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on 
Climate Change (MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study. The MSAAPCC climate 
modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected to increase across the state, 
with important regional variations resulting in potentially significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance. 
Impacts will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, 
hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall intensity) already experienced in the state over recent 
past, as illustrated by the three severe droughts that hit the state over the past five years. Given these uncertain shifts in 
weather and climatic events, the small and marginal farmers are disproportionately exposed to risk and farm distress. 
 
10. With the support of the World Bank, Maharashtra has recently rolled out four programs, to enhance the climate 
resiliency of the state’s agriculture: the Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture, and three national level 
programs that have significant presence in the state: the National Dairy Support Project (P107648), the National 
Groundwater Management Improvement Program (P158119) and the proposed Agriculture Risk Resilience Insurance 
Access Project (P165923). Their focus is on enhancing climate resilience of farmers through promoting adoption of 
climate-resilient agricultural technologies, irrigation and production risk management. The proposed project will seek to 
complement and leverage these Bank financed projects/programs and other thematically related on-going/pipeline 



projects and initiatives both nationally and in the state viz., National Rural Economic Transformation Project (P104164), 
the proposed Food Processing and Value Addition Pilot Program (P167559). 
 
Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The project advances two focus areas of the India CPF of promoting more resource efficient growth and enhancing 
competitiveness and creating jobs. Specifically, the project will support the following CPF goals: 

 
12. Objective 1.1: Promote more resource-efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector. The project 
closely aligns to the CPF sectoral goal of supporting Government of India (GOI) priorities of agricultural transformation 
and doubling farmer incomes by 2022. The project seeks to undertake a range of interventions to enhance market access, 
competitiveness and resilience to market shocks of farmers and value chain actors in the state of Maharashtra. The 
project will seek to generate jobs in agribusiness related areas including input supply, provision of technical services and 
food processing. The project will also explicitly target and develop mechanisms for inclusion of women at all level of 
agricultural transformation, from diversification to higher value crops, to access to higher level technical services, and 
access to a broader range of markets. This will promote inclusivity and diversification of the rural growth. With its strategy 
to align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes, the project will also advance resource 
efficient growth and build climate resilience of farmers. 

 
13. Objective 2.1: Improve the business environment and select firm capabilities. The project will support the GOM’s 
efforts to develop a more favourable regulatory environment for private investment in agribusiness related areas, 
promote private sector investments and enhance the competitiveness of the agricultural sector. This will include support 
for the improved implementation of reforms already undertaken; setting up of institutional structures for consultative 
planning and capacity building of identified value chains and growth clusters, and provision of technical services to 
agribusiness enterprises.  .  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
14. The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value 
chains6, focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra.     
 
B. Key Results 

a) Increased access to new and organised markets (gender disaggregated, with a target for increased access for 
women producers/value chain participants); (measured by increase in the value of marketed output at the 
beneficiary level); 

b) Beneficiaries of job-focused interventions (CRI) (gender disaggregated); (measured by the number of beneficiaries 
reached by training, employment in processing, entrepreneurial development and other interventions that 
contribute to the jobs agenda); and 

c) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (CRI) (gender disaggregated). 
 
15. Project beneficiaries include producers, community-based organisations (viz., SHG federations, Farmer Producer 
Organisations, and Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Societies), agri enterprises and other value chain participants, 
including individuals where relevant. 
 
D. Concept Description 

                                            
6 Competitive value chains are defined as those providing project beneficiaries with access to services, markets, and jobs. 




 
16. The proposed project will strengthen and speed up ongoing agricultural systems transformation in the state of 
Maharashtra. The project will support the state in strengthening the continuing market-driven transition, with an 
expanded private sector role in the production, processing, and value addition, commercialisation of crops, and livestock 
products. With a substantial urban population – the highest in the country; relatively high per capita incomes – third 
highest in the country; and the highest industrialisation level amongst states, Maharashtra is well placed for such 
agricultural sector transformation. The proposed project will support the following pillars of agriculture and rural 
transformation in the state:  

 
(a) Build state capacity for evidence-based agribusiness reforms. The state has undertaken many agriculture market 

reforms and plans to do more to address market-distorting interventions and bottlenecks for private sector activity.   
The project will seek to build capacity of the state to inform on how reform issues are debated, decided, implemented 
and evaluated; and develop institutional mechanisms for coordination with the private sector.  

(b) Expand market access. Constraints to producers and entrepreneurs accessing emerging domestic and export markets 
include lack of access to technical services relating to food safety and quality; weak information on market 
opportunities and requirements; and inability to invest in market development activities.  The project will seek to 
improve access of producers and entrepreneurs to a range of technical and business development services to 
enhance competitiveness through food safety and quality; new technologies; and skills training. International 
experience shows that accessing new markets requires longer-term strategic actions including identifying 
opportunity based on local competitive advantages and supply-demand projections; and support for firms and 
entrepreneurs to undertake market development. The project will support a range of such activities including: 
identifying opportunity commodities and value chains for interventions; scaling up production and processing of 
identified commodities; enhancing access to timely market information and intelligence; and supporting producer 
and enterprise associations to undertake market access activities.  

(c) Strengthen risk mitigation measures. The project will support strengthening risk mitigation measures including 
building the capacity of the state to respond to commodity-price fluctuations and agriculture sector crises; 
developing access to timely information on markets and productions trends; and enhancing access of producers to 
financing and hedging instruments. Additionally, for building the climate resiliency and resource growth, the project 
will align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes. 

 
17. In addressing these constraints, the project will support  a number of actions for leveraging additional resources 
by (i) improving the policy and regulatory environment for private sector investments in the agricultural sector; (ii) using 
public financing to enhance private sector incentives and to reduce transaction costs and risks  ; (iii) forging innovative 
partnerships for leveraging funding, including Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding through the Village Social 
Transformation Foundation (VSTF), a foundation promoted by the GOM, with private sector participation and financing, 
to catalyze rural transformation. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. The net 
irrigated area is only 30.77 million Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. Maharashtra has typical monsoon climate, with 
cold weather seasons. The state has been affected by the recurrent monsoon failures in recent years 
resulting in droughts which have disproportionately impacted the state’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. Sahyadri and 
Satpura are two important hill ranges and Godavari, Bhima and Krishna are the two major rivers of the state. The state 
also has a long coastline. About 17% area of the state is forest, majority of which are in the eastern and Sahyadri regions 
of the state. Since the central parts of the state receives low rainfall, most of the rivers in the region have multiple dams. 
Maharashtra has around 1800 notable large dams. Maharashtra is generally rich in biodiversity Southern Tropical Thorn 
with five major forest types (Southern Tropical Semi-Evergreen, Southern Tropical Moist Deciduous, Southern Tropical 
Dry Deciduous, Southern Tropical Thorn and Littoral and Swamp Forests). The Western Ghats areas of Maharashtra are 
included in the 34 global Biodiversity Hotspots. The proposed project will be implemented throughout the state. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Borrower is familiar with the World Bank's safeguard policies having implemented several Bank funded projects. 

More recently, in the agriculture sector, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project (MACP) and Project on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (PoCRA) are being implemented. Both have sound environmental and social management 
frameworks. MACP has been rated Satisfactory on safeguards performance consistently. There is now adequate capacity 
in the state to manage potential safeguard risks of projects. However, some capacity building efforts are needed to deal 
with the new set of challenges arising as a result of climate change impacts. In general, Maharashtra has good institutions 
that can prove technical support to deal with safeguards related impacts, risks and challenges and build on positive 
outcomes of resource efficiency and sustainability. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This policy is triggered. The project involves a series of 
interventions on agriculture value chain development, 
facilitating market access, supporting improvement of 
livestock productivity, food processing and, in general, 
enhancing resilience.  It is anticipated that 
investments to be made under the project will not 
lead to any major irreversible impacts. the project by 
design promotes market-led better natural resource 
and environmental management within the selected 
sectors and sub-sectors. The potential environmental 
issues that could arise if project financed investments 
are not implemented appropriately, include food 
safety, supply chain sustainability, waste generation 
and management, poor energy efficiency and 
associated emissions, soil degradation etc. Activities 
for post-harvest management and value chain creation 
for product aggregation, handling, and marketing 


could have impacts associated with general civil works 
construction, if supported under the project. This 
includes appropriate site selection for creating new 
infrastructure and reducing impacts of construction 
related activities like debris disposal, dust and solid 
wastes. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. At this stage it is 
not clear if investments in enhancing the access of 
intended project beneficiaries to private markets will 
trigger this policy. The project investments may result 
in increased role of private markets and attract private 
investments in food processing etc. The proposed EA 
will ascertain whether this policy will be triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. Project 
investments are not likely to adversely impact natural 
habitats but certain elements may have some bearing 
on agro-biodiversity. The EA will ascertain whether 
this policy will be triggered. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not lead to any impact on forests or 
their management practices. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Even through the project is not going to invest on the 
crop production side of agriculture, this policy is 
triggered as opportunities created through better 
market access could lead to overuse of pesticides and 
other agro-chemicals for boosting production. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project is unlikely to have any impact on physical 
cultural resources. Proposed investments are largely in 
existing markets and/or rural household level. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Project activities will be implemented state-wide. 
Given that Maharashtra has a large tribal population 
spread across the state with 54% of those living below 
poverty line, OP 4.10 has been triggered. As specific 
locations for the project are unknown, an Indigenous 
People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared 
after free, prior and informed consultation with 
affected Scheduled Tribes as per OP 4.10 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 
Project activities currently envisaged are not likely to 
cause any involuntary resettlement. This will be 
updated during preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not invest on constructing any new 
dam and/or support rehabilitation/improvement of 
any existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not involve any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project does not include any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 08, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard preparation will involve undertaking an Environment Assessment. The preparation timeline is aligned with 

project processing timeline. In addition, an Indigenous People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to take into 
account initiatives undertaken in areas populated by Scheduled Tribes. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
LIVELIHOODS RESILIENCE AND COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT (LRCP) IN PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

 

 

  
Jun 07, 2018 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23863 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P164336  LIVELIHOODS 
RESILIENCE AND 
COMMERCIALIZATION 
PROJECT (LRCP) IN 
PASTORAL AND AGRO-
PASTORAL AREAS 
(P164336) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jan 22, 2019 Mar 27, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Cooperation 

Ministry of Federal and 
Pastoral Development 
Affairs 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 600.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 400.00 

Financing Gap 100.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 400.00 



          IDA Credit 400.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 100.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 100.00 

 
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment   
 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Ethiopia, with a current estimated population of 102.4 million1 (2016), has seen rapid economic growth over the past 
decade and is one of the fastest growing economies in the World. The IMF predicted the growth rate of Ethiopia to be 
8.5 percent in 20182.  The rapid economic growth over the past decade3 has not been able to generate adequate 
employment opportunities and Ethiopia needs to generate 1.7 million jobs4 every year to provide gainful employment 
to youth who are entering workforce. The arid and semi-arid low-lands, accounting for 60 percent of land area with 12 
to 14 percent of population, comprising of pastoral and agro-pastoral (PAP) communities lag behind in most of the 
social and economic indicators and their livelihoods are highly vulnerable to a multitude of shocks, primarily droughts, 
which is being exacerbated by climate change.  

 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The pastoral and agro-pastoral system are complex systems that need to balance the dynamic interplay between 

                                            
1 World Development Indicator, World Bank  
2 IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2018  
3 Average annual GDP growth was 10.1% between 2010 and 2016, World Development Indicators, World Bank 
4 National Planning Commission, Government of Ethiopia. 


people, livestock and environment resource base. The complexity of these livelihood system is getting exacerbated, 
driven by multiple factors droughts, degradation of rangelands, active conflict and insecurity, constrained livestock 
mobility and access to key resources etc. All these changes are resulting in significant changes in PAP production and 
livelihood systems. The commercialization pull is resulting into a category of commercially oriented large-scale herd 
owners who are successfully managing the transition. The stress-push has resulted into a category of population who 
has moved-out of pastoralism either being forced out by successive droughts or opting out since the pastoral livelihood 
is no longer viable or being pulled-in towards other market opportunities. Despite the complexity and high stress 
environment, there are significant economic opportunities in the pastoral and agro-pastoral areas and a significant 
proportion of population is still engaged in pastoral and agro-pastoral systems while others are pursing alternate 
livelihood opportunities.  

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The operation features in the Bank’s CPF for FY 17-21 under the Building Resilience and Inclusiveness Pillar. In addition, 
it strongly contributes to “Promoting Structural and Economic Transformation through Increased Productivity’ pillar.  
The project will contribute to CPF result framework targets of enhance resilience, increase in agricultural yield, job 
creation, natural resource management, climate co-benefits, improved service delivery, as well as Ethiopia’s targets of 
National Adaptation Plan and Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP-2).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
To Enhance Livelihood Resilience and Commercialization of the Production Systems among PAP Communities in 
Ethiopia.  
 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The key PDO level Indicators includes:  

1. Number of direct project beneficiary (disaggregated by gender)  
2. People provided with access to improved Economic and Social services (disaggregated by service type and 

gender)  
3. Proportion (volume and value) of production sold by targeted beneficiaries for selected products  
4. Range and agricultural land area (in HA) under improved natural resource management practices 
5. Percentage increase in yield of selected crop and livestock commodities  
6. Jobs created (disaggregated by gender) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
A comprehensive and integrated approach, rather than discrete interventions, that addresses multiple dimensions of 
livelihood is needed to address the binding constraints described above. By understanding the needs of different 
beneficiary groups, pastoralists, agro-pastoralists, and households pursing or intending to pursue alternate livelihoods, 
and designing intervention packages to meet their specific needs, this project aims to support livelihood resilience and 
commercialization through the following project components. The project would invest in improving the overall 


     

enabling environment of rangeland management, pastoral risk management, and institutional development and 
capacity building which will contribute to increased resilience of the PAP communities and production systems.  To 
improve livelihoods, the project would support improving productivity and commercialization of pastoral and agro-
pastoral production system, small scale irrigation in lowland areas, and promoting livelihood diversification. To project 
would support improving access and utilization of basic social and economic services among the target communities 
through a decentralized Community Driven Development approach, which will be complimented by a strategic inter-
community, and inter woreda investments with the purpose of improving prevention and preparedness against 
disasters.  

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in the Pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia. The geographical coverage of the 

project would include regions of Afar, Ethio-Somali, Oromia and SNNPP. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The borrower has implemented a number of Bank projects and have moderate institutional capacity for implementing 

safeguard policies.The project implementation arrangements will largely follow the existing mechanisms for the ongoing 
PCDP III with slight modifications to capture recent developments. 
While implementing various World Bank Financed infrastructure projects (PCDP I-PCDP III), the Borrower has gained 

experiences in preparing safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESS and ESMP documents) to identify and address potential 
environmental and social risks. The Ministry of Federal and Pastoral Development Affairs (MoFPDA) has implemented 
three successive phases of Pastoral Community Development Project (PCDP) under an Adaptable Programme Lending 
(APL) spanning 15 years, which has been jointly supported by the World Bank and IFAD. It is, therefore, proposed that this 
new LRCP will utilize the existing experience that has been built up with the ongoing PCDP III safeguard implementation 
arrangements. MoFPDA has the responsibility for overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the LRCP. Currently, 
there are safeguards specialists dedicated for PCDP III at federal and the four regional bureau levels. However, if 
Gambella and Benishagul regions will be benefited from the proposed project they are required to deploy safeguards 
experts before commencement of the project. 
Experiences revealed that proper implementation and documentation of safeguards related matters still remains a 

challenge that needs to be further strengthened, through ensuring adequate personnel and capacity at the ministerial 
and local levels, to ensure environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 


Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Livelihoods Resilience and Commercialization 
Project (LRCP) is expected to finance the following 
activities: pasture development, supporting area 
enclosures, Prosopis and other invasive species 
control, water resource development along cattle 
corridors, soil and water conservation measures, 
afforestation activities, small dams, flood control, rain 
water harvesting, breed improvement, feed/forage 
improvement and management, animal health 
services, rain-fed agriculture, build demand-driven 
social and economic infrastructure; which may include 
schools, health posts, veterinary posts, small water 
supply and irrigation, small feeder roads, catchment 
management improvements. Given that most of the 
aforementioned activities result in environmental and 
social risks, an environmental and social assessment is 
necessary; ergo OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered. The 
assessment will be outlined in an Environmental and 
Social Framework to be updated prior to appraisal and 
key resullts and measures will be integrated into the 
project documents (PAD, PIM, ESMF, etc.). Further, 
site specific ESIA, ESMP and PMP will also be prepared, 
as required, during project prepation.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The Project is being implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In case of any linkages to private sector 
via the commercialization component of the Project, 
these will be handled via OP 4.01. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Pastoral areas cover some natural habitats which are 
protected by law, such as the Awash and Yangudi Rasa 
National Parks (Afar), Yabello Sanctuary (Borena) and 
the Babile Wildlife Sanctuary (Somali). However, LRCP 
is not expected to be operated within such areas or 
other areas that qualify as critical natural habitats 
under OP. 4.04 or include any sub-projects that have a 
bearing on protected areas. However, it will affect 
rangelands and pastures, for which OP/BP 4.04 will 
apply to protect even those non-critical natural 
habitats from any adverse impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered to avoid any anticipated 
potential impacts that may affect the natural forests 
found in Gambella and Benishangul Gumuze regions. 
Besides, LRCP is expected to finance afforestation and 
other natural resources management (range land 
management, area enclosure, …) related activities for 




which OP/BP 4.36 would apply. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Promotion of rain fed and/or irrigated farming where 
feasible and profitable is part of promoting sustainable 
livelihoods and may indirectly involve use of 
agrochemicals including fertilizers and pesticides for 
both crop and livestock improvements. The ESMF will 
include guidelines and procedures for the preparation 
of specific PMPs, when is required, during the project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands that 
may constitute physical cultural resources in the sense 
described in BP/OP. 4.11. Although the nature and 
scope of the LRCP sub-projects is not known now, they 
are unlikely to involve any major excavation work or 
inundation of areas with water, and are thus not likely 
to affect any physical cultural resources. Furthermore, 
subprojects will be carried out only in areas selected, 
through a broader consultative process that includes 
prior informed consent, by local citizens who would 
normally give great importance to safeguarding their 
cultural resources. Nonetheless, the policy is triggered, 
predicated on the assumption that there could be 
“chance find”. No sub-project that might have 
negative impacts on cultural property will be funded 
without acceptable mitigation measures prepared 
prior to execution of any such sub-project. There are 
national procedures and guidelines for reporting 
chance finds to be followed, and a national entity for 
coordinating and facilitating the archiving, safekeeping 
and documentation of physical cultural resources. The 
Project would work closely with the national authority, 
should any chance find issues arise. The requirements 
and standard measures of a chance-find procedure 
will also be included in the ESMF.  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the project area meet the criteria for OP 
4.10, with the project explicitly targeting lowlands in 
emerging regions. While the Project therefore will 
benefit specifically these areas, assessing culturally 
appropriate interventions as well as ensuring equal 
access to project benefits, a related Social Assessment 
shall be conducted and respective results integrated 
into the Project design. The SA will contain an explicit 
Social Development Plan and the Project will integrate 
the required measures into the PAD as well as 



allocating ressources to ensure its implementation. 
Consequently it will also be addressed in the PIM and 
the ESMG. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

LRCP interventions may involve acquisition of land and 
/or restriction of access to communal natural 
resources. Therefore, an RPF has to be prepared to 
ensure that appropriate measures are in place to 
address any issues which might arise from potential 
land acquisition and or restriction of access to 
communal natural resources under the Project. This 
RPF shall include appropriate tools to address 
potential impacts by a large number of sub-projects. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

LRCP is not expected to finance any investments 
aimed at rehabilitating or constructing large dams. 
Although there could possibly be construction of small 
dams under LRCP, particularly for small scale 
irrigation, they may not be large (more than 4.5 
meters high) and therefore may not require special 
procedures that are normally applied for large dams to 
follow. This notwithstanding, the Project will trigger 
OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams). In cases of small dams 
construction (less than 4.5 meters), the Project will 
use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to 
Siting, Design and Construction’. In addition, the 
guideline for small dam construction prepared by the 
MoA will be used to ensure safety of small dams. 
Generic dam safety measures designed by qualified 
engineers will be included in the design and 
implementation/rehabilitation of small dams; with 
respective requirements outlined in the ESMF. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

LRCP could extract very small amounts of water from 
any of the shared rivers or drainage systems. This 
notwithstanding, the Project will, in accordance with 
the requirements of the policy, send renewal 
notification of intended water use to the relevant 
riparian countries. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not expected to be implemented in any 
disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 21, 2019 
 



 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Before the project appraisal date 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agriculture Modernization and Competitiveness Project (P158372) 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC20304 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uzbekistan P158372  Agriculture 
Modernization and 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158372) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 26, 2019 Dec 16, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance State Investment 
Committee, Rural 
Restructuring Agency 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. Such 
services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination through 
extension services, support to productive partnerships, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and food safety 
systems. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 195.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 5.00 

          IDA Credit 5.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1 Uzbekistan is currently undergoing a paradigm shift away from its state-managed economy. In 2017 and 2018, the 
Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) launched a wide range of reforms that represent a shift from a state-led economic 
system to a market economy. As noted in the 2018 Performance & Learning Review of the World Bank (WB), these entail 
four fundamental economic and social shifts: (i) from the state to the private sector; (ii) from inward-looking to outward-
looking growth and jobs drivers; (iii) from general government subsidies to targeted social programs; and (iv) from central 
government to regional and local authorities, in particular as regards responsibility and accountability for the 
implementation of the reform agenda on the ground.  

2 Important progress has been made in the reform agenda. In an especially significant move, in September 2017, 
the GoU allowed a 50 percent devaluation of the Uzbek Som and abolished many foreign exchange controls. This almost 
immediately eliminated a thriving parallel foreign exchange market and eliminated about 30 percent of the cotton 
taxation, which was depressing agricultural incentives for decades1. The GoU further boosted market incentives by 
liberalizing many import tariffs and committing to WTO accession, lifting price controls for certain raw materials and 
production inputs, and extending the use of commodity market exchanges. It eliminated the monopoly on exports of fruits 
and vegetables and has taken steps to improve safety nets for vulnerable groups, which is critical for further agricultural 
and broader economic reforms. 

3 Significant progress has also been made in reducing the use of forced labor, which has been hampering sustainable 
development of agriculture and damaging Uzbekistan’s image on the global arena. Systematic use of child labor in cotton 
harvesting has been eradicated, while overall use of forced labor has been declining over time. The use of forced labor in 
2018 was estimated by the International Labor Organization (ILO) to drop to 7 percent compared to 15 percent in 2017. 
There is the highest level political commitment in Uzbekistan to fully eradicate the use of forced labor in all sectors, and 
an increased level of transparency and dialogue on the issue, encompassing all groups of civil society, including critical 
voices. The WB’s partnership with ILO has been instrumental to this achievement. Yet, the issue remains, requiring 
continued serious attention to it in future policy dialogue and investment operations.                    

4 While the above reforms are significant, they need to be deepened to facilitate the transition from a state-led to 
a market-oriented economic system as noted in the WB’s Reform Roadmap 2.02. This requires a fundamental reevaluation 
of the state’s role in the economy, from direct involvement in production and marketing to delivery of core public goods 


and correction of market failures. In other words, the government needs to decide what to “do less” and what to “do 
more” going forward. Yet, the definition of a new role of the state and economic transition itself has only just begun.   

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

5 In the overall reform context, agriculture is a sector of the economy where ambition and investment can be 
rewarded. Reforms in the sector present an opportunity to deliver quick economic and social wins, given the large share 
of employment and other economic gains this sector generates3, on the one hand, and its heavy overregulation and a lack 
of high-quality public services on the other. Recent reforms on cotton pricing, import tariffs for inputs and liberalization 
of horticulture exports need to be complemented by a broader shift in the government’s approach to agricultural 
development. This requires putting competitiveness, farm incomes, jobs, and sustainability at the center of the reform 
agenda.  

6 During the preparation of the Concept/Strategy for Agricultural Development in Uzbekistan by 2030 during 
September-December 2018, the completion date of which was moved to October 2019 by the President’s Decree4, it was 
largely agreed that modernizing agriculture requires delivery of a wide range of quality agricultural public services, with 
many of them have been either underfinanced or even not existed in the past. This should help restore the agricultural 
growth, which dropped sharply in recent years (Figure 1)5. Public services include applied agricultural research and 
development, extension/advisory services, education, soil fertility improvement, food safety, animal disease 
control/veterinary services, phytosanitary services, support for smallholder market inclusion (associations, cooperatives, 
clusters, productive partnerships), market and statistical information, market infrastructure and logistics, and 
environment protection and climate change adaptation, among others. The global experience shows that these public 
services are key to correct some large market failures and eventually accelerate agricultural transformation.   

7 Supporting the above-mentioned agricultural public services would constitute a significant departure from current 
practice, under which only few programs receive adequate attention and funding. In 2017 about 80 percent of the 
agricultural budget was spent on irrigation (for its operation and management, pumping water, building new canals, and 
improving drainage). The largest share of the remaining 20 percent was spent on subsidizing 130,000 cotton and wheat 
farmers, who cultivate about 3 million ha or 70 percent of the irrigated area. The public spending on agricultural research 
and development was just 0.01 percent of agriculture sector’s value added, compared to the average 1.5 percent in 
middle-income countries with successful agricultural transformation and of above 2 percent in the developed countries. 
Agricultural extension services do not even exist from the market-economy’s perspectives. Food safety and sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) standards are outdated, preventing Uzbek agri-food products from entering many foreign markets. As 
a result, most farmers do not receive any information and technical assistance (TA) on new technologies and farming 
practices, which leads to the large market failures. 

8 The most underserved are dehkan smallholders. There are 4.7 million of them, who cultivate 481,000 ha or 13 
percent of irrigated land arears. Even though they generate more than 75 percent of agricultural output, including more 
than 90 percent of horticulture and livestock outputs, they do not receive public services from the Ministry of Agriculture 
and other ministries. As dehkan farms are too small and often unskilled, private sector also do not provide any services to 
them either, except buying surpluses they produce. This leads to the market failure. The government has recently 
recognized the need to support this group of farmers through extension, TA, and investments6. Yet, more focus has been 

                                            
3 In 2017, the primary agriculture generated 19 percent of GDP, 20 percent of export, and 27 percent of employment. It provided inputs for 
development of food and textile industries, which accounted for 5 percent of GDP and 2 percent of employment. 
4 Decree of the President No. 5614 “On Additional Measures to Ensure Further Development of Economy and Increase Efficiency of Economic 
Policy” dated January 8, 2019.   
5 The recent decline in the growth of agricultural value added was a result of the decline in production of wheat and cotton caused by adverse 
weather and the more accurate statistical reporting in recent years.     
6 The President’s Decree No. PP-3680 “On Additional Measures to Improve Functioning of Farmers, Dehkans, and Household Plots” dated April 26, 
2018 assigned the Council of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots to lead engagement and delivery of services to small farms.  



so far given to their investment/credit support and less to their capacity building, voluntary cooperation, and their 
integration into modern value chains. This hampers the development of inclusive agri-food value chains as experienced 
under the ongoing WB and other donors-financed projects for horticulture and livestock development where the efforts 
to link dehkan farms to large farms and agribusinesses, who receive loans for their business development, largely fail. 

9 While the horticulture sector gets some boost from the government’s desire to increase and diversify exports, the 
livestock sector, which is oriented to domestic market, suffers from a lack of strategic approach to its development. The 
sustainability of its growth is affected by the limited fodder base,7 neglected pastural development, and the lack of 
veterinary, animal nutrition, and other TA services. The government’s attention in recent years has been more to bringing 
highly-productive cattle and upgrade dairy processing and less to addressing the above constraints. 

10 Uzbekistan’s agriculture is significantly exposed to the climate hazards. It is the most vulnerable to the decreased 
and more variable precipitation, higher temperatures, reduced river runoff, and increased frequency and severity of 
extreme events. The adaptation capacity of Uzbekistan’s agriculture is assessed to be weak8. The proposed options for 
increasing adaptation include: (i) generation of drought-and pest-resilient seeds; (ii) increasing access of farmers to 
technology and information through extension services, both generally and for adapting to climate change; (iii) optimizing 
the use of agronomic inputs, especially fertilizers, and adopting good agricultural and animal husbandry practices; (iv) 
investing in water saving technologies; and (v) encouraging farmers to efficiently adapt to climate change.      

11 Generating and delivering agricultural services in a coordinated manner is challenging due to the fragmentation 
of public institutions responsible for delivery of agricultural services. In 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Water 
Resources were split into the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water Resources. Moreover, during this split the 
State Plant Quarantine Inspection and the State Veterinary Inspection were both moved to the Cabinet of Ministers. Food 
safety’s responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture is shared with the Ministry of Health. And finally, the newly created 
Ministry of Innovations is responsible for agricultural research, especially seed development. The proposed project will 
engage selectively and strategically with these institutions during the project preparation and implementation. 

Relationship to CPF 

12 The proposed operation is aligned with the Country Performance Framework (CPF) for FY19-21, which has been 
adapted to meet Uzbekistan’s growing social and economic transformation. It largely falls under the Focus Area 1 
“Sustainable transformation towards market economy,” supporting a more strategic engagement in agriculture outlined 
in the CPF. The proposed project would leverage: (i) the WB Livestock Sector Development Project (US$150 million 
approved in June 2017) and additional financing to the WB Horticulture Development Project (US$500 million approved 
in January 2018), which stimulate private investments in production, processing, storing and marketing; (ii) the WB 
Fergana Region Entrepreneurship Project (US$200 million to be approved in March 2019), which will stimulate job creation 
and regional development; (iii) Climate Adaptation for Aral Sea Project (US$14 million), which provides financing for 
climate-smart adaptation practices; (iv) additional grants from the European Union for technical assistance to the WB 
operations to support value chain organization, institutional capacity building strengthening, regulatory framework 
improvement, and small farmers’ access to higher value markets through value chain inclusion in livestock and horticulture 
subsectors; (v) the IFC’s agribusiness and agrifinance programs; and (vi) projects of other development partners such as 
the Asian Development Bank’s horticulture and livestock projects, the European Union’s agricultural budget support, the 
French Development Agency’s livestock project, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s capacity building for 
agricultural institutions.     

13 The proposed project aims to add value by addressing needs that are currently unmet in the WB and other donors’ 
portfolio. The current WB projects are mainly focused on improving access to finance for larger farmers and agribusinesses 

                                            
7 The ratio of fodder area per a unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, against the global standard of 0.5 ha of irrigated area and 1.5 ha of dryland.  
8 World Bank. 2013. Reducing the Vulnerability of Uzbekistan’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change. A World Bank Study, Washington, D.C.  




and just marginally on strengthening selected public institutions to deliver better services for horticulture and livestock 
subsectors. The situation is similar with the projects financed by other major agricultural donors. The ongoing agricultural 
projects amount US$2.5 billion, while the pipeline for the next two years is US$0.8 billion. There are limited investments 
in strengthening public institutions to deliver services to agriculture in a coherent and integrated manner, especially for 
small farms, to increase the rates of economic return of many credit line’s projects and reduce risks for agricultural credit 
borrowers. The proposed project would work with the ongoing agricultural projects to identify investment gaps and design 
activities to leverage operations of the various donors and ultimately improve the agricultural sector outcomes. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

14 The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. 

15 Selected services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination 
through extension services, support for smallholder market inclusion, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and 
food safety systems. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

16 The proposed project would help: (i) generate more and better innovative farm and agribusiness technologies, 
information, and other public services through applied agricultural research; (ii) make them readily available to farmers 
and agribusiness through extension and advisory services; (iii) integrate smallholders in modern food value chains; and 
(iv) reduce costs of pest invasions and animal diseases and expand export opportunities through SPS and food safety 
services. 

D. Concept Description 

17 The proposed project will be a departure from the standard Uzbekistan’s donor-financed agricultural projects of 
the recent years. The standard project consists of a credit line component, typically accounting for 80-90 percent of the 
project costs, and a component for complementary TA to farmers and public institutions, either associated or not 
associated with the credit line. The latter is usually financed by grants. In two ongoing WB projects, for example, the 
capacity building TA activities are financed by the EU grants.     

18 The proposed project will be centered around strengthening public institutions to deliver more and better services 
to farmers and agribusinesses. The efforts will be made to modernize the public institutions through capacity building and 
investment support, encourage their more strategic engagement with private sector, and pilot delivery models of public 
services through public-private-partnerships (PPPs) and using digital technologies. The geography of the project activities 
will be nationwide.    

19 The key guiding principles for designing the proposed project would be the following: 

a. Supporting agricultural reforms: The proposed project will support reforms in agriculture, helping: (i) pilot 
new approaches for public programs, including through PPP; and (ii) define a new role of the government 
in market-oriented agriculture, including improvement in sustainability of land and water use, boosting 
shared prosperity, and elimination of unsustainable labor practices in the entire agri-food industry. It will 
be aligned with the WB Development Policy Operation(s), and, where relevant, with the EU’s agricultural 
budget support program (under preparation), to complement an improved agricultural policy 
environment by investments and capacity building.  

b. Financing public goods: Agricultural programs such as agricultural R&D, extension, cooperation and 
production partnerships, good agricultural practices (including climate-smart agricultural technologies), 
integrated pest management, and food safety and SPS are globally recognized as critical to induce 
agricultural modernization by correcting market failures and providing public goods. These public 




functions have been chronically underfinanced in Uzbekistan; to make impact, these programs require 
both investment and TA to increase quantity of services and, more importantly, improve their quality and 
outreach.   

c. Selection of public goods: Priority will be given to public programs critical to increase competitiveness of 
agricultural production and trade, both domestically and internationally. Competitiveness can be 
increased through higher productivity (or lower costs), adaptivity to climate change, better quality, higher 
(food) safety, and lower transaction costs.        

d. Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD): The proposed project will seek to crowd in private 
investments by strengthening the quality of public programs, reducing transaction costs for farmers and 
agribusinesses, piloting PPP in service delivery, and encouraging private investments in entire food 
system, including from the IFC. It should seek mobilize expertise and resources of the World Bank Group 
to deliver the best services to clients.       

e. Complementary investments that do not duplicate ongoing and planned programs: Several investments 
and capacity building projects financed by the WB and other development partners already support the 
above-mentioned areas of agricultural development and several more are in the pipeline. The proposed 
project will be complementary, focusing on filling gaps and connect various activities.   

20 The following activities and components will be considered during the project preparation. This list is intentionally 
long to provide the task team with flexibility during preparation and give the authorities more options to select from it 
when defining (and narrowing down) the scope of the proposed project.  

Component 1: Generating new agricultural technologies and innovations       

21 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
machinery and irrigation/drainage for agricultural research stations; (ii) competitive research grants; (iii) capacity building 
of researchers and other stakeholders associated with operation and management of their fixed assets, knowledge and 
skills for conducting modern agricultural research; and (iv) institution strengthening. Thematically, the support will focus 
on crop and fodder seeds and good agricultural practices (GAP). Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations and the Ministry of Agriculture.      

22 Seeds: Generating drought and pest-resistant seed varieties, multiplying, and making them available to farmers 
are critical to increase competitiveness of agricultural production, given the limited land and water availability in 
Uzbekistan. Yields are low even for crops, on which local agricultural research has focused in the recent decade. Thus, 
improvements are needed for a wide range of crops, from cotton and wheat to fruits and vegetables, and from seed 
genetics to seed multiplication. Seeds will need to be adjusted for different agro-ecological zones of the country. In 
addition, Uzbekistan can produce seeds for exports, which would require, among other things, to have seed laboratories 
accredited by the International Seed Quality Control Agency (ISTA). Furthermore, the proposed project can support PPPs 
in seed production, encouraged by the recent legislation9, by cofinancing the public aspects of the projects. 

23 Fodder crops and pasture management: Applied research on fodder crops and integrated pasture management 
could be supported to help increase the supply of feed to the growing livestock sector, which faces the rapidly rising feed 
cost. Feed account for 60-70 percent of meat and milk prices, so identifying suitable feed varieties and pasture 
management technologies (due to the limited irrigated areas to produce fodder) through agricultural research and 
extending this knowledge to farmers through extension services will be valuable investments. The current ratio of fodder 
area per unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is at least ten time lower than the international norms10; thus, efforts are needed to 

                                            
9 President’s Resolution No. PP-4020 “On Measures to Create Additional Incentives for Greenhouse’s Development” dated November 20, 2018. 
10 The ratio of fodder land per cattle unit in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, while international norms require it to be 0.5 ha for irrigated land and 1.5 ha for 




identify and promote high-productivity fodder crops suitable for production on both irrigated and dry lands to inform 
decision of farmers on selecting appropriate varieties and techniques suitable for various agro-ecological zones.     

24 Good agricultural practices: Uzbekistan does not have a code of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for crop and 
livestock production, which is common in other countries to promote climate-smart agricultural practices. In many 
countries the adoption of GAP is a precondition for farming or for receiving subsidies. It is also used as a precondition for 
adopting stricter Global GAPs and other standards such as organic and halal. There are many locally-tested best farming 
practices in Uzbekistan, but they are not put together in one coherent place and they are not widely disseminated and 
adopted. The project could support the preparation of the GAP code and guidelines using the best practice local and global 
knowledge; introduce pilot training courses and adjust draft code and guidelines based on experience/feedback; and 
publish final version of the code and guidelines and promote it widely through training programs for extension staff and 
farmers.  

25 The project could also support investments to update soil fertility maps, which is needed for GAP adoption. Such 
investments include upgrading soil testing laboratory infrastructure, digitalize map information with open-date access, 
developing best practice guidelines on soil monitoring and fertilizer use adjusted to different soil types and agro-ecological 
zones, making this information available to farmers through field-based advisers and extension services, and procuring 
portable field-based soil testing equipment to allow extension services and other advisers to provide immediate feedback 
to farmers on soil quality and proposed adjustments needed to enhance soil fertility.   

26 Institutional strengthening: Engagement will be required with the Ministry of Innovations, Ministry of Agriculture, 
other agencies/institutes and private sector (farmers and agribusinesses) to develop mechanisms to bring research and 
private sector together for better defining applied research priorities that would address constraints faced by farmers and 
agribusinesses in a timely and coordinated manner. The experience of the Netherlands and other countries will be used 
to foster a closer collaboration between researchers, farmers, and agribusiness companies. The proposed project could 
foster this kind of collaboration and generate knowledge and lessons to inform a roadmap for other reforms in the 
agricultural research system in Uzbekistan.                 

Component 2: Disseminating agricultural technologies and innovations and creating markets    

27 This component would support: (i) investments in infrastructure for extension/advisory activities, including 
mobility, learning campuses/facilities, demo plots close to farm fields, and creation of digital platforms for reaching out 
many farmers at low cost; (ii) capacity building of extension/advisory officers and preparation of extension materials for 
farmers and agribusinesses; and (iii) operation costs for delivering services to farmers and other clients. Preparation of 
this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Council 
of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots (Farmers Council), and other stakeholders such as cotton-textile clusters. 

28 Currently, the work of the public agricultural extension services is limited to delivery of production-oriented advice 
to farmers producing wheat and cotton under the government production quota and to make sure that farmers have 
inputs to meet their quotas. The proposed project would help transform them into market-oriented extension and 
advisory services differentiated to the needs of dehkan smallholders, larger farms, and agribusinesses, building on the 
recent legislation11 and the strategy for agricultural extension being drafted by the Ministry of Innovations. The reformed 
extension service would extend knowledge on new technologies and farming practices generated by research locally and 
globally to farmers; promote GAP adoption; offer diversified agribusiness support services; and use digital platforms to 
design services, deliver training and information, improve responsiveness, and increase farmer outreach.  

29 For dehkan farms, extension services could be delivered as a part of establishing productive partnerships, which 
are proved globally as a potent mechanism to promote farm collective actions and reduce transaction costs for 

                  

agribusinesses to include these farm groups in their value chains.  Productive partnerships as a part of the proposed 
project would help include smallholders in modern value chains and reduce transaction costs for agribusinesses to interact 
with smallholders, through: (i) TA for dehkan smallholders; (ii) promotion of their voluntary cooperation and development 
of joint investment plans; (iii) co-financing of investment plans through grants; and (iv) linking farm groups with 
agribusiness and lead firms. The latter could be selected from the ongoing WB-financed horticulture and livestock projects. 
Preparation of this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Farmers Council and the Ministry of Agriculture.     

30 For larger farms, for example, the PPP arrangements with cotton-textile clusters could be developed to deliver 
advisory services on cotton and wheat production and develop technology and information database using digital 
platforms on GAP, crop protection, integrated pest management, decent work, water usage, soil fertility, as well as good 
manufacturing practices in textile factories, to strengthen technical capacity of clusters’ technical staff to increase 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability of agricultural production. For agribusiness, the project could support 
preparation and delivery of targeted courses on agri-food enterprise business diagnostics, business planning and 
preparation of investment applications, and pilot agro-business schools and start-ups for small and medium scale farmers 
and agri-businesses. This part will be prepared in collaboration with IFC and ILO. 

Component 3: Improving SPS and food safety standards  

31 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
and other fixed assets of selected SPS and food safety-relevant public institutions; (ii) capacity building of staff associated 
with operation and management of their fixed assets and knowledge and skills for delivering public services; and (iii) 
institution strengthening. These investments will finance and co-finance public programs and be complementary to those 
already carried out or planned under the donor-financed projects. Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health, the State Plant Quarantine Inspection, and the State 
Veterinary Committee.     

32 Veterinary services: Efficient and trustworthy veterinary services are critical to reduce risk for farmers to invest 
in livestock, reduce economic losses in case of animal diseases, and protect human health. Currently, the delivery of 
veterinary services and their outreach are unsatisfactory to deal with the growing number of animals in the country. The 
World Animal Health Organization (OIE) has recently completed the assessment of the performance of veterinary services 
and investment gap, with the support of the WB-financed livestock project and the State Veterinary Service, with the 
purpose of identifying, detailing, and costing priority activities. The Gap Analysis identified priority areas of support and 
the associated investment needs (funding requirements) in all areas of veterinary services, including trade, veterinary 
public health, animal health, veterinary laboratories, and veterinary management services for the next five years. The 
identified gaps include investments needs in fixed assets, human capital, and operational resources, which will be used to 
define the activities for the proposed project. Veterinary laboratories alone include the large network of laboratories and 
veterinarians, which could be supported by the project.12 Investments will be based on thorough assessments of the needs 
and the role of specific units in delivering public services vis-à-vis the role of private sector.     

33 Phytosanitary/quarantine services: Uzbekistan incurs significant economic losses from pest invasions and from 
difficulty to meet the SPS requirements of importers. Uzbekistan, for example, is on top of the rejection of its fresh 
horticulture exports by the EU, mainly caused by the high level of mycotoxins in dried fruits, which is very far in excess of 
the EU standards. The proposed project could support the State Plant Quarantine Inspection to improve surveillance 
capacity to prevent pest invasions, promote adoption of integrated pest management as a part of GAP adoption, and 
facilitate trade, both export and import. Among several things, the project could help the Inspection to accelerate signing 

                                            
12 The network of veterinary laboratories in Uzbekistan comprises of the State Center for Animal Diseases and Food Safety, which also manages the 
State Research Center on Quality Control of VMPs and Feed Additives; 13 Regional Veterinary Laboratories; 130 Local Veterinary Laboratories; 
1,411 Field Veterinary Stations; 265 laboratories at food markets; and 27 Border Inspection Posts and Transport Stations. Together these veterinary 
laboratories employ 2,600 veterinarians and veterinary para-professionals.   



the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and develop a Pest Risk Analysis capability that is credible to IPPC 
members; establish minimum residual level standards and protocols per international norms and support an awareness-
raising program for existing and potential agri-food exporters; and establish a system of accreditation of SPS laboratories 
and where needed, reference laboratories connected to a network of public and private laboratories. 

34 Food safety standards: The WB’s CPSD analysis found that the food safety standards called GOST require 
modernization to meet the requirements of importers outside of the former Soviet Union and even to expand on 
traditional markets such as Kazakhstan and Russia, who adjust their food safety standards to internationally accepted 
norms and practices. This is especially urgent for horticulture products, for which foreign buyers are sensitive to meeting 
strict food safety requirements, as the above figure shows. The proposed project could support the process of bringing 
domestic food safety standards to the requirements of the major importing countries and provide TA to agribusinesses 
and exporters to adopt the upgraded food safety standards. 

Component 4: Project management and coordination  

35 This component will finance project management and coordination activities, as well as monitoring and 
evaluation. The scope of work under this component will be further defined as institutional and implementation 
arrangements are refined during preparation. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Although this project intends to provide institutional strengthening, capacity building, and improved service 
delivery, the project will be working with farmers. The GoU has a history of Child and Forced Labor (CFL) 
which was inherited from Soviet times. The GoU has made tremendous strides towards eliminating the use of 
CFL for harvesting of cotton. Third party monitoring by the ILO has reported that child labor seems to have 
been eliminated, however recent reports state cases of forced labor, although at much lower scale than 
previously, still exists. The project will be working with all farmers, which may include farmers who include 
cotton in their crop rotation. Therefore, the concern of forced labor raises project risk to a moderate level. All 
project initiatives, where relevant, will include addressing CFL, as well as ensuring women and the rural poor 
are included in project initiatives. 

 

 

