



















































LOAN NUMBER 3477-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

(Irrigated Agriculture Inclusive Development Project) 

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

MYA 47152



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 'Ll between THE REPUBLIC OF
THE UNION OF MYANMAR ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and

(B) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's Special 
Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set 
forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.01 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan, as 
denominated in accordance with Section 4.01, shall be credited to the 
Loan Account and may be withdrawn therefrom in accordance with the 
provisions of the Loan Agreement and these Regulations.

(b) Section 4.01 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Denomination of the Loan. The Loan shall be denominated 
in the particular currency specified in the Loan Agreement.

(c) Section 4.02 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the Loan
Account shall be made in the particular currency specified in the Loan 
Agreement.

(d) Section 4.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Currency of Payment of Principal. The principal of the Loan shall be 
expressed and repayable in the particular currency specified in the 



2

Loan Agreement. The Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn from 
the Loan Account in accordance with the Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as referred to in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “DOA" means the Department of Agriculture within MOALI of the 
Borrower or any successor thereto;

(d) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(f) "GAP" means the Gender Action Plan agreed between ADB and the 
Borrower for the Project and set out as one of the linked documents to the RRP;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting 
Services;

(h) “Indigenous Peoples Plan" or “IPP” means the indigenous peoples 
plan for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means the initial
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(k) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(I) "IWRM” means integrated water resources management;

(m) “IWUMD" means the Irrigation and Water Utilization Management 
Department within MOALI of the Borrower or any successor thereto;



3

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook’' means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation” 
means the Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation or any 
successor thereto;

(p) “MOALI” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

(q) "O&M” means operations and maintenance;

(r) "Output" means the outputs described in paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement;

(s) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
10 October 2016 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time 
in accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “PMU" means Project Management Unit as further described in the 
PAM;

(u) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(v) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
10 October 2016 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time 
in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(w) "Project Areas" means the areas within the territory of the Borrower 
that covers Magway, Yamethin, Shwebo and Meiktila districts;

(x) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MOALI or any successor thereto acceptable to 
ADB, which is responsible for carrying out of the Project;

(y) “Project facilities" means facilities to be installed, constructed, 
reconstructed, developed or operationalized under the Project;

(z) “PSC" means Project Steering Committee as further described in the 
PAM;

(aa) "Resettlement and Ethnic Groups Framework” or “REGF” means 
resettlement and ethnic groups framework prepared for the Project, including any updates 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement and Ethnic Groups Plan” or “REGP” means the 
resettlement and ethnic groups plan prepared for the Project, including any updates thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;



4

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and 
compliance with the EMP, the REGP and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective 
and preventative actions;

(ee) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding 
Consulting Services; and

(ff) “WUG” means the water user group that will be involved in Project 
implementation.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy-five million Dollars ($75,000,000).

Section 2.02. (a) The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest
charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time.

(b) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.

Section 3.05. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3.06. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.


IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE 
MYANMAR

UNION OF

DAW NWE NWE WIN
Director General

Treasury Department 
Ministry of Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
,cAristopAeK|Pohr

Officer-In-Charge
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased income and reduction of poverty for
rural populations in Project Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs:

Output 1: Effective Agriculture Value Chains in Oilseeds, Pulses and 
Horticultural Crops Developed. Under this Output, the Project shall support farming, landless 
communities and the other key participants in selected townships within Magway district 
(Magway region), Meiktila and Yamethin districts (Mandalay region), and Shwebo district 
(Sagaing region) through value chain and private sector development.

Output 2: Reliability of Agricultural Water Supplies Improved and Irrigated 
Area Increased. Under this Output, the Project shall support rehabilitation, modernization, 
and improved management of about five irrigation systems to improve the reliability of water 
supplies on about 20,000 hectares within Magway, Meiktila, Shwebo and Yamethin districts.

3. The Project shall include consulting services and is expected to be completed
by 31 December 2023.


12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing the interest charge on the
Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals shall be 
made from the Loan Account until the Borrower has (a) established the PMU to the satisfaction of 
ADB; and (b) trained the PMU staff in financial management.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 
(Irrigated Agriculture Inclusive Development Project)

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

Category 
($)

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1. Works** 47,182,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
2. Consulting Services** 2,220,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
3. Service Providers** 3,660,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

4. Agricultural Value Chain Development** 15,110,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5. Vehicles** 511,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
6. Equipment** 249,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
7. Office Materials** 435,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
8. Operational Costs** 3,519,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
9. Interest Charge 2,114,000 100% of amounts due

Total 75,000,000
*Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Borrower.
**Subject to the conditions of withdrawals described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to this Loan 
Agreement.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids
under international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of 
the Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) 
and 2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award Works contracts until:

(a) the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation 
has granted the final approval of the IEE of the Project;

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP 
into the Works contract; and

(c) the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REGP 
based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
REGP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for technical advisory and
Project management support in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting 
individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB's Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that each subproject shall meet the following
selection criteria:

(a) it shall be at least Category B in terms of environmental and social 
safeguards impacts as defined in the SPS;

(b) all land acquired and used for the subproject, including for 
development of tertiary canals, must be voluntarily donated or through 
other acceptable arrangement;

(c) should not be covered by other ongoing or proposed projects financed 
by ADB or any other development partners;

(d) there should be formal evidence of local demand for the subproject 
reflected in a letter from the township administrator;

(e) the beneficiaries should include sharecroppers, poor farmers, and 
women farmers; and

(f) should be economically viable; and technically, socially and 
environmentally feasible.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that each irrigation-related subproject shall meet
the following additional criteria:

(a) the irrigation system shall have low irrigation efficiency and water 
productivity with scope for substantial enhancement of both irrigation 
efficiency and water productivity;

(b) should involve only rehabilitation of existing systems and should not 
involve construction of new systems, any new supplementary 
structures or canals must be within existing command areas;

(c) should involve rehabilitation of primary, secondary and minor canals to 
ensure that water reaches the farm;



17
Schedule 5

(d) must have a command area that is conducive to diversification to 
higher value crops and some evidence of actual diversified cropping, 
at least in the summer;

(e) should have adequate physical access roads and bridges for input 
suppliers and access to markets, subject to minor improvements as 
part of the rehabilitation program;

(f) must have adequate water available to meet its irrigation water 
requirements for the proposed typical annual crop plan at least 4 years 
out of 5 years;

(g) the farmers must be willing to ensure maintenance and management 
of terminal units and priority will be given to those demonstrating 
existing community groups; and

(h) the coverage area of the subproject should be between 400 and 
10,000 hectares.

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all farmers within irrigated areas and at least
2/3 of farmers in neighboring benefited areas should (a) be granted permission by the 
relevant authorities to grow crops of the farmers’ choice in all seasons; and (b) have formally 
registered land use certificates for all their land in the Project Areas.

Subproject Selection Process

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the subprojects shall be selected through the
following process:

(a) the PMU, in consultation with IWUMD, DOA and the relevant regional 
and district authorities, shall conduct a feasibility review of potential 
subprojects;

(b) the PMU shall screen and rank subprojects in accordance with the 
selection criteria reflected in paragraphs 2 and 3 above and submit the 
ranking to the PSC for their consideration;

(c) the PSC shall consider and provide necessary concurrence to the 
proposed subprojects prepared and recommended by the PMU; and

(d) ADB shall issue a no-objection to the selected subprojects.

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities 
comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, 
health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.



18
Schedule 5

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the REGF, REGP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REGP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REGP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REGP.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human
resources to fully implement the EMP, the REGP and the IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that reguire contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the REGP and the IPP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 



19
Schedule 5

that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the 
REGP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the REGP 
and the IPP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or 
impacts, with detailed description of the event and proposed corrective 
action plan;

(c) no later than one month after the Effective Date, engage gualified and 
experienced external experts or gualified NGOs under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 
information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and reguirements set forth in the EMP, the REGF, the REGP or the 
IPP promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited-List of Investments

13. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project reguiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 



20
Schedule 5

occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include, but 
not limited to having at least 30% women's involvement in all training and in membership of 
common interest groups, farmer field schools and WUGs.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

19. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.







