




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme


Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$11.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$7.96 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.43 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$270,000

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic

Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).

2. The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.

3. Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.

4. Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.

5. Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.

6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.

7. Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.

8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.

9. Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.

10. In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP

11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.

12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.

13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma

and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.

15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.

B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in

the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.

17. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:

(a) Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.

(b) Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.

(c) Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.

C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils

(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.

19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).

20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the

Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.

1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.

26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.

27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.

29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support

missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this

total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning 2 142 71 247 8 637 21 3 025

2. Implementation of
investment plans 4 755 77 265 4 1 139 18 6 159

3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination 1 055 54 253 13 650 33 1 959

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143

B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide

US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles and equipment 188 84 36 16 224 2
2. Training 614 84 117 16 731 7
3. Consultancy services 2 904 66 500 11 982 22 4 385 39
4. Grants (for sub-projects) 3 202 78 265 6 660 16 4 128 37
5. Salaries 534 50 534 50 1 068 10
6. Operating expenses 510 84 97 16 607 5

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of

annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.

34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.

D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national

policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.

36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.

37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.

38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,

climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.

40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.

42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.

43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.

44. Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.

45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.

47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.

48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

9

assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.

49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).

50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the

development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.

52. In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.

53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).

Innovations and scaling upC.
54. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project

builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.

Policy engagementD.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is

aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

10

Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the
Livestock Cooperatives Development Project
in the Central-Eastern Region


Republic of Cuba

Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the
Central-Eastern Region

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Cuba

Executing agency: Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment,
delegated to the Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$50 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.9 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.9 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a
grace period of three years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Cofinancier: French Development Agency

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$10 million (CUP 10 million as per official exchange
rate of the Central Bank of Cuba)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in
the Central-Eastern Region as contained in paragraph 58.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock
Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern
Region

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cuba is a middle-income country that in 2014 had a population of 11.2 million,

23 per cent living in rural areas. In 2014, Cuba’s nominal gross domestic product
(GDP) was US$80,656 million, equivalent to a GDP per capita of US$7,186.
However, care must be taken when analysing per capita GDP in view of the
country’s regulated dual monetary system, in which the Cuban Peso (CUP) and the
Cuban Convertible Peso (CUC) coexist. According to the World Food Programme
(WFP), between 60 per cent and 75 per cent of households’ income is spent on
food, which is high compared to other middle-income countries (the average is
between 20 per cent and 45 per cent).

2. With social policies guaranteeing food and nutritional security, and targeting the
most vulnerable populations, Cuba has made major strides in eradicating extreme
poverty and hunger. It is the only country in Latin America and the Caribbean to
have eliminated severe infant malnutrition. According to the 2015 Human
Development Report, Cuba is advanced in terms of human development, with a
score of 0.769, ranking 67th out of 188 countries. Cuba’s score is above average for
countries rated as high in human development (0.744).

3. Cuba’s agricultural sector accounts for about 4 per cent of its GDP but employs
approximately 20 per cent of the workforce, 16 per cent of whom are women. The
agricultural sector is in transition, with an increasing role played by private
cooperatives and individual farmers, which account for over 90 per cent of
agricultural production on 70 per cent of the land. While the state purchased
80 per cent of national production in 2007, this figure decreased to 60 per cent in
2012. Growing domestic food markets and demand from the increasing tourist
sector are providing opportunities for local producers; however producers must
enhance the quality and quantity of their production in order to serve these
markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
4. Food security is a strategic priority for the Cuban Government. The agricultural

sector’s current productivity is well below the country’s potential, considering the
availability of natural resources and human and technological capital. As a result,
local food production is insufficient to cover demand and Cuba is highly dependent
on food imports.

5. A decline of productivity in Cuba’s livestock sector was caused by gradual
decapitalization since the 1990s. As a result, the livestock sector changed from an
advanced production system based on the intensive use of inputs to a dispersed
system of pastoralism. National milk production fell from 982 million litres in 1989
to 434 million litres in 2014, and meat production decreased from 271 thousand
tons in 1990 to 119 thousand tons in 2014.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

6. Improving agricultural productivity is therefore at the core of Cuba’s public policy
agenda. Since April 2011, Cuba has begun a series of political, institutional and
economic reforms known as the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. These
guidelines call for a gradual transformation of the agricultural sector by introducing
more market incentives and private-sector production, and reducing controls on
prices and wages.

7. As outlined in the country strategy note, IFAD can play an important role in
supporting the transformation of Cuba’s agricultural sector by supporting
smallholders organized into private cooperatives, who represent the productive
backbone of the sector. In order to meet the challenges of changing economic
conditions and benefit from new opportunities, these smallholders need productive
assets, inputs and capacity-building.

8. The Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern Region
(PRODEGAN) aims to support private cooperatives comprised of smallholders
managing dual-purpose cattle and focused on milk and meat production. The
Government currently imports nearly 50,000 tons of milk powder per year to cover
50 percent of local demand in a world market characterized by volatile prices.

9. The proposed project builds upon the experience gained from the ongoing
Cooperative Rural Development Project in the Oriental Region (PRODECOR), which
focuses on production of maize and beans in the eastern provinces of Las Tunas,
Holguín, Granma and Santiago de Cuba. As in PRODECOR, the focus of this project
is on increasing the productivity of private cooperatives through participatory
development plans and improved service provision.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
10. The project area encompasses the province of Camagüey, in which four priority

municipalities have been selected: Guaímaro, Sibanicú, Camagüey and Jimaguayú.
These municipalities comprise 45 per cent of the province’s cattle population and
57 per cent of its milk production. The area was selected because of its long
tradition of livestock production, its productive potential, the presence of processing
plants with spare capacity and the concentration of cooperatives that are already
integrated into existing value chains.

11. Since the 1990s, the economy in Camagüey province has suffered because of a
decline in the livestock sector caused by decreasing investments, a lack of inputs,
limited technical assistance, land degradation and the effects of climate change and
variability. The proposed project aims to reverse this trend.

12. PRODEGAN will directly benefit 11,500 rural families organized in 105 cooperatives,
for a total of 34,500 direct beneficiaries. These direct beneficiaries will include:
(i) members of cooperatives producing meat, milk and dairy products such as
cheese; (ii) wage-earning rural workers employed by the cooperatives; and
(iii) technicians employed by the service providers of livestock cooperatives.

13. The cooperatives average between 60 and 140 members; women represent
13 per cent of cooperative membership and young people 11 per cent. PRODEGAN
will focus on reaching women (at least 20 per cent) and youth (at least 15
per cent), and will support their inclusion in cooperatives’ decision-making and
productive activities.

14. Three types of cooperatives exist in Cuba. Credit and service cooperatives, created
in 1963, are characterized by individual land ownership and comprise
approximately 60 per cent of the cooperatives in the area; they are considered to
be the most efficient form of cooperative. Basic cooperative production units are
former state farms transformed in 1993. Characterized by collective ownership
structures, they comprise approximately 30 per cent of cooperatives in the area. In
agricultural production cooperatives, which were created in 1975, individuals



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

voluntarily agree on collective ownership (they comprise approximately 10 per cent
of the cooperatives in the area).

B. Project development objective
15. The development objective of the project is to promote the sustainable growth of

the livestock sector by increasing the production and sale of milk and meat, raising
the incomes of beneficiary families in cooperatives. The main outcomes for the
primary target group will be: (i) higher average net incomes for members of
participating cooperatives; (ii) increased delivery of cold milk from cooperatives to
the industry from 17 million litres to 47 million liters per year; and (iii) increased
sale of beef by cooperatives from 5,000 tons to 6,000 tons per year.

C. Components/outcomes
16. PRODEGAN has three inter-linked technical components and one component for

project management. The main focus of component 1 is on strengthening milk and
meat producing cooperatives, which currently have significant manual labour
capacity, high mortality and low birth rates of cattle, insufficient pastures and
limited water availability. Through component 2, service providers in the project
area will be strengthened in order to free up land, increase water availability,
improve artificial insemination and veterinary services, and build cooperatives’
capacity. Finally, in order to ensure sufficient capacity to collect and process the
increased milk and meat produced, agro-industry in the project area will be
supported through component 3. The main expected outcomes of each component
are detailed below:

(a) Component 1: Strengthening smallholder livestock cooperatives. By
implementing cooperative development plans (CDPs), livestock farmers will
increase their cattle populations and milk and meat production in a
sustainable manner. The project also aims to improve their managerial and
organizational capacities, with a focus on gender. Specific outcomes will
include: (i) an increase in annual milk production per lactating cow from
600 liters to 1,300 liters; (ii) decreased mortality of herds from 7 per cent to
4 per cent; and (iii) an increase in the percentage of women in managerial
positions within cooperatives from 14 per cent to 20 per cent.

(b) Component 2: Strengthening service providers. The project is expected
to enable service providers to substantially improve the frequency and quality
of their services, including technical assistance and provision of quality inputs.
Specifically: (i) the percentage of pregnant inseminated cows is expected to
increase from 45 per cent to 60 per cent; (ii) improved pastureland in the
project area will increase from 4,000 hectare to 8,000 hectare per year; and
(iii) 200 water-capture infrastructures will be rehabilitated.

(c) Component 3: Strengthening agro-industry. Through component 3, milk
and meat transport and industry processing capacity will be strengthened; the
exact outcomes will be defined by a value chain study. Expected outcomes
include: (i) an increase in transport capacity for the collection of milk; and
(ii) an increase of the processing capacity of the meat industry in Camagüey.

(d) Component 4: Project management and coordination. This component
consists of project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities. It includes the development of strategy and operational guidelines,
and the responsibility for technically sound project implementation. The M&E
system will be an important input into the knowledge management agenda of
IFAD’s country programme, which is the basis for IFAD’s dialogue with the
Government on rural development.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

17. In line with experience from PRODECOR, the implementation approach is based on
the definition of community-driven CDPs. Through these plans, livestock farmers
will assess their strengths and weaknesses, and the opportunities and threats they
face, and define the most appropriate development strategy for their cooperatives.

18. In parallel with the development of the first CDPs, a participatory value chain
analysis will be carried out involving major stakeholders in the livestock sector. The
objective of this study is to identify the main weaknesses and entry points in the
milk and meat value chains in order to guide the development of
service-strengthening plans.

19. It is foreseen that cooperatives, most service providers and agro-industry
stakeholders will finance their investments through bank loans in the local currency
– mainly from the Bank for Credit and Trade. A similar mechanism is currently
being implemented through PRODECOR. Service providers such as environmental
agencies, institutes for land and water, and the University of Camagüey, which
cannot utilize credit, will be supported through budgetary allocations by the
Government.

20. The CDPs and service-strengthening plans are expected to be formulated over a
three-year period and each will have a time horizon of two to three years. The
overall duration of the project is expected to be six years.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment will act as legal

representative of the borrower. The responsibility for execution will be delegated to
the Ministry of Agriculture, which regulates all activities related to milk and meat
production. Within the Ministry of Agriculture, the responsible agency will be the
Livestock Business Group, which is responsible for providing production and
business services to livestock cooperatives. The Ministry of Agriculture will also
coordinate agro-industry investments with the Ministry of Food Industry and the
Food Industry Business Group.

22. In order to benefit from lessons learned, a national coordination office for IFAD
projects in Cuba will be established at the Ministry of Agriculture, employing staff
from PRODECOR. This office will be in charge of: (i) supporting the definition of
participatory development plans; (ii) administration, financial management and
procurement; (iii) planning and M&E; and (iv) knowledge management, including
South-South cooperation, exchanges, seminars and studies.

23. In addition, a technical implementation unit will be established within the Livestock
Business Group with a main office in Havana and a local office in Camagüey.

24. An investment evaluation committee will be set up to evaluate the individual
investment plans of cooperatives, service providers and agro-industry stakeholders.
In addition, a national project steering committee will be established to approve
annual workplans and budgets, and provide strategic guidance. Both committees
will be comprised of representatives from government ministries; IFAD will be an
observer on the national project steering committee.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. A planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be established to provide
timely information on project performance and support continuous improvement of
project management. The system will be designed and launched during the first six
months of implementation, benefitting from the experience of PRODECOR. Its
purpose is to: (i) generate updated information on project goals, outputs, results
and impact; and (ii) facilitate learning, the exchange of experiences and best
practices, and the dissemination of project results.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

26. A midterm review will be conducted to: (i) assess the cost recovery of the service
providers; (ii) evaluate the performance of the different types of cooperatives; and
(iii) analyse the performance and impact of the reference farms. As a result of this
midterm review, any necessary adjustments will be discussed with the Government.

27. The National Statistics and Information Office is expected to participate in the
development of the baseline survey, midterm review and final impact study.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by the national office for the management of IFAD-funded
projects within the Ministry of Agriculture. This arrangement will capitalize on the
experience gained by PRODECOR staff and is expected to promote project
readiness. This project will utilize the same accounting system as PRODECOR,
which complies with minimum IFAD requirements.

29. The financial management and procurement systems used by public entities in
Cuba are in line with national regulatory authorities including the Office of the
Comptroller General, the Ministry of Finance and Pricing, the Ministry of Economy
and Planning, and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment.
Compliance with the standards and procedures governing these systems is
mandatory for all government agencies. This requirement also applies to the
Livestock Business Group, the national coordination office and technical
implementation unit.

30. Based on Cuba’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 47 and IFAD’s experience in the country, the project’s fiduciary risk has
been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in this section, along with
implementation support, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risks.

31. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in euros at the Bank
for Credit and Trade exclusively for the loan proceeds. Operating accounts in
convertible pesos will be opened at the same bank and administered by the national
coordination office.

32. Audit. The project team will submit annual consolidated financial statements
compliant with international standards. The annual consolidated financial
statements will be independently audited in line with terms of reference approved
by IFAD and in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD’s
Guidelines on Project Audits. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within
six months from the end of the each fiscal year.

33. Procurement. Goods from abroad will be procured using the services of the
Caribbean Citrus Anonymous Society, the Ministry of Agriculture’s specialized
import-export agency. The delivery of external acquisitions and domestic
procurement will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture’s Business Logistics
Group and the Livestock Insurance and Services Company. The national
coordination office will be required to seek IFAD’s approval on a no-objection basis
before replacing the procurement agency. Minor purchases will be handled by the
national coordination office, which will apply the provisions and regulations detailed
in the project operating manual in accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

34. Governance. To promote good governance, IFAD applies a policy of zero tolerance
against fraud, corruption and misconduct.

E. Supervision
35. PRODEGAN will be directly supervised by IFAD in line with its policy on supervision

and implementation support. As the lead agency, IFAD will also supervise
implementation of the portion of the project financed by French Development
Agency (AFD) based on an agreement between AFD and IFAD. AFD will participate
in supervision missions and will approve all annual workplans and budgets,
procurement plans, terms of reference, reports of external evaluations and
requirements for annual audit reports related to AFD financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. The first supervision mission is planned for the first year of the project and will
focus on operational and financial progress achieved during initial implementation.
It will include a review and assessment of the project’s financial management
arrangements. Subsequent supervision missions will take place annually, including
field visits to verify progress and evaluate any implementation problems.

37. Implementation-support activities during the first 18 months are expected to
include:(i) supporting the fulfilment of conditions for the first disbursement;
(ii) organizing a start-up workshop; (iii) training staff of the national coordination
office and technical implementation unit in the preparation of annual workplans and
budgets, procurement plans and withdrawal applications, and fiduciary
requirements and procurement procedures; (iv) supporting the preparation of an
implementation strategy, value chain study and progress reports for each project
component; and (v) supporting the design and set-up of the planning, M&E and
knowledge management system.

F. Exceptions to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing and IFAD’s operating policies

38. Expenses incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date
of entry into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a
ceiling of EUR 300,000 for activities related to: (i) adjustments to the accounting
system; (ii) the start-up workshop; (iii) the baseline survey and gender
methodology; (iv) the value chain study; and (v) equipping and operating the
national coordination office and the technical implementation unit. Depending on
the nature of expenditures, the costs of these activities will be charged against the
relevant categories of expenditures indicated in the financing agreement.

39. In addition, it was agreed with the Government of Cuba that as an exception to
section 14.04(a) of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing,
the number of arbitrators will be three, and the provisions of article 9 of the
Arbitration Rules 2012 of the Permanent Court of Arbitration will apply.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
40. The base cost of the project is US$47.5 million, plus estimated contingencies, for a

total cost of US$50 million. Of the total cost, 5 per cent is for physical contingencies
and price increases.
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart1 Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Strengthening smallholder
livestock cooperatives 7 940 67 18 485 66 4 512 45 30 937 62
2. Strengthening service
providers 2 412 20 5 615 20 2 131 21 10 158 20
3. Strengthening agro-industry - - 4 000 14 2 000 20 6 000 12
4. Project management and
coordination 1 548 13 - - 1 357 14 2 905 6

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

1 In accordance with the Agreement Establishing IFAD and the General Conditions for Agricultural Development
Financing, IFAD usually calculates the value of government contributions using the exchange rate published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, Cuba is not a member of the IMF. According to the Central Bank of Cuba
and the United Nations Operational Rates of Exchange, the exchange rate of US$/CUP is 1:1, and is therefore the rate
used in this document for the US dollars value of the government contribution expressed in local currency. There is no
actual rate for foreign currency transaction to and from CUP within the country, and the exchange rate from CUP to CUC
used for private transactions in the country is significantly different than the US$/CUP rate. The actual value of the
government contribution will be subject to external audit based on expenditures incurred.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan denominated in euros (equivalent

to approximately to US$11.9 million); (ii) a loan from AFD for EUR 25 million
(equivalent to approximately US$28.1 million); and (iii) a counterpart contribution
from the Government estimated at US$10 million.

42. IFAD and AFD loans will cofinance components 1 and 2; external financing of
component 3 (strengthening agro-industry) will be provided by AFD; and
component 4 (project management) will be financed by IFAD. The borrower’s
contribution will cofinance all components and taxes.
Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and materials 10 415 88 27 589 98 5 162 51 43 166 86
2. Consultancies 685 6 193 1 58 1 936 2
3. Training 190 2 318 1 3 616 36 4 124 8
4. Operating costs 610 4 - - 1 164 12 1 774 4

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
43. The main benefits expected from the project are: (i) an increase in domestic milk

and meat production and sales (which reduces the need for imports); (ii) the
strengthening of actors along the milk and meat value chains; and (iii) an increase
in the participation of women and youth, ensuring a better quality of life for
cooperative members.

44. The financial analysis shows that considering prices in Cuba’s livestock sector, the
proposed investments are financially viable. The financial rate of return ranges from
38 per cent to 87 per cent (whereby credit and service cooperatives have higher
rates of return than cooperatives characterized by common ownership structures).

45. The economic analysis, which considers economic prices and costs, shows that the
proposed project is competitive with imports, with an economic rate of return of
14.8 per cent and a net present value of US$26 million.

D. Sustainability
46. The project design is based on the sustainable development of the cooperative

organizations, with support also extended to service providers and local
agro-industry. Measures to promote sustainability include: (i) a special budget
dedicated to increasing the participation of women and youth, enabling the
sustainable development of human capital; (ii) integrating the area’s main
environmental agencies as service providers in order to ensure the sustainable
management of natural resources and the adoption of climate change adaptation
measures; and (iii) involving local financial institutions (especially the Bank for
Credit and Trade) as loan providers to ensure the financial sustainability of the
investment plans.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Risk identification and mitigation
47. The main identified risks and mitigation measures are described below:

Main risks Mitigation strategy

Changes in Cuba’s current
policy framework could lead to
changes in relative prices.

The project will strengthen the productive, organizational and
entrepreneurial capacities of participating cooperatives, increasing their
adaptive capacities to possible market changes. This will be achieved
through capacity-building and the sustainable provision of equipment and
inputs to increase their productivity and competitiveness.

Climate variability poses a risk
to project activities.

To ensure the sustainable management of natural resources, the
formulation and implementation of CDPs will take into consideration the
environmental context in which cooperatives operate; the Government’s
environmental agencies will be involved in this process.

A lack of understanding of the
project strategy, methodology
and implementation procedures
may have adverse effects on
implementation.

The establishment of a single coordination office with experience from
the PRODECOR project will allow the project to benefit from the lessons
learned in terms of methodology, administration, financial management,
procurement and M&E.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. The project is consistent with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, and aims to
increase rural people’s productive capacities while supporting market participation
and strengthening the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their
activities. The project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by
applying geographical targeting (by province, municipality and cooperative),
self-targeting (through participatory development plans) and social targeting
(focused on women and youth); (ii) gender, through its strategy aimed at closing
the gender gap and increasing women’s participation in cooperatives;
(iii) environmental and natural resource management, by supporting
climate-resilient production and the sustainable management of land and water
resources; and (iv) rural finance, by providing access to rural financial services.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The proposed project is aligned with the Government’s agricultural sector reform

agenda, as outlined in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. This includes:
(i) fostering the autonomy and productivity of cooperatives; (ii) supporting free
competition by facilitating producers’ direct access to inputs, equipment and
markets; (iii) reducing the amount of unproductive land and increasing agricultural
yields in an environmentally sustainable manner; and (iv) ensuring that banking
services are available to the agro-industry sector. In addition, the project is aligned
with Cuba’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change since it includes climate change
adaptation activities and mitigation measures (e.g. renewable energy sources).

50. IFAD has engaged with development partners such as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), WFP, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) and the European Union to ensure that the project is aligned with their
activities in the country. The project’s integrated approach, which considers value
chains and long-term environmental sustainability, is based on lessons learned
from two projects on environmental investments in milk production managed by
UNDP and financed by the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
51. The main innovations that the project will introduce are: (i) the establishment of

"service cooperatives" providing support to other cooperatives (e.g. hay and
ensilage services, and equipment maintenance); (ii) 10 reference farms for
observing and disseminating new technologies (four of which will develop



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

innovative environmental practices such as automatic meteorological systems,
solar-powered electric fences and biodigesters); and (iii) the establishment of
10 hectare of silvo-pastoral areas for each cooperative. Other innovations will be
demand driven, emerging from cooperatives’ development plans. These innovations
will be disseminated through knowledge-sharing activities.

52. If the project successfully meets its objectives, it could be scaled up to other
municipalities in Camagüey province and the neighboring provinces of Ciego de
Ávila and Las Tunas – potentially doubling the number of beneficiaries.

Policy engagementD.
53. Policy dialogue will be driven by the national project steering committee, which will

include representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Foreign Trade
and Foreign Investment, the Ministry of Food Industry, the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Environment, the Ministry of Economy and Planning, the National
Institute of Water Resources, the National Statistics and Information Office, the
Central Bank of Cuba and the Bank for Credit and Trade, with IFAD and AFD as
observers. This dialogue will cover: (i) lessons learned from project innovations and
their potential for scale-up; (ii) the results of efforts to increase the participation of
women and youth in the livestock sector; (iii) progress in establishing a financing
mechanism with the Bank for Credit and Trade; and (iv) any risks related to the
Cuban economy’s gradual liberalization and changes in relative prices, along with
mitigation strategies.

54. M&E and knowledge management activities during project implementation will
assist both the Government and IFAD in making better use of the policies for the
cooperative sector as detailed in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
55. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Cuba and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

56. The Republic of Cuba is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

57. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
58. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Cuba in an amount equivalent to ten million nine hundred
thousand euros (10,900,000) (equivalent to US$11.9 million), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value
Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

Republic of Ecuador

Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture
and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$35.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$25.7 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of six years, with an interest rate per annum
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$5.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain
Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA), as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Ecuador is classified as an upper middle-income country. In 2015

the country posted GDP growth of 4.1 per cent, with inflation and external debt of
4.0 per cent and 20.4 per cent, respectively. With sustained growth over the past
decade has come an expansion in the public sector, broad-based reforms and social
programmes, and upgraded infrastructure, particularly roads. This modernization
process has been funded largely with oil revenues. However, the gradual decline in
oil prices since 2014, difficulty accessing new sources of financing and dollar
appreciation have affected the general government budget, which was cut by
2.2 per cent of GDP in 2016.

2. The economic deceleration and contraction in domestic demand contributed to
pushing up poverty from 22.5 per cent to 23.3 per cent between 2014 and 2015,
resulting in a rise in rural poverty from 35.3 per cent to 39.3 per cent. Despite the
progress made on inequality, poverty and expanding access to services, the gaps
between urban and rural and vulnerable people – indigenous, Montubian and
Afro-Ecuadorean people – are even more marked. In addition, the current
macro-economic situation places this progress in jeopardy. Many of the families
who have risen above the poverty threshold are in a vulnerable situation that could
easily revert to absolute poverty.

3. In this context, one of this administration’s priority objectives is to make a shift in
production patterns by promoting the value chain approach and adding value to
commodities in order to boost exports.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The project originated in the realization by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) that providing production support is not
sufficient to enable smallholder farmers to overcome poverty. What is needed is to
identify promising subsectors and act along the entire value chain to distribute
returns more fairly. To contribute to sustainable rural development it is crucial to
seek institutional partnerships with the private sector, in order to match supply to
demand and enable smallholder producers to benefit from market opportunities and
raise their incomes. The project’s collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and
Productivity (MIPRO) is a response to these needs, and the partnership with IFAD is
taking place in the context of major government policies.

5. The project is aligned with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP), which are as follows: (i) to improve access to
assets and resources to support the diversification of Ecuador's rural economy by
promoting, inter alia, associational initiatives and investments that generate
employment and income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (ii) build the



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

capacities of poor rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to enable them to
participate in and benefit from the formulation of inclusive, pro-poor production
policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The selected area includes 65 cantons in the provinces of Orellana, Napo

(Amazonia), Imbabura (Sierra Norte), Cotopaxi, Chimborazo, Bolívar and
Tungurahua (Sierra Centro), Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí and Esmeraldas (Costa), the
latter two seriously affected by the earthquake earlier in 2016.

7. The selection criteria included the incidence of poverty in terms of unmet basic
needs and consumption; the presence of vulnerable groups; production volumes in
the selected subsectors; and the existence of smallholder producers organizations
(SPOs) in the value chains considered, with access to collection and/or processing
infrastructure.

8. The project target group comprises approximately 20,000 rural smallholder
producer families deriving most of their family incomes directly from one of the
selected subsectors – fine flavour or flavour cacao, blackberries and golden
berries – and are living near the poverty line.

9. The smallholder producers considered include people of mixed race (Montubians
from the Coastal area), and indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people. The social
targeting criteria are intended to promote the inclusion of smallholder producer
families and limit resource capture by non-needy families, and to adapt the project
to regional characteristics.

B. Project development objective
10. The goal of the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

is to improve the living conditions of smallholder families in strategic sectors. The
development objective is to improve the incomes of smallholder families producing
cacao, blackberries and golden berries within the project area.

11. The aim is to generate an increase in the margins derived from value addition and
redistribute income within the priority value chains so that profits reach smallholder
producers.

C. Components/outcomes
12. Component 1: Promoting partnerships1 by smallholder producers with the

agribusiness sector and markets. The objective is to forge win-win partnerships
between smallholder producers and agro-industrial enterprises, to enhance the
impact and sustainability of business initiatives supported within the selected value
chains. The expected outcome is better market access for the targeted smallholder
producers. Activities include: promoting commercial partnerships among value
chain actors; promoting trade in the selected subsectors; building competencies
and capacities for partnerships; and promoting access to financial products and
services.

13. Component 2: Building sustainable production, associational and
entrepreneurial capacities of smallholder producers. The objective is to
improve the capacities of targeted smallholder producers to boost productivity,
enhance quality, generate value added, and improve management and governance
of their production organizations or family enterprises. This component will
cofinance the execution of gap-closing plans. Activities include: promoting

1 Minga (mink'a or minga in quechua) means collective work done for the community; minca derives from
the quechua minccacuni, "to ask for help while promising something"). It refers to a pre-Columbian tradition of voluntary
community or collective work for a common (social) or reciprocal purpose. In Ecuador the term "minga" has been used
in the term “Gran Minga del Cacao nacional”, part of the MAGAP National Programme.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agricultural and post-harvest good practices; building entrepreneurial, associational
and gender equality capacities; and generating capacities to access financial
services.

14. Component 3: Knowledge development, management and administration.
This component consists of a planning, M&E, knowledge management, and
management and administration systems.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. Ecuador’s export agriculture sector, which provides 25 per cent of total

employment, plays a dominant role in the economy and contributed 36 per cent of
GDP in 2015, but continues to be a two-tier system. On one hand is a dynamic and
industrialized sector of medium-sized and large enterprises engaging in intensive
monocropping of banana, flowers and African palm. On the other, holding potential
for improvement – in cacao, coffee and fruit – is a sector composed of smallholder
producers who are the country’s poorest and do not as yet participate in value
chains with strong demand from domestic and international markets.

16. The fine flavour cacao and non-traditional Andean fruit (blackberry and golden
berry) value chains were selected on the basis of rising broad-based demand on
domestic and global markets, high potential for improvement, producers living in
conditions of poverty and vulnerability, and areas with high poverty rates.

17. IFAD will contribute significant value added under this project on the basis of past
experience in the cacao sector through public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)
with local governments and cacao processors; previous projects in Ecuador; and
agro-enterprise operating models. The analysis done by IFAD shows the need for
flexibility and adaptability to different contexts. Moreover, three cases in the cacao
sector – in the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Sao Tome and
Principe – have shown that an immediately operational and market-oriented private
sector allows for greater efficiency in projects.

18. The selected value chains feature similar constraints on allowing producers to
garner a larger share of the benefits. These are both endogenous – relating to
production, productivity, quality, traceability, certification and lack of business
capacity – and exogenous – a high level of intermediation, lack of recognition for
weight and quality of the products, and volatile prices. This creates an obstacle to
achieving stable quality in the supply of raw or processed materials, and to building
trust between members, and between members and buyers.

19. The project has been designed around the structure of the selected value chains,
both associational and individual, to address all bottlenecks identified within
them: at the production stage for Andean fruit, and in processing and marketing,
the main links in the chain, in the case of cacao. The strategic orientation set out by
MAGAP and MIPRO calls for linking producers’ associations to business demand both
on the domestic market and for export, including niche markets such as the organic
and fair trade segments. The strategy follows the 4P model, which consists of
building partnerships between the public sector, the private sector and smallholder
producers, represented by their leaders, with intermediation and facilitation by the
public sector, represented by the executing agencies MAGAP and MIPRO. To reflect
Ecuador's diverse realities, the model has been adapted to different
modalities. Through these, the aim is to facilitate and support the matching of
supply and demand so that supply responds to the requirements of demand, better
prices are obtained in recognition of quality and the level of intermediation is
lowered.

20. The greatest possible number of targeted beneficiaries will be reached by adopting
differentiated approaches. The project calls for: (i) an economies of scale approach



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

by supporting selected SPOs in providing timely marketing and other services to
member and non-member providers; (ii) a family business approach in the form of
support for individual smallholder producers to enable them, through their leaders,
to participate in partnerships with enterprises; (iii) a women in development and
youth approach to ensure that opportunities to access project resources and
services are available equally to women and men involved in the cacao, blackberry
and golden berry production chains, by setting gender and age quotas for
beneficiaries and introducing affirmative action measures; and (iv) a vulnerable
population approach by including indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people among
the targeted producers.

21. The operating strategy contemplates two kinds of complementary support: support
for off-farm activities managed by organizations with at least one collection centre,
in the form of subsidies (nonreimbursable transfers) conditional upon the fulfilment
of terms agreed under the 4P partnership; and direct on-farm support for individual
smallholder producers, considering their family businesses as rural
microenterprises. The objective is for activities by organizations and farms to
conform to conditions demanded by the market and for producers to gain greater
capacities, empower themselves and strengthen their links with organizations and
agribusinesses.

B. Organizational framework
22. The executing agency is MAGAP, through a project executing unit (PEU) within the

organizational structure of MAGAP that will provide administration, coordination,
supervision, support and M&E, together with MIPRO and pursuant to a specific
agreement.

23. Project implementation will be outsourced to an operator. MAGAP will be
responsible for relations with the National Planning and Development Secretariat
(SENPLADES), the Ministry of Finance and IFAD in connection with budget
allocation, withdrawal requests and reports on the project’s technical and financial
progress.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
24. The project will perform planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management

(PMELKM) functions in accordance with national and MAGAP provisions on PMELKM
and IFAD guidelines contained in the Project M&E Manual and General Conditions
for Financing. A conceptual and methodological document will be prepared outlining
the main orientations of PMELKM, highlighting the respective responsibilities of
MAGAP, MIPRO and the operator, the schedule of activities and the expected
outcomes.

25. The main approach guiding the planning and M&E functions is the managing for
development results (MfDR) approach, which calls for obtaining observable and
verifiable change for the target group. MfDR falls within the MAGAP’s governing for
results (GfR) initiative whereby MAGAP generates information on previously
established indicators. MfDR will be applied in project execution and in planning and
M&E by adopting the following principles: effectiveness in achieving objectives;
quality in serving people’s needs; transparency and accountability;
complementarity with other public agencies; citizen participation; learning
promotion; and continuity through institutional strengthening.

26. This methodology is supported by an automated tool to systematize and monitor
results. SENPLADES engages in medium- and long-term M&E in connection with the
quantifiable targets set in the National Development Plan. The coordinating
ministries monitor short-term commitments through the Managing for Governance
System (SIGOB).

27. The planning and M&E system will conform to the requirements of the M&E
subsystems of GfR, the Public Administration Secretariat, SIGOB, the Ministry of



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Production, Employment and Competitiveness and the Integrated Financial
Management System (SIGEF) of the Ministry of Finance.

28. An impact assessment plan has been agreed upon with the Government of Ecuador.
The quasi-experimental methodology will allow for a comparison of results by
producers and SPOs benefiting from the project (treatment group) with similar
producers and organizations that have not received any benefits (control group).
The intention is to measure the project’s causal impact on indicators of interest,
such as household income, production and sales, and other variables.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
29. Financial management. Financial management will take place through the PEU

financial unit which, in coordination with the MAGAP Financial Administration
Coordination Office, will be responsible for proper administration of the resources.
The main responsibilities of the PEU financial unit will be as follows: (i) ensure that
the project has adequate liquidity and prepare withdrawal requests; (ii) review the
Plan of Action (POA) and prepare the annual procurement plan; (iii) make the
necessary arrangements for yearly budget allocations; (iv) manage disbursements
to the operator; (v) review the operator’s financial statements and relevant
documentation and monitor the operator’s financial management; (vi) prepare
annual financial statements and deliver them to IFAD; (vii) contract the audit firm
and deliver the annual audit report to IFAD; and (viii) ensure fulfilment of the
fiduciary conditions of the financial agreement.

30. Operationally, the project will be implemented by an operator selected by MAGAP
under a competitive and transparent process based on national public contracting
regulations and in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project procurement. IFAD
will evaluate the proposed operator’s financial management before the contracting
process is finalized. The findings of the financial management evaluation will be one
of the criteria considered by IFAD in issuing its non objection to contracting the
operator.

31. Based on the country’s rating of 32 on the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index, as well as IFAD’s experience in the country, the project fiduciary
risk is considered moderate. The financial management arrangements provided for
this project, together with close implementation support by IFAD, are considered
sufficient to mitigate this fiduciary risk.

32. Flow of funds. The borrower will open and maintain two designated accounts in
United States dollars exclusively for advance deposit of the loan and grant
proceeds, respectively.

33. Audit. The project will prepare annual consolidated financial statements in
accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The
consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by an independent
private auditor in accordance with IFAD Project audit guidlines and international
auditing standards. All of the project accounts will be audited, including all financing
sources. The auditor’s terms of reference will include a detailed review of the
financial transactions carried out by th eoperator and all relevant documentation.
The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the first six months following the
end of the fiscal year under review.

34. Procurement. Procurement will take place in accordance with the Organic Law on
the National Public Procurement System and regulations, provided they are
compatible with IFADs’ procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
35. IFAD will provide support for project implementation in the manner deemed most

advisable by the parties, seeking to improve effectiveness and ensure that the
objectives and desired outcomes are achieved. In addition, IFAD, in coordination



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

with MAGAP and MIPRO, will supervise the project directly, in accordance with the
Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support.

36. The implementation support and supervision plan will seek to contribute to reaching
the targets set and will monitor compliance with the commitments, provisions and
standards set forth in the financing agreement and operating manual. Support will
be provided from the time of formulation, taking advantage of the various
phases – review, negotiation, approval – for proper preparation of start-up. Among
other activities, plans call for providing support as follows: start-up workshop,
annual supervisión (two per year at the initial stage), midterm review and closing
workshop, and ongoing activities in support of execution. The plan will initially focus
on ensuring operating capacity for project management; preparing annual
workplans and procurement plans; and consolidate financial management
arrangements.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total cost of the project has been estimated at US$35.2 million, covering two

operating components and a project management component: (i) promoting
smallholder partnerships with agribusiness and markets, US$8.3 million
(24 per cent); (ii) building sustainable production, associational and entrepreneurial
capacities among smallholders, US$20.6 million (59 per cent); and (iii) knowledge
development, management and administration, US$6.3 million (18 per cent). Costs
have been calculated at current prices, taking into account the selected area.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promoting smallholder
partnerships with
agribusiness and markets 7 024 27 - - 1 144 20 100 3 8 268 24
2. Building sustainable
production, associational
and entrepreneurial
capacities among
smallholders 14 860 58 - - 2 226 39 3 503 97 20 588 59
3. Knowledge development,
management and
administration 3 776 15 250 100 2 274 40 - - 6 300 18

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by: the IFAD loan for US$25.7 million (73 per cent of

total project cost; the IFAD grant for US$0.3 million (1 per cent); a contribution by
the Government for US$5.6 million (16 per cent); and cash contributions by
beneficiaries for US$3.6 million (10 per cent). Detailed allocations by source of
financing and category of expenditure are shown in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Project costs by category of expenditure and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 636 2 - - 103 2 71 2 810 2
2. Equipment, materials
and vehicles 499 2 - - 81 1 37 1 582 2
3. Consulting and training 8 682 34 250 100 1 261 22 1 398 39 3 761 11
4. Grants and subsidies 12 853 50 - - 2 092 37 2 097 58 17 042 48
5. Salaries and operating
costs 2 992 12 - - 2 106 37 - - 5 098 14

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. In the farm models, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is higher than the

discount rate and the financial net present value (FNPV), at an average of
US$3,000, demonstrates the project's financial feasibility to a 10-year horizon.

40. Strengthening the associations and improving their production capacities is
expected to generate the following benefits: an increase in household assets of
19 per cent over the baseline, and an average increase in incomes of
21 per cent. This gives an idea of the prospects for the associations' sustainability,
improved access to value chains and better negotiating power with buyers.

41. The cost estimate done for economic feasibility took into account adjustments for
transfers to direct beneficiaries, strengthening of organizations, investments in
upgrading infrastructure and equipment; adjustments to price contingencies;
adjustments to value-added taxes to reflect transfer payments; adjustments to
economic prices for inputs, tradable goods and the social discount rate.

42. The results obtained show that the project is economically feasible, with an
economic IRR of 28.50 per cent; economic NPV of incremental net return of
US$23.9 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.77.

43. The project’s sensitivity analysis and economic feasibility indicators show that it is
more sensitive to a price reduction where with a fall of 10 per cent the EIRR falls to
12.18 per cent and a reduction in returns where a fall of 14 per cent causes a fall in
EIRR to 12.51 per cent. In addition, with a reduction in returns of
20 per cent the EIRR is 22.94 per cent and a cost increase of 20 per cent leads to
an EIRR 22.94 per cent. In terms of delays, the project can withstand two years
and still maintain positive returns above the discount rate.

D. Sustainability
44. The project will promote a match between supply and demand of quality products,

and will make use of existing financial services available in the marketplace, adapt
them to potential demand and enable the two parties to negotiate the services they
need and the prerequisites for accessing such services, with support and mediation
from the Government in its capacity as intermediary. This matching of supply and
demand will serve as the basis for the partnerships and will contribute to their long-
term sustainability, even after the project's conclusion.

45. Success in terms of the scope of goal and objectives, sustainability and replicability,
lies in strengthening the actors involved and their partnerships: SPOs and both
female and male members, both formal and comercial; enterprises; and
institutions. This institutional strengthening and consolidation of capacities for
analysis, training, marketing and formulation of proposals will be achieved with
training and advisory assistance, and with the same participation and shared



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

responsibility of the target groups and their involvement in the project M&E
process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s socio-environmental classification is B in accordance with IFAD's

Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. The project will not
finance activities covered by category A of IFAD’s environmental policy. All of the
risks and adverse environmental and social impacts are avoidable.

47. The climate vulnerability classification is moderate. The project is in line with the
National Climate Change Plan 2015-2018, which prioritizes agricultura, water
management, ecosystems, energy and capacity-building in environmental risk
management.

48. The main risks identified with a medium or high probability of occurring are given
below.

Risk Probability Mitigation strategy
No timely fiscal allocation and no
adequate countryl counterpart
contribution

Medium  MAGAP, MIPRO and IFA will exert all their influence to
ensure that the required amount is allocated in a timely
manner.
 Minimum country counterpart is set in view of the current
macroeconomic context and budget us in Ecuador

Demand for financing from collection
centres is limited given difficulties
meeting the requirements of financial
institutions

Medium Training and technical assistance (component 3) will support
organizations and overcome barriers in financial idiom,
procedures and consultations to meet requirements

Financial institutions are not interested
in financing producers’ organizations

Medium Training and assistance to financial institutions should
underscore promotion of the three agroindustrial value
chains and report on l inkages and opportunities for serving
this market niche

Liquidity in the financial sector
continues to fall to levels that do not
allow for earmarking resources to
these segments

High More emphasis will need to be given to international banks,
especially in the case of the export of products.

Unforeseen losses as a result of
market instability, sudden contraction
in demand, unusual drops in global
prices and the lack of a mechanism to
differentiate prices in the International
Coffee Organization and global
commodity exchanges, as well as
extreme climate events.

High The project promotes moving producers closer to
compensation mechanisms that can cover, albeit in part,
unforeseen losses for any of the reasons indicated
(emergency fund, insurance)

Main environmental risks: use of
agrochemicals, loss of genetic
biodiversity of cacao, improper
management of solid and liquid waste

Medium Financing investments at the collection level will be
conditional on developing an environmental profile, in
accordance with national environmental regulations, and
compliance by business plans with the sustainable
environmental management principles set forth in the
Operating Manual, the Guide on Coffee Growing Best
Practices, and the Cacao Post-harvest Best Practices
Manual (MAGAP)

Cadmium content in Ecuadorean
cacao not permitted in the European
and U.S. markets

Medium Field tests to identify the main causes, pilot interventions and
generalization of practices that limit the fixing of cadmium in
cacao

Main climate risks: reduced availability
of water during dry months (Sierra);
lower yields and plant production
capacity (Sierra); higher likelihood of
floods and landslides (Costa and
Amazonía);2 increase and distribution
of pests and their vectors

Medium Funded infrastructure should take the minimum
considerations of environmental safeguards and include a
localization analysis. Construction of infrastructure will
include the principles of labour security, risk analysis
(seismic risks), and will take place outside areas of flooding,
landslides or geological faults

2 Flooding and landslides are among the primary four threats to the country in the provinces of the Coast region, and to a
lesser extent in the Sierra and Amazon regions.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
49. The project complies with the main IFAD policies on targeting rural poor people,

gender equality and women’s empowerment, implementation in relation to
indigenous peoples, natural resources management and environment, and strategy
on climate change.

B. Harmonization and alignment
50. The project is fully aligned with the priority government policy to effect a shift in

production patters, as set forth in the National Plan for Good Living 2013-2017, and
with three of the main government policies: the National Strategy for Equality and
Poverty Eradication (ENIEP, SENPLADES, 2014); Ecuadorean Agricultural Policy and
Sustainable Territorial Rural Development 2015-2025 (MAGAP, 2016). In addition,
the project will directly address the COSOP strategic objectives based on the results
for 2014-2018.

51. Linkages were developed with other donors through their initiatives in support of
the private sector (Multilateral Investment Fund of the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Development Bank of Latin America) during implementation of the
project to improve private investment.

52. Also, within the framework of collaboration among the Rome-based agencies, the
project will be supported by FAO in developing and implementing the nutrition pilot
in the cantons prioritized for their higher incidence of malnutrition and integrated
disease and pest management.

C. Innovation and scaling up
53. The innovation by the project is to put forward the 4P model, adapted to the

diverse realities of Ecuador, as the central thrust of the approach, and seeks to
replicate successful partnership models.

54. Knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and capitalize on
knowledge accumulated during project execution, with the goal of disseminating
best practices and practical knowledge available in the project territories.

D. Policy engagement
55. The compilation of experiences and learnings, and exchanges between actors

responsable for MAGAP and MIPRO and their members, will contribute to improving
their operations, and will serve as practical information on the use and functionality
of public policies, helping with reform as needed. The project will build the
capacities of these actors and the leaders of beneficiary organizations.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
56. A financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

57. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recomendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in the amount of twenty-five million six hundred and sixty
thousand United States dollars (US$25,660,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Ecuador in the amount of two hundred and fifty thousand United States
dollars (US$250,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the
Fisheries Resources Management Programme


The State of Eritrea

Fisheries Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: The State of Eritrea

Executing agency: Ministry of Marine Resources

Total programme cost: US$32.12 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 10.75 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15 million)

Cofinanciers: Federal Republic of Germany

Global Environment Facility (GEF)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Amount of cofinancing: Germany: US$5.97 million

GEF: US$7.89 million

FAO: US$500,000

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of recipient: US$1.42 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.35 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries Resources Management Programme as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries
Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Strategic context. More than two decades after attaining its independence in

1993, Eritrea is still faced with many development challenges. The main economic
sectors have yet to fully recover, resulting in high unemployment, few
income-generation opportunities, an unsupportive business environment for
investment, and weak macroeconomic conditions. The country is prone to periodic
droughts and remains dependent on rainfed agriculture, which makes it highly
vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.

2. On the Human Development Index,1 Eritrea scored 0.391, ranking 186th out of
188 countries in 2014. The country also scored poorly on the Global Hunger Index2
with a score of 33.8 in 2014. Nonetheless, recent economic performance has been
positive, driven mainly by the mining sector. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was estimated at 2 per cent in 2014 and 2.1 per cent in 2015 – double that
of 2013. The current GDP composition is services (59.9 per cent),
non-manufacturing (17.3 per cent), agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and
fisheries (16.9 per cent), and industry (5.9 per cent). Exports increased in 2014
and 2015, but the current account balance is estimated to have deteriorated from
0.2 per cent of GDP in 2014 to -1.2 per cent in 2015, and is forecast to be
1.5 per cent of GDP in 2016. This is partly due to decreases in both remittances
and the "development and recovery" tax (a 2 per cent tax levied on the Eritrean
diaspora). Based on International Monetary Fund Article IV 2009,3 Eritrea was at
the pre-decision point for becoming a heavily indebted poor country (HIPC) and
therefore may be eligible for HIPC multilateral debt relief. Eritrea is classified as
"red" by the Debt Sustainability Framework and is therefore entitled to 100 per
cent grant financing.

3. Agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing are mainstays for most Eritreans, with
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the population relying on these subsectors
for their livelihoods; they also account for between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of
commodity exports. However, these subsectors are affected by highly variable
climatic conditions, inefficient rain-fed subsistence farming systems, limited
resource allocation and low profit margins. The fact that over 80 per cent of poor
people live in rural areas and depend on agriculture suggests that increasing
agricultural production and productivity would have a significant impact on poverty.
Eritrea has 26 per cent arable land, but only 4 per cent is under cultivation. Mining
is becoming important and is the main attraction for foreign investment. The

1 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report 2015 (http://hdr.undp.org/en/2015-report).
2 The Global Hunger Index, produced by the International Food Policy Research Institute, is an aggregated measure of:
overall undernourishment; child wasting; child stunting; and child mortality (http://www.ifpri.org/topic/global-hunger-index).
3

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/071813.pdf: Only information for 2009 is available from the IMF; since then,
there has been no agreement with Eritrea’s Government on mission dates or modalities for the next Article IV.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

growth outlook is promising if Eritrea exploits all its opportunities for trade and
opens its economy to foreign investment in sectors other than mining.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
country strategic opportunities programme

4. Eritrea has substantial and relatively underexploited marine and fisheries
resources, comprising nearly 1,000 fish species. These fisheries exist in an
unpolluted and undercapitalized marine environment; the fisheries sector
contributes only about 3 per cent of the country's GDP. The maximum sustainable
yield (MSY) of Eritrea’s Red Sea fisheries has been estimated by several sources at
80,000 tons per year (some fisheries experts provide a more conservative MSY
range of between 40,000 and 80,000 tons per year since there has been no recent
stock assessment). Small pelagic fisheries account for about half of this MSY and
are currently underutilized. Recorded total fish catches rarely exceed 10,000 tons
per year, of which fewer than 2,000 tons are caught by small-scale fishers.

5. This programme will support Eritrea’s Government in ensuring that the country’s
marine fishery resources are utilized in a sustainable manner to improve the
livelihoods of coastal communities. Specifically, the Fisheries Resources
Management Programme (FReMP) will: (i) support increased fish production while
ensuring that production levels do not exceed historical MSY estimates (for small
pelagic fish, it will be limited to 19,000 tons per year); (ii) support the Ministry of
Marine Resources in monitoring and enforcement; (iii) update MSY estimates and
adjust targets when needed; and (iv) invest in restoration and protection of the
ecosystem.

6. The projected total fish production represents an estimated gross first sales
value-at-landing of approximately US$50 million. This involves a huge investment
in fishing, processing and other support services like boat building, supply of
fishing gear, cold storage, production of ice and packaging material, and
opportunities in fish distribution and marketing. FReMP will mainly target fishers
who use traditional motorized wooden boats (along with a few using improved
motorized fiberglass boats). Other beneficiaries will include "foot fishers" who do
not own any fishing assets. The programme will address many limiting factors and
contribute to increased productivity, production and improved livelihoods of the
target beneficiaries. Eritrea’s mangrove forests also offer opportunities for
supplementing livelihoods with honey production, fodder for small livestock, and
fuelwood, ensuring the viability of fisheries over the long term.

7. Inland fisheries and aquaculture present another investment opportunity for
increased fish production, incomes and nutrition. The Government, with support
from other development partners, has established over 330 reservoirs, of which
70 are stocked with fish species including tilapia, carp and catfish. However, the
country’s inland fisheries resources are not widely exploited since many local
communities are: unaware of the nutritional benefits; they lack fishing skills and
equipment; and fishing is not part of their tradition. In addition, there are
opportunities for engaging in aquaculture using cages placed within water
reservoirs or in external ponds drawing water from the reservoirs. FReMP will
target 15 water reservoirs to demonstrate good practices and test successful
models that can be replicated and scaled up in the other reservoirs. The
programme will also assist in developing climate-resilient conservation plans for
the water reservoirs, which will lead to improved crop and livestock production,
and enhance rural populations’ nutrition and incomes.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. Programme Area. FReMP will be national in scope, targeting all six zobas

(regions) in Eritrea's coastal and inland areas. There will be a special focus on



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

marine fish landing sites, inland water reservoirs for aquaculture and fish markets.
On the Red Sea coast, it will target the Northern Red Sea and Southern Red Sea
zobas. In the inland zobas of Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka, and Maekel, the
programme will be site-specific, operating in selected water reservoirs with high
fishery production potential.

9. Target Group. The target group consists of: (i) small-scale fishers (men and
women small boat owners, crew members and foot fishers) who will participate
either as individuals or as cooperatives; and (ii) rural smallholder farmers involved
in subsistence agriculture and small livestock-keeping around inland water
reservoirs, and those involved in rehabilitating their catchment areas, who are
interested in economic activities along the inland fisheries supply chain; (iii) youth
entrepreneurs (fishers and non-fishers) interested in establishing business
enterprises or cooperatives that respond to market demand for fishery products
and services; (iv) women, especially women-headed households, who will account
for at least 30 per cent of the programme’s beneficiaries; and (v) demobilized
soldiers and internally displaced persons.

B. Programme development objective
10. Programme goal and development objective. FReMP will be implemented over

a seven-year period from 2017 to 2023. The programme’s goal is to contribute to
household food and nutrition security, and alleviate rural poverty. Its development
objective is to increase incomes and improve nutrition among targeted
beneficiaries, and promote the sustainable management of natural resources. In
pursuit of this objective, FReMP will support marine and inland small-scale fishers
to produce a surplus (within the MSY of the fisheries) for the market. To achieve
this, it will forge sustainable partnerships with various actors along the fish
production and marketing value chain. The aim will be to transform Eritrea’s
small-scale fisheries sector from subsistence to a sustainable commercial industry.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Develop sustainable fisheries systems. This component will

support the establishment of necessary infrastructure and technologies for
production and post-harvest operations, marketing, and consumption of both
marine and inland fisheries. It will be achieved through three sub-components:

(i) Development of marine fisheries production and post-harvest systems;

(ii) Development and sustainable utilization of inland fisheries; and

(iii) Market development and promotion of fish consumption.

12. Component 2: Fisheries enterprise support services. This component seeks
to: (i) promote the development and build capacity of cooperatives and other
enterprise groups; and (ii) strengthen input-provision services to ensure that
legally constituted cooperatives and enterprise groups have access to the inputs
required to undertake economically viable and sustainable fish-related businesses.
These objectives will be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Entrepreneurial capacity development; and

(ii) Strengthening of input supply services.

13. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and implementation support.
The objectives of this cross-cutting component are to: (i) ensure that the
institutions responsible for implementing and overseeing the programme’s various
implementation processes have the capacity to effectively carry out their duties;
and (ii) manage and facilitate the programme in an efficient and effective manner
by coordinating planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and sharing, progress reporting, and liaising with other stakeholders. These
objectives are to be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Marine Resources and other implementing
agencies for the development of the fisheries sector; and

(ii) Programme coordination and implementation support services.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

14. The programme’s overall approach is to strengthen production systems and market
linkages. FReMP will use communities as an entry point, engaging local institutions
in participatory planning for sustainable fisheries development. The programme will
be implemented through – and fully embedded in – the Government’s
decentralized system, and sustainability will be a central aspect of the programme
approach. The programme will support enterprises in engaging with markets in
order to increase returns on their investments and establish public and private
mechanisms to ensure continuity of benefits. Gender will be mainstreamed across
the programme by: (i) ensuring that gender issues are considered in policy
dialogue and staff training; (ii) establishing programme work plans that are gender
sensitive and identifying gender focal points at the national and zoba levels;
(iii) promoting women’s participation in programme activities, particularly those
focused on small pelagic fish production and market linkages; and (iv) closely
monitoring gender empowerment.

B. Organizational framework
15. The management, coordination and implementation of FReMP will involve various

government institutions and private-sector entities. The Ministry of Marine
Resources will be the lead executing agency and will be supported by: (i) a
programme steering committee chaired by the minister responsible for fisheries
and with representation from ministries with direct relevance to the programme
goal and development objective; and (ii) an adequately staffed national
programme coordination office (NPCO). At the zoba level, FReMP will be
implemented, managed and coordinated through the zoba administration systems.
Zoba programme coordination offices will be established in all the six zobas to
strengthen programme management and coordination.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning. Annual work plans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will be the key instruments

for implementation and operational control. AWP/Bs will be prepared for all
programme participants, starting with the primary stakeholders at the community
level. These plans will identify activities according to needs and priorities through a
participatory planning process.

17. The NPCO will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate the AWP/Bs from the six
zobas and all other programme areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Marine
Resources. The NPCO will submit the consolidated AWP/Bs to the programme’s
technical committee for review and endorsement before submitting them to the
programme steering committee for approval and to IFAD for review on a "no
objection" basis. In order to facilitate the proper preparation of AWP/Bs, training
will be provided at programme start-up.

18. Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E will be embedded in the institutional
strengthening and implementation support component, coordinated by the NPCO.
This system will reach all implementers at the national and zoba levels, and will be
supported by additional professional staff, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will feed into the Ministry of Marine Resources management
information system and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

19. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management
will be based on the programme’s M&E system, especially on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. The
national-level M&E team will liaise with zoba-level counterparts to develop a
learning and knowledge management system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The proposed financial management arrangements for

FReMP have been assessed as medium risk. Therefore it is recommended that the
Laccie accounting software be used instead of the Government’s financial
management system. The NPCO, which will be the accounting hub, has gained
experience through the Fisheries Development Programme (FDP) in the
implementation of IFAD-funded projects. In addition, the Laccie accounting
software was specifically designed for donor-funded projects and is able to
generate the required financial reports.

21. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened at the Central Bank of
Eritrea to receive the proceeds from the IFAD grant, and Germany and GEF
contributions. A programme operating account at a bank acceptable to IFAD will
be operated in accordance with Government regulations. To facilitate
traceability of funds, each zoba will have a dedicated operating account to
receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved AWP/Bs, which will be
accounted for prior to any request for subsequent advances.

22. Audits. The Government’s audit processes will be used for FReMP. As was the case
for FDP, Eritrea’s Auditor-General will have the discretion to undertake the audit or
to appoint an independent private audit firm acceptable to IFAD. Either way, the
auditor’s terms of reference will require IFAD's "no objection" review on an annual
basis. The Ministry of Marine Resources’ internal auditors will include FReMP in their
annual rolling internal audit plans and issue formal reports at least twice each year.

23. Procurement. All procurement funded by the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent that they are
consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. The country’s legal and
regulatory framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently
robust. There are checks and balances within the system to ensure that public
procurement is undertaken transparently and competitively. Lessons learned from
FDP indicate that a programme-specific procurement officer should be recruited to
strengthen: (i) records management; (ii) contract management; (iii) the
integration of procurement into budget formulation; and (iv) reporting.

24. Transparency, governance and anti-corruption. The Government will maintain
a governance and anti-corruption framework throughout the programme
implementation period to mitigate the risk of fraud and corruption, and promote
effective utilization of programme funds. Specific measures to mitigate identified
fiduciary risks will include: (i) use of the Laccie accounting system at the NPCO to
reduce the risk of human error; (ii) checks and balances in contracting and
administration; (iii) the integration of FReMP into internal audit plans within all
zobas; (iv) activity-tagged transfers to zobas instead of general cash releases;
(v) maintaining the current statement of expenditure ceiling used in other
IFAD-funded projects in Eritrea, given the inherent risk; (vi) adequate staffing
arrangements; and (vii) continued capacity building of the cooperative credit unit
to handle the asset financing.

E. Supervision
25. FReMP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and Eritrea’s Government. The frequency

and composition of missions will be determined by actual requirements through
collaboration with IFAD and the Government. Preferably, supervision missions will
take place every six months. Supervision will not be seen as a general inspection



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned,
and to jointly reflect on improving implementation and increasing the likelihood of
achieving the programme’s development objective.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. Programme costs. The total programme costs over seven years, including

contingencies, taxes and duties, are estimated to be US$32.12 million as detailed
in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Develop sustainable
fisheries systems 4 958 40.4 6 508 53.0 - - 26 0.2 286 2.3 504 4.1 12 284 38.2
2. Fisheries enterprise
support services 3 376 31.4 128 1.2 - - 5 940 55.3 445 4.1 846 7.9 10 735 33.4
3. Institutional
strengthening and
implementation
support 6 666 73.2 1 254 13.8 500 5.5 - - 686 7.5 - - 9 105 28.3

Total programme
costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

B. Programme financing
27. The total combined FReMP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$32.12 million
(ERN 481.8 million). The programme will be financed by the Government, the IFAD
grant, Germany, GEF, FAO and beneficiary contributions. IFAD has confirmed a
grant equivalent to US$15 million from the Tenth Replenishment of IFAD’s
Resources (IFAD10), which represents 46.7 per cent of the total programme cost.
Germany will contribute US$5.96 million (18.6 per cent of the total programme
cost); GEF has committed US$7.89 million (24.6 per cent); FAO will contribute
US$500,000 (1.6 per cent); and beneficiaries will contribute approximately
US$1.35 million (4.2 per cent of the total programme cost) through their
participation in construction, setting up fishery sites and purchasing inputs like
fishing gear. The Government will finance the taxes and duties (US$1.42 million,
representing 4.4 per cent of total costs). Details of the financing arrangements are
shown in table 2.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs
A. Works 3 367 32.8 6 155 59.9 - - 26 0.3 227 2.2 504 4.9 10 279 32.0

B. Vehicles 1 707 72.1 54 2.3 - - - - 605 25.6 - - 2 367 7.4

C. Equipment and materials 2 206 22.5 353 3.6 - - 5 929 60.4 487 5.0 845 8.6 9 820 30.6

D. Consultancies 562 38.3 356 24.3 500 34.1 - - 48 3.3 - - 1 466 4.6

E. Training 4 187 86.7 629 13.0 - - 10 0.2 1 - 1 - 4 829 15.0

Total
investment costs 12 029 41.8 7 548 26.2 500 1.7 5 966 20.7 1 368 4.8 1 351 4.7 28 761 89.5

II. Recurrent costs
A. Salaries and allowances 1 370 80.0 343 20.0 - - - - - - - - 1 713 5.3

B. Operating costs 1 601 97.0 - - - - - - 50 3.0 - - 1 650 5.1
Total recurrent costs 2 971 88.3 343 10.2 - - - - 50 1.5 - - 3 363 10.5
Total programme costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. Benefits and Beneficiaries. FReMP will target 17,500 households

(87,500 people) through 600 groups. The cost per beneficiary is US$361 (about
US$1,800 per household). The programme will provide direct support to inland
fishing cooperatives, small pelagic fishing enterprises, fish value-addition
enterprises (e.g. fish drying), fish mongers and traders, fish marketing, provision
of inputs through the cooperative support unit and the establishment of a
sustainable ice plant.

29. Expected benefits include: (i) increases in the production and quality of
marketable fish; (ii) higher prices for producers and traders as a result of the
aggregation of fish products and improved marketing processes; (iii) increased
community-level resource rental revenues; (iv) consumer benefits such as
enhanced availability and affordability of fish products by reducing inefficiencies
along the value chain; and (v) empowered government systems that have
benefited from capacity development.

30. Economic analysis. The programme has the potential to generate an economic
rate of return of 17 per cent over a ten-year period.

31. Impact indicators. FReMP is expected to facilitate the development of sustainable
production, processing and market linkages for marine and inland fisheries, and
deliver increased volumes of fish to consumers. This will: generate employment,
especially for youth and women; increase incomes of small-scale fishers in Eritrea’s
coastal and inland communities; increase the volume and quality of marketed fish
in coastal and inland areas; and enhance food and nutrition security in the target
communities.

D. Sustainability
32. Institutional sustainability. The participatory programme design process and

the bottom-up planning approach will ensure that programme implementation
modalities respond to the target communities’ concerns, sector-specific priorities,
national development policies and strategies, and the national institutional
framework. The approach creates ownership and builds the foundation for
sustainability after the programme ends. FReMP implementation will be fully
embedded within the Government’s institutional framework at all levels and the
Government has committed to continue this integration after programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

implementation. The institutional building-capacity approach encompasses
government institutions at various levels as well as cooperatives and enterprise
groups to ensure that skills continue to support programme-initiated activities after
completion.

33. Economic/income sustainability. The programme will build the capacity of
target groups in business plan development for their subprojects and prudent
financial management; enterprise groups will be linked to markets. The financial
analysis of the programme indicates that members of different enterprise groups
will improve their incomes and earn good returns on their investments. These
financial benefits on investments in the sector, coupled with improved access to
inputs, will promote sustainability and enhance replicability and scaling up. The
availability of a revolving fund through the cooperative credit unit will provide
opportunities for highly performing enterprise groups to expand their businesses in
the long run.

34. Environmental and climatic sustainability. The programme will promote
environmentally sustainable fishing practices by adopting a precautionary
approach, which involves promoting and enforcing good fisheries management
practices. FReMP’s interventions will support: adaptation to climate change through
investing in "climate buffers", which include watershed management; increasing
water and soil retention to reduce the impacts of drought and extreme rainfall; and
rehabilitation and planting of mangroves to safeguard their important role in the
coastal ecosystem. This approach also integrates expected climate change impacts
and utilizes these data in feasibility studies for infrastructure.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Several potential risks could undermine the programme’s success if they are not

mitigated. Delayed programme start-up, slow disbursements during the early years
of implementation and high staff turnover have been recurrent problems in the
portfolio. To mitigate these risks, FReMP will operate with similar institutional
arrangements as FDP and will be managed by the same experienced programme
management unit. Expansion of fishing activities, if not properly controlled, could
lead to overexploitation of fish resources beyond the MSY for both marine and
inland fisheries. Mitigation measures include: (i) setting conservative catch levels
below historical MSY estimates (19,000 tons per year for small pelagics);
(ii) supporting the Ministry of Fisheries Resources in monitoring, control and
surveillance capacity; (iii) updating MSY estimates and adjusting targets when
needed; and (iv) investing in restoration and protection of the ecosystem. For
inland fisheries, the programme will facilitate the establishment of fishing
cooperatives with standard codes of fishing and environmental practice. The
programme will also support a hatchery to restock water reservoirs as necessary.
In addition, extension agents from the Ministry of Marine Resources and fishing
cooperatives will receive training in stocking and sustainable harvesting.

36. Based on Eritrea's 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 18, the country’s inherent risk is high. The fiduciary risk has been
assessed as medium due to the introduction of mitigation measures highlighted
above.

37. Climate risks. The programme’s sensitivity to the impacts of climate change is
assessed as moderate. The greatest risk relates to the unknown impact of
increasing sea temperatures on marine fish resources. Through its monitoring
activities, the programme will be able to adjust to changes in fish stocks. At the
design stage, there were no data available to carry out an in-depth climate risk
assessment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The design of FReMP is compliant with: (i) IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025;
(ii) Reaching the Rural Poor: IFAD Policy on Targeting; and (iii) IFAD Policy on
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. In addition, the nutrition focus of the
programme is aligned with the Government’s strategy on food security and
nutrition, and IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and action
plans on mainstreaming nutrition. FReMP will be implemented in compliance with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy, and IFAD's Climate
Change Strategy. Climate change adaptation measures are integrated into
programme activities in order to address the inherent risks resulting from a
changing climate and the potential multiplication of these effects on ecosystems.
As an extra safeguard, IFAD has developed a complaints procedure on alleged
non-compliance with its social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects
of its social, environmental and climate assessment procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The programme is fully aligned with Government investment priorities as defined in

the Eritrea Food Security Strategy, the Eritrea Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper and the five year (2013-2017) strategic development plans for the country’s
agriculture and fisheries sectors. It will be fully embedded in the Government’s
decentralized institutional framework and delivery mechanisms. Links between the
steering and technical committees as well as among the management teams will
ensure coordination, collaboration, learning and scaling up of good practices.
Operational linkages between the Ministry of Marine Resources and other relevant
ministries, and other development partners in the fisheries sector are expected to
result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. Innovation. Eritrea’s small pelagic fisheries present opportunities for introducing

new techniques and innovative products and recipes. Novel techniques and fish
products to be piloted include solar-dried assortments, pickling, fish powder,
protein concentrates, salted-pressed sundried fish snacks, fermented products, fish
oil, fish sauces and different fish recipes. Successful products will be introduced to
fish processing and marketing enterprise groups for commercial uptake. The
programme will also pilot new technologies to boost fish production.

41. Scaling up. Experiences from FDP will be used to guide programme interventions,
especially the formation of cooperatives and enterprise groups, capacity
development and input financing. FDP established an asset-financing model, which
has become instrumental in sustaining the country’s small-scale fishing sector,
particularly for large fish along the coasts. FReMP will scale up this proven model
for sustainable access to fishing inputs and replicate it in small pelagic fish and
inland fisheries supply chains. Enterprise groups at different links in these chains
will be able to access the inputs they need to undertake economically viable and
sustainable fish-related businesses.

42. The programme will pilot mariculture – the cultivation of marine organisms for food
– and aquaculture development activities in marine and inland systems, with the
objective of demonstrating their technical and economic viability. The inland
fisheries intervention will target up to 15 water reservoirs to generate good
practices that are replicable in the remaining water reservoirs across the country.

Policy engagementD.
43. The programme presents an opportunity to: (i) test new approaches, models and

technologies within small pelagic inland fisheries and coastal areas; and (ii) support
the Government’s own efforts to analyse the effectiveness of its fisheries policies,



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

including those on sustainable production and management of fisheries resources.
Lessons learned through the programme will be used to inform Government-led
dialogue around national policies. The programme will maintain policy engagement
around fish product marketing systems and related legal and regulatory
frameworks, particularly regarding the role of the National Fisheries Corporation
and fisher cooperatives in the pricing of fish products.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the State of Eritrea and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as appendix I.

45. The State of Eritrea is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the State of Eritrea in an amount equivalent to ten million seven
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 10.75 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation
Development Programme – Phase II
(PASIDP II)

Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources

Total programme cost: US$145.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 72,950,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$102 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1,080,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$1.5 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund grant:

SDR 7,870,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$11 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$18.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$12.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.18

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Federal Democratic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II), as contained in
paragraph 43.

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. During the last decade, the Government of Ethiopia has achieved impressive results

in economic growth and poverty reduction. Broad-based gross domestic product
growth averaged 10.8 per cent each year between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, and
annual population growth was 3 per cent. This strong economic growth was driven
by significant public investment and expansion of services and agriculture. The
Government committed more than 60 per cent of its total expenditures to
poverty-oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water and road
construction. Ending extreme poverty in Ethiopia requires sustaining current efforts
and ensuring that economic growth is inclusive, especially in the rural areas. Many
non-poor households in Ethiopia are just above the poverty line and vulnerable to
falling into poverty in the case of a significant shock.

2. To sustain the country’s strong economic growth, it is critical to enhance the
productivity of agriculture, particularly farming systems such as small-scale irrigation
with high potential for productivity increases. The Government’s Growth and
Transformation Plan II for 2015/2016-2019/2020 emphasizes the important role of
agriculture as a driver of economic growth.

3. Ethiopia is endowed with a highly diverse agroecological environment spanning from
temperate and moist tropical highlands to hot and arid lowlands, matched by a
diverse sociocultural setting. As much as this heterogeneity has to offer in terms of
natural resources, a common characteristic is environmental fragility. Major
challenges include soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. Climate
change projections for Ethiopia indicate a significant increase in temperature and a
likely increase in droughts, heavy rains and floods, particularly in the lowlands.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD are moving towards a programmatic approach
with a longer-term vision for lending in the Ethiopian small-scale irrigation
subsector. The first phase of the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme (PASIDP), which was implemented between 2008 and 2015, contributed
to reducing the country’s vulnerability to adverse climate risks and drought as well
as rural poverty and food insecurity. The country programme evaluation by the
Independent Office of Evaluation of IFAD recommended financing a second phase of
PASIDP since small-scale irrigation offers great potential for reducing the impact of
climate change, enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty, which are all
aspirations of the Government. This second phase will complete and hone the
intervention model developed in the first phase, and will pilot the geographical



EB 2016/118/R.18

2

expansion that will mainly be undertaken in the third phase, with an ultimate final
vision of scaling up the programme nationwide.

5. PASIDP II is based on the assumption that poor farmers who are provided with
access to a secure irrigation production base and access to markets and services will
be able to produce and market greater volumes of crops in a profitable manner. The
investment will include watersheds contiguous with the irrigation schemes, which
exhibit varying levels of degradation, in order to stabilize them, improve their
productive capacity and enhance their resilience. This will improve farmers’
prosperity, food security and nutrition, enhancing their resilience against external
shocks – including those induced by adverse weather and climate change as
witnessed in 2015 as a result of the El Niño weather phenomenon.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. The programme area of PASIDP II will cover four regions in Ethiopia: (i) Amhara;

(ii) Oromia; (iii) Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region; and (iv) Tigray.
By the time of the midterm review, opportunities to expand the programme
interventions into other regions on a pilot basis will be explored.

7. PASIDP II will benefit 108,750 households, of which: (i) 46,250 utilize small-scale
irrigation schemes and some fields in the adjacent watersheds; (ii) 37,500
households live in and utilize the adjacent watersheds; and (iii) 10,000 benefited
from irrigation support under PASIDP I and will benefit from the agronomic and
market linkages support under PASIDP II. In addition, 15,000 employment
opportunities will be created as a result of the growing labour requirements on farms
and in marketing chains. Within the selected irrigation schemes and adjacent
watersheds, PASIDP II will use a self-targeting approach together with mechanisms
to promote the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups.

B. Programme development objective
8. The programme development objective is to improve income and food security for

rural households on a sustainable basis.

C. Components/outcomes
Component A: Investment in small-scale irrigation infrastructure

9. The expected outcome of component A is that farmers will have access to
sustainable irrigation schemes; the programme aims to develop at least 15,000
hectares (ha) of small-scale irrigation schemes. Subcomponent A.1 will support
(i) the selection of schemes; (ii) feasibility studies and detailed designs; (iii) the
establishment and strengthening of irrigation water users' associations (IWUAs); and
(iv) environmental and social impact studies and management plans. Subcomponent
A.2 will support the development of the selected irrigation schemes, including
multiple-user systems alongside irrigation.

Component B: Investment in capacity for sustainable agriculture
10. The expected outcome of component B is that farmers will have increased

market-oriented skills and capacity for sustainable agriculture. Component B will
support activities designed to ensure that beneficiaries operate in an environment
that is conducive to rural commercial development. Subcomponent B.1 will support
the strengthening of farmers’ cooperatives, the development of agribusiness linkages
and access to financial services. Subcomponent B.2 will: (i) support the
improvement of crop husbandry practices, mainly through farmers’ research groups
and extension support; (ii) facilitate access to improved seeds; (iii) include gender-
sensitive activities; and (iv) promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture. Subcomponent
B.3 will support improved watershed management and promote climate-smart
agriculture.



EB 2016/118/R.18

3

Component C: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and
knowledge management

11. Component C will focus on (i) learning and knowledge management; and
(ii) programme management, monitoring and evaluation.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

12. Programme implementation will be governed by four main principles: (i) alignment
with government systems and procedures, and integration of programme
implementation into decentralized government institutions; (ii) empowerment of
beneficiaries to lead programme implementation through their grass-roots
institutions; (iii) cooperation with private service providers and business entities;
and (iv) partnerships and collaboration with other development partners and
stakeholders in the sector.

B. Organizational framework
13. Programme governance. A national programme steering committee (NPSC) will

provide overall policy and strategic guidance on programme focus, priorities and
institutional strengthening. The NPSC will be chaired by the Minister of State for
Agriculture and Natural Resources, and shall be composed of ministers of state from
relevant sectors including the: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; Ministry
of Trade; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of Finance
and Economic Cooperation; and Ministry of Industry. It will also include executives of
the Federal Cooperative Agency, the Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute and
other institutions aligned with the programme’s strategic focus.

14. Programme management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources will
be the lead implementing agency. The Minister of State for Natural Resources will be
responsible for coordinating implementation with support from the Directorate of
Small-scale Irrigation. A federal programme coordination and management unit
(FPCMU) will ensure: (i) planning, monitoring and evaluation, (ii) stakeholder
coordination at the federal level; and (iii) quality control of investments and cost-
efficiency. The Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency will provide technical
and analytical support, and mobilize service providers for South-South Cooperation
to build capacity in areas of innovation, including support to market access alliances,
promotion of climate-smart innovations and agricultural finance.

15. Regional programme coordination and management units (RPCMUs) will coordinate
investment planning, procurement and coordination of design consultants, works
contractors and capacity-building service providers. At the district and
programme-site levels, implementation will be fully integrated into local government
structures. IWUAs will actively participate in the entire process of irrigation scheme
development, from identification to the final hand-over.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. The programme will be implemented on the basis of approved annual workplans and
budgets, which will be prepared jointly by the FPCMU, RPCMUs, district governments
and implementing partners. The FPCMU will consolidate the budget and present it to
the NPSC for approval pending IFAD’s prior review.

17. In line with the result-based management approach, progress towards programme
outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability will be regularly monitored. Baseline
and impact surveys will be conducted at start-up, midterm and programme
completion to assess the effectiveness of the investment. Feasibility studies for each
irrigation scheme and watershed will provide baseline data to assess performance
and results.



EB 2016/118/R.18

4

18. To improve performance and build local partners’ capacity, the programme will
promote participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. The FPCMU will
facilitate periodic structured discussions to share any issues encountered, solutions
and results. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s
M&E system, particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons
learned during implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. A senior finance manager will be appointed to ensure the use of a consistent,

comprehensive chart of accounts and accounting software at the federal and regional
levels. An accountant will be recruited at the FPMCU and in each region.

20. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. A designated account will be
opened at the National Bank of Ethiopia to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan,
the IFAD grant and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant. A programme operating account will be maintained by the FPCMU in
accordance with government regulations and a separate account will be opened for
the receipt of counterpart funding. The RPCMUs and implementing partners will also
open dedicated bank accounts in their regions to facilitate the transparency of funds.

21. Programme audits. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources internal
audit department will include the programme in its internal audit plans. The Office of
the Federal Auditor General will either directly perform the external audit, request
that the Audit Service Corporation perform it or hire an independent audit firm
acceptable to the Fund. The internal and external audit recommendations will be
reviewed by the NPSC.

22. Retroactive financing and start-up costs. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii)
of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible
expenditures during the preparatory period from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2016
up to the equivalent of US$2 million pre-financed by the Government will be
reimbursed from the IFAD loan after the financing agreement has entered into force
and the conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met. In addition to this
retroactive financing, withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures incurred between the date of entry into force of the Financing
Agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

23. Procurement. The country’s legislative and regulatory framework provides an
adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for
works. Lessons from the previous phase imply that a programme-specific
procurement officer should be recruited to strengthen: records management;
contract management; the integration of procurement into the budget formulation
process; and reporting. Annual procurement plans will be subject to prior review by
IFAD and will serve as tools for planning, implementing and monitoring all the
programme’s procurement activities.

E. Supervision
24. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. Features likely to require

implementation support include: (i) planning and preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes, including the early establishment of IWUAs and facilitating beneficiaries’
active participation; (ii) implementation of an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF); (iii) programme M&E; (iv) procurement; (v) access to finance,
inputs and markets; and (vi) targeting.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
25. Total programme costs over seven years, including contingencies, taxes and duties,

are estimated at US$145.3 million, as presented in the table below. Component A



EB 2016/118/R.18

5

represents 71.9 per cent of the costs, component B 20.5 per cent and component C
7.6 per cent.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Investment in
small-scale irrigation
Infrastructure 82 226 78.7 1 000 1.0 1 287 1.2 4 452 4.3 15 523 14.9 104 489
B. Investment in capacity
for sustainable agriculture 11 571 38.8 - - 8 516 28.6 7 621 25.6 2 108 7.1 29 815
C. Programme
management, M&E and
knowledge management 8 203 74.6 500 4.5 1 196 10.9 - - 1 091 9.9 10 990

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

B. Programme financing
26. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of US$102 million on highly

concessional terms and an IFAD grant of US$1.5 million. An additional grant of
US$11 million (7.6 per cent of the total programme cost) from the ASAP Trust Fund
will support the mainstreaming of climate-resilient interventions within the
programme. The Government will provide the equivalent of US$18.7 million,
representing 12.9 per cent of total programme costs, to cover all duties and taxes.
Public services at the national, regional and district levels will play a major role in
programme implementation. The beneficiary contribution is estimated at
US$12.1 million, and will be provided in labour and materials.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Training 4 142 33.4 - - 6 475 52.1 - - 1 801 14.5 12 417
Works 78 594 79.5 - - 1 000 15.0 4 452 4.5 14 831 15.0 98 876
Consultancies 3 954 47.0 1 500 17.8 1 988 23.6 - - 969 11.5 8 412
Goods, services and
inputs 9 348 50.5 - - 1 094 5.9 7 620 41.1 455 2.5 18 516
Salaries and allowances 3 572 84.1 - - 443 10.4 - - 233 5.5 4 247
Operating costs 2 390 84.6 - - - - - - 434 15.4 2 825

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The programme is expected to lead to: (i) a significant increase in farm productivity,

market output and incomes for 46,250 farm households cultivating 18,400 ha of
irrigated agriculture; (ii) higher yields in at least 60,000 ha of adjacent watersheds;
(iii) additional jobs for 15,000 young and landless people who are not members of
the households with irrigation schemes or watersheds; and (iv) improved market
access and higher yields for 10,000 farming households that received support under
PASIDP I.

28. With an economic rate of return of 28.8 per cent over 20 years and a net present
value of US$165 million per annum, the programme is an economically viable
investment. The sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to increases in



EB 2016/118/R.18

6

programme costs and reductions in output prices. The adoption rate and time lags of
benefits are the most sensitive factors.

D. Sustainability
29. The participatory process of irrigation scheme establishment creates ownership and

the necessary foundations and commitments for sustainability after programme
completion. Programme implementation will be fully embedded in the Government’s
institutional framework at all levels, which will continue after programme
implementation.

30. Mutually beneficial market linkages will ensure the sustainability of beneficiaries’
incomes. The financial analysis indicates that producers will substantially improve
their incomes with solid returns on their investments. These financial benefits from
investment in the sector will not only promote sustainability but enhance replicability
and opportunities for scaling up.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The design of PASIDP II has benefited from a risk assessment study recently

undertaken by the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management. Extreme risks with a
low or moderate frequency but high severity (such as extreme droughts or market
outbreaks) require the intervention of macro-level players.

32. The programme has been confirmed as Environmental and Social Category A since a
number of irrigation schemes may result in a loss of environmental services provided
by the natural ecosystem or have significant implications that affect a broader area
and are not easily remedied. An ESMF and a free prior and informed consent
implementation plan have been developed to guide the programme during
implementation, and environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) will be
conducted for those schemes classified as Category A, while environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for those in Category B. The
programme will endeavour to avoid schemes that may result in a high probability of
resettlement. If any scheme is selected that will trigger physical or economic
resettlement, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared and disclosed as a
precondition for financing the scheme. The RAP process should entail meaningful
consultation and negotiation with any people who will potentially be affected in
accordance with the free prior and informed consent implementation plan. In terms
of climate risk, PASIDP II is classified as "medium". The climate risks will be
mitigated by increasing the ability of affected communities to adapt to environmental
and economic variability, demographic shifts, shocks and long-term changes.

33. As a result of the uncertain implications of – and resources required for – managing
ESIAs for Category A schemes, priority will be given to schemes classified as
Category B. During early implementation, ESIAs will be prepared and IFAD will
organize an independent review to assess their implications and determine the
Borrower’s and IFAD’s capacity to manage and implement these schemes.

34. Based on Ethiopia’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 33 and public financial management assessments, the programme’s
fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D
of this report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

35. Programme design is aligned with IFAD’s Policies for Targeting; Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment; Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security; the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests; the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa; and IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The programme



EB 2016/118/R.18

7

is also aligned with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy
and Climate Change Strategy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
36. The programme is fully aligned with the investment priorities under the

Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II. Linkages between the steering
committees and technical committees, as well as between the management teams of
programmes such as the Sustainable Land Management Project and the Agricultural
Growth Programme will ensure coordination, collaboration, learning, and scaling up
of good practices. Operational linkages with the Ministry of Industry’s Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance Project and the Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
project are expected to result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The main innovations for scaling up outcomes include the: (i) mainstreaming of

participatory planning and selection of schemes; (ii) development of agribusiness
linkages and market access to mitigate marketing risk, especially for perishable
crops; (iii) integration of climate-adaptation strategies, including watershed
improvement and management, building on experiences with the Community-based
Integrated Natural Resource Management Project; (iv) promotion of improved crop
husbandry and access to improved inputs and financial services in order to achieve
the targeted yields and improve water productivity; (v) enhanced focus on women
and youth as priority target groups; (vi) mainstreaming of nutrition-sensitive
agriculture; and (vii) alignment with IFAD’s new SECAP and international
engagement with respect to climate change resilience.

Policy engagementD.
38. Productive use of water resources is a priority guiding Ethiopia’s agricultural

development agenda. Strengthening existing models for irrigation and enhanced
watershed management is a vital priority for policy engagement. The programme
presents an opportunity to: (i) test new implementation approaches, models and
technologies, identify successes and share relevant lessons; and (ii) support the
Government’s own efforts to assess the implementation and effectiveness of its
policies. The lessons learned in pursuing these approaches will be used to inform
Government-led dialogue around national policies.

39. Much of the policy engagement will take place within the framework established by
the Government for policy dialogue with its development partners and other national
stakeholders, including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector
Working Group, and its subcommittees.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A programme financing agreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of

Ethiopia and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included
in appendix I.

41. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2016/118/R.18

8

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to
seventy two million nine hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 72,950,000) (approximately US$102 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to one million and
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 1,080,000) (approximately
US$1.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to seven
million eight hundred and seventy thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 7,870,000) (approximately US$11 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the
Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$45.2 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

10.75 SDR million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.0 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund grant:

4.3 SDR million (equivalent to approximately US$6
million)

Contribution of Government: US$5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.2 million

Contribution of private sector: US$2 million

Financing gap: Approximately US$15 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the Inclusive Value Chain
Development Project, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for
the Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mauritania has about four million inhabitants, 50 per cent of whom derive their

livelihoods from crop and livestock farming and fishing (World Bank, 2013). The
annual demographic growth rate was 2.8 per cent in 2013. The country covers an
area of 1,030,700 km2, more than two thirds of which is desert.

2. During the period 2005-2010, the rural sector contributed an average of 25 per
cent of GDP, which breaks down by subsector as follows: 11 per cent plant
production, 9 per cent livestock and 5 per cent fishing (World Bank, 2016).1 During
the same period, annual average growth in GDP linked to the primary sector was
4.1 per cent, with significant discrepancies between years as a result of irregular
precipitation.

3. Mauritania is classified as a lower middle-income country.2 The human development
index (HDI) improved from 0.424 to 0.487 between 2004 and 2014 but remains
below the average for sub-Saharan Africa, which stands at 0.502. Although more
than half the population live in rural areas, the country is urbanizing very rapidly
and the population is very young: 44 per cent of Mauritanians are under 15 years of
age,3 60 per cent under 25 and just 5 per cent are over 60.

4. The incidence of rural poverty remains high, particularly in the country’s south. The
proportion of the population defined as poor fell from 51 per cent in 2000 to
47 per cent in 2004, 42 per cent in 2008 and 31 per cent in 2014.4,5 Despite the
progress made, this percentage remains high, particularly in rural areas where
74 per cent of poor people live, and in the country’s south where 44.4 per cent of
the rural population still live below the poverty line compared to 16.7 per cent in
urban areas.6

5. The food and nutritional situation of Mauritania’s population is cause for concern.
According to the last food security survey (FSMS, 2015) conducted by the Food
Security Commission with support from the World Food Programme (WFP),
23.8 per cent of Mauritania’s households are food-insecure, particularly in the
country’s southern agro-pastoral strip. Ongoing food insecurity leads to high rates
of chronic malnutrition among children under five, with national rates above
20 per cent,7 while acute malnutrition affects 14 per cent of children.8,9

6. Local value chains face competition from imports. Mauritania imports an average of
60 per cent of the staple foodstuffs consumed in the country. Only red meat and
fish are covered by domestic production, while two thirds of cereals are imported.
Imports of market garden products, mainly from Morocco and Europe, have been

1 World Development Indicators.
2 World Bank, October 2015.
3 WFP, Food Security Survey in Mauritania, July 2009.
4 These poverty rates are based on a poverty line estimated in real terms at MRO 169,445 at 2014 harmonized prices.
5 World Bank, October 2015.
6 MAED, National Poverty Profile in Mauritania. Draft version, June 2015.
7 Critical threshold according to WHO.
8 SMART national nutritional survey, Mauritania, Ministry of Health and UNICEF, June 2015.
9 IFPRI Global Nutrition Report 2015.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

2

rising since 2010. Despite substantial investments in developing rice growing areas,
the volume of rice imports remains high. Sugar and oil consumption are entirely
import-dependent. It is therefore essential to take demand into account before
undertaking any intervention in production to reduce the country’s food
dependence. This demand-driven approach is all the more important given the
experience of the Value Chains Development Programme for Poverty Reduction
(ProLPRAF), the previous project cofinanced by IFAD, which showed the local
markets can quickly become saturated.

7. Mauritania is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Based on the
environmental performance index for 2010, the country is in 161st place of
163 countries. Climate change amplifies natural risks such as periodic drought and
flooding, the resulting risks of network breakdown and human impacts. Climate
change also reduces productivity and biomass quality, which has a detrimental
impact on pastureland and non-timber forest products. High temperatures also
pose an obstacle for product conservation.

8. Mauritania’s financial sector is relatively modest in size and not well developed in
rural areas. With about 15,000 members, or 0.4 per cent of the population, and
US$1.7 million in financial savings,10 coverage by rural credit unions remains
limited. Low demographic density and low levels of capitalization among rural
people, hence their credit unions, place constraints on financial inclusion in value
chains.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

9. In a country context characterized by high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor
value chain competitiveness, heavy dependence on imports and climate phenomena
that accentuate impoverishment among the population, PRODEFI builds upon and
scales up IFAD’s experience in Mauritania and elsewhere in the subregion by
adopting a poverty reduction approach based on supporting inclusive value chains.
The PRODEFI approach is fully aligned with national policies and strategies – the
Rural Sector Development Strategy, the National Agricultural Development Plan,
the National Food Security Strategy, the National Programme of Action for
Adaptation to Climate Change – and IFAD’s country strategy note. It is also based
on the experience of technical and financial partners with a presence in Mauritania,
particularly the European Union, WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO).

10. ProLPRAF showed that market access is a determining factor in food security for
poor people. It identified pro-poor value chains with good nutritional potential in
which vulnerable people, women in particular, could position themselves through
partnerships with the private sector and benefit from the value added with project
support in production, processing, transportation and commercialization. Promoting
policy dialogue between the Government and the main value chain actors will help
install an enabling environment for promotion of local production.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. PRODEFI will be implemented in the wilayas (regions) in the country’s

south – Brakna, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech
Charghi. In these six wilayas, intervention will be localized and phased. During the
first phase, in each value chain, the project will intervene around markets where
ProLPRAF gains need to be reinforced. During the second phase, PRODEFI will
gradually expand its activities in all six wilayas.

B. Project development objective
12. The overall objective of PRODEFI is to improve the incomes and food and nutritional

10 Central Bank annual reports and interviews during formulation mission.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

3

security of poor rural people, particularly women and young people, in the project
area. The development objective is to include poor rural people, including women
and young people, in profitable and resilient value chains. PRODEFI will contribute
directly to achieving the objectives of the Rural Sector Development Strategy and
the National Agricultural Development Plan.

13. The project will target 42,600 direct beneficiaries and 243,000 indirect
beneficiaries, mainly farmers and other upstream and downstream value chain
actors. For the first phase, four value chains have been selected based on ProLPRAF
results and their poverty reduction potential: market gardening, poultry farming,
goat milk and non-timber forest products. For the second phase, plans call for
PRODEFI to operate in new value chains based on the results of the market studies
done during the first phase. A pilot operation in inland fishing will be conducted as
of project start-up around lake Foum Gleita.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will be structured around the following three components:

15. Component 1: Revitalization of value chains and development of pro-poor
public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps). The desired effect is for value
chain working groups (GTFs) and partnerships to support value chain development
and defend the interests of poor producers. To this end, the project will:
(i) reinforce and scale up GTF activities undertaken by ProLPRAF; (ii) promote a
better match between supply and demand and help set up higher performing and
more inclusive value chains by capitalizing producers, bringing actors into the
banking system, formalizing commercial transactions and facilitating partnerships
between actors, from simple contractual arrangements to 4P type partnerships; and
(iii) facilitate access to markets through structural improvements.

16. Component 2: Development and promotion of production models. The
intended effect is for the beneficiaries to adopt resilient, market-driven production
models that are sensitive to nutritional challenges. To this end, the project will
support: (i) competitive production models programmed to respond to market
demand, contracts and the 4Ps facilitated under component 1; and (ii) making
available training and advisory services associated with these production models,
i.e. nutritional education, agricultural advice, training for young people and
functional literacy.

17. Within the framework of these activities, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) financing granted will make it possible to take better account of
climate change by facilitating the use of solar energy – from production to storage
and processing – and promoting sustainable management techniques for natural
resources such as water, pastureland and plant resources, which are particularly
important in the non-timber forest products value chain.

18. Component 3: Coordination, M&E and knowledge management. Funding will
be provided for: (i) the project coordination and management unit based in
Nouakchott; (ii) the operations of two project operational management units, based
in Kaedi and Kiffa; (iii) the technical and financial assistance pool, based on cost
sharing with the Poverty Reduction Project in Aftout South and Karakoro – Phase II;
and (iv) strategic and technical steering activities as well as M&E, knowledge
management and communication.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

4

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project approach adopted by PRODEFI is to scale up the successes of ProLPRAF

while reinforcing and complementing them and integrating them with national
strategies through systematic, expanded policy dialogue. The project will adopt a
value chain approach driven by market demand. It will support actors involved the
value chains, both individually and collectively, as well as policy dialogue.Within the
framework of component 1, the actors will benefit from assistance in organization
and consultation to improve the matching of supply to demand. Project
interventions will consist of building the capacities of the actors in organization,
governance and leadership. The project will promote actor-to-actor contracting,
prioritizing producers and private promoters of innovative projects. Under
component 2, the project will, in developing market-driven production models as
defined in component 1, promote an increase in agricultural productivity and
processing by offering support to producers – underscoring financial viability,
improved nutrition and adaptation to climate change.

20. In addition, to gain efficiency, the project will adopt an outsourcing approach with
support from experienced national and international operators and consulting firms.
Operational partnerships will be promoted with other technical and financial
partners, civil society and the private sector to implement activities.

B. Organizational framework
21. Technical oversight of PRODEFI will be provided by the Policy, Planning, Statistics,

M&E and Cooperation Directorate (DPSSEC) of the Ministry of Agriculture, with
technical links to the departments in charge of the value chains targeted by the
project: livestock, fisheries and environment. The government contribution to the
project will be included in the budget of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
national steering committee will report to the Public Investment and Economic
Cooperation Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In addition, the
participation of GTF representatives will be crucial to facilitate policy dialogue
around value chain promotion. The same national steering committee could also
pilot other projects as part of IFAD’s programme in Mauritania.

22. With respect to programme coordination, a team in Nouakchott will be responsible
for operational and strategic project steering, with a mandate to, first, coordinate
and support work by branches and, second, facilitate policy dialogue on value chain
development at the national level.

23. Two operational management units, located in Kaédi and Kiffa and reporting
directly to the project coordinator, will be responsible for implementing the project.
Each unit will be administered by a branch head, based respectively within the
agriculture office in Kiffa and the livestock office in Kaédi. Both branches will be
supported by a deputy branch head and will benefit from the services of an M&E
assistant who will provide support for monitoring contracting, targeting, gender
equality, youth and nutrition, as well as a financial officer, secretariat and drivers.
Work premises will be shared with the regional offices.

24. With a view to gradually putting in place a programme approach to IFAD’s portfolio
in Mauritania, a shared pool of technical and financial assistance will provide
support to both projects in the portfolio. To this end, the PRODEFI PMU will be
housed in shared premises at the Nouakchott branch of PASK II.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
Planning

25. The PRODEFI activities will be presented each year in the form of an annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B) prepared on the basis of actors in the value chains
identified with GTF support and supported by annual action plans. Needs expressed
at the local level will be gathered on a participatory basis and consolidated by
wilayas with support from the operational management branches concerned. These



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

5

workplans will be subject to validation by technical steering committees, then
consolidated by the project coordination team in a national AWP/B and transmitted
for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture, then approved by the national steering
committee before being sent to IFAD for non objection.

M&E
26. The PRODEFI M&E system will be set up to provide information and analysis needed

to steer project implementation and plan sufficient human and financial resources
for implementation. It will measure progress in project implementation and its
effects and impact on the target groups. It will also report on a limited list of
indicators in connection with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS),
the effects of climate change (ASAP financing) and nutrition.

27. The system will be participatory, and the main M&E stakeholders will be GTFs,
implementation partners and service providers. Socio-economic baseline surveys
will be done by external service providers at project start-up and completion, and
will be strengthened with a study on the problematic issue of gender and poverty,
which will be conducted on the basis of the women’s empowerment in agriculture
index.

Learning and knowledge management
28. A knowledge management strategy will be developed under PRODEFI. The

approach will consist of creating a value chain between M&E, knowledge and
communication in order to collect, process, document, add value to and
disseminate on a large scale the data and information generated by activities in the
field, using multimedia and new technologies. The lessons learned will be
communicated via the PRODEFI website and at various national and international
workshops.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management

29. From start-up, PRODEFI will benefit from fiduciary support to encourage a forward
planning dynamic, which will be reviewed and supported during supervision
missions.

Flow of funds
30. To facilitate disbursements, the Recipient will open a designated project account

denominated in United States dollars at the Central Bank of Mauritania. The
National Pesticide Control Commission (CNCP) will open three current accounts
denominated in Mauritanian Ouguiya as the operating accounts in the two cities
where the PRODEFI branches will be located and in Nouakchott, where CNCP has its
headquarters. Start-up costs in amounts and categories to be defined during
negotiations with the Government are provided for upon the entry into
effectiveness of the PRODEFI financing agreement. Commitments and payments for
these expenses will be submitted by the Government of Mauritania to IFAD for non
objection on the basis of a detailed AWP/B.

Audit
31. The project will have an internal control function with activities based on an annual

plan drawn up by the internal controller. In addition, a full project audit conforming
to relevant international standards will be conducted each year by a firm drawn
from a shortlist with demonstrated experience in auditing the accounts of
IFAD-funded projects or programmes.

Procurement
32. Contracts for goods, works and services funded by IFAD will be awarded in

accordance with the regulations of the Recipient, provided they are compatible with
IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procedures governing contracts below the threshold
for sector commission jurisdiction will be set forth in the PRODEFI fiduciary manual.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

6

E. Supervision
33. Project supervision and administration of the financing will be done directly by

IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
34. The total cost of the project, which will be implemented over eight years, will be

US$45.2 million, of which US$4.2 million in respect of physical and financial
contingencies and US$41.0 million in base costs, which break down as follows:
US$18.3 million for component 1 (45 per cent), US$16.9 million for
component 2 (41 per cent) and US$5.8 million for component 3 (14 per cent).



7

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

4

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD

IFAD
ASAP

Other
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Value chain revitalization and 4P development
1.Professionalization of actors
and value chain steering 1.1 43.1 - - 1.1 43.1 - - - - 0.4 13.8 2.6 5.8
2.Contracting initiatives and
partnerships between value
chain actors 2.5 25.4 1.0 10.6 2.5 25.4 2.0 21.0 1.4 13.9 0.4 3.6 9.7 21.5
3.Structural improvements for
market access 3.3 41.5 - - 3.3 41.5 - - 0.4 4.6 1.0 12.5 7.9 17.5

Subtotal 6.9 34.0 1.0 5.1 6.9 34.0 2.0 10.1 1.7 8.5 1.7 8.4 20.2 44.7

B. Production models development and promotion
1.Production and processing
models 4.2 26.3 4.8 30.0 4.2 26.2 0.0 - 0.5 2.8 2.3 14.6 15.9 35.3
2.Advisory assistance and
supply of services 1.2 43.0 - - 1.2 43.0 - - - - 0.4 14.0 2.8 6.1

Subtotal 5.4 28.8 4.8 25.6 5.4 28.7 0.0 - 0.5 2.4 2.7 14.6 18.7 41.4

C. Coordination, M&E and knowledge management
1.Coordination and
management 2.3 46.2 - - 2.3 46.2 - - - - 0.4 7.6 4.9 10.8
2.M&E, knowledge
management and
communication 0.5 36.4 0.2 13.6 0.5 36.4 - - - - 0.2 13.7 1.4 3.1

Subtotal 2.8 44.0 0.2 3.0 2.8 44.0 - - - - 0.6 9.0 6.3 13.9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5.0 11.0 45.2 100.0



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

8

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

B. Project financing
35. PRODEFI, with a total cost of US$45.2 million, will be financed by: (i) IFAD, in the

amount of US$21 million (46.5 per cent of total cost), in the form of a grant for
US$15 million under the Debt Sustainability Framework for the 2016-2018 cycle of
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS), and a grant for US$6 million
under ASAP; (ii) private partners, in the amount of US$2 million (4.5 per cent);
(iii) the Government of Mauritania, in the amount of US$5 million (11 per cent);
and (iv) the beneficiaries, in the amount of US$2.2 million (4.8 per cent). The
financing deficit, in the amount of US$15 million, will be covered by other sources
of financing. Otherwise, it will be covered by a second tranche of IFAD financing
under the next PBAS cycle (2019-2021), subject to the availability of resources for
that cycle and subject to Executive Board approval.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure4

IFAD
PBAS

IFAD
ASAP

OTHER
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount    %
I. Investment expenses

A. Works 4.9 36.8 1.2 8.9 4.9 36.7 0.0 - 0.7 5.6 1.6 12 0 13 3 29.3
B. Vehicles 0.1 30.2 - - 0.1 28.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.3 0 1 40 0 0 3 0.7
C. Equipment and
supplies 0.3 19.1 0.3 21.9 0.3 18.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0 6 40 0 1 4 3.2
D. Training and
workshops 2.4 37.7 0.7 10.5 2.4 37.7 - - - - 0 9 14 0 6 4 14.1
E. Consultations 1.4 40.6 0.2 7.0 1.4 40.6 - - - - 0 4 11 9 3 5 7.7
F. Goods and services
and inputs 2.7 27.6 2.6 25.8 2.7 27.6 0.1 1.0 0.5 4.7 1 3 13 2 9 9 22.0
G. Grants and subsidies 1.5 21.4 1.0 15.0 1.5 21.4 1.9 28.3 1.0 13.9 0 0 - 6 9 15.2

Total investment
expenses 13.3 31.9 6.0 14.4 13.3 31.8 2.0 4.9 2.2 5.2 4 9 11 8 41 7 92 1

II. Operating expenses
A. Salaries and benefits 1.6 50.0 - - 1.6 50.0 - - - - - - 3 3 7.3
B. Operations 0.1 35.0 - - 0.1 35.0 - - - - 0 1 30 0 0 3 0.6

Total operating expenses 1.7 48.9 - - 1.7 48.9 - - - - 0 1 2 2 3 6 7 9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5 0 11 0 45 2 100 0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The financial analysis performed on the 4Ps and production models show that the

investments will be profitable, with internal rates of return (IRRs) higher than the
opportunity cost of capital and positive net present value (NPV). Based on the
assumptions included in the logical framework, the overall EIRR for the project is
20.5 per cent, generating NPV of US$19.6 million. The economic analysis takes into
account all of the aggregate benefits of the production models, 4Ps, environmental
co-benefits and the benefits deriving from tracks. The sensitivity analysis shows
robust results under all scenarios with different levels of risk.

D. Sustainability
37. The sustainability of PRODEFI results will be ensured by: (i) taking into account

market requirements and the profitability of investments in value chains;
(ii) strengthening and gradual participation of institutional actors such as GTFs,
government institutions and research centres, and economic actors such as
entrepreneurs and sponsoring companies, that are sustainably anchored in value
chain development; (iii) promoting a producer capitalization dynamic through
savings as a prerequisite for investments; and (iv) promoting production models
that are resilient to climate change and investments with positive environmental
externalities, as well as lower operating costs thanks to complementary ASAP
financing from IFAD.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

9

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The risk level presented by PRODEFI is considered moderate. The risks considered

most likely and most serious are systemic risks linked to the macro-economic
context, including competition from imports, as well as climate hazards, weak
domestic supply of services, and limited technical and management capacities for
implementation of the country programme. These risks will be mitigated through
greater involvement in policy dialogue to promote inclusive value chains, financing
for adaptation measures and use of outsourcing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
39. The project is in compliance with IFAD strategies, principles and tools in the areas

of rural finance and value chain financing, as well as gender equality. It is fully
consistent with IFAD's strategy on climate change (2010), particularly the objective
promoting innovative approaches to assist smallholder producers, both women and
men, to better adapt to climate change.

40. PRODEFI is classified in category B in that it is not expected to have any major
adverse environmental or social impact. Its climate vulnerability is deemed
moderate given the inclusion of adaptation considerations in all project activities.
The project also includes a set of technologies and approaches intended to prevent
greenhouse gas emissions and enable carbon storage.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the strategy on rural sector

development, which has as one of its five strategic directions the development of
value chains with growth potential, generating permanent employment and
motivating incomes, with support from structured mechanisms for consultation and
effective value chain management to the benefit of the organizations of value chain
actors. In addition, it is fully consistent with the National Agricultural Development
Plan, which calls for promoting the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. The
recent installation of the Value Chain Directorate at the new Ministry of Livestock
underscores the importance given to value chains within the Mauritanian
institutional landscape.

42. With respect to nutrition, an inter-sector action plan on nutrition has been drafted
under the initiative of the Renewed Efforts against Child Hunger and Undernutrition
(REACH) partnership with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO and WFP. A national
multi-sector strategy on nutrition (2016-2025) is also nearing completion. PRODEFI
will be part of the implementation of this strategic plan.

43. In the area of climate change, in 2015 Mauritania prepared an INDC in connection
with the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. PRODEFI will contribute to implementing national priorities
through its support for small-scale irrigation and regeneration of plant cover.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. A number of innovations and best practices introduced by ProLPRAF will be scaled

up under this project, e.g.:

(i) The market-driven value chain approach, through dialogue among the actors
within GTFs. The situational analysis done of GTFs at the time of project
design and the lessons learned from ProLPRAF allowed for a rigorous
identification of support on a larger scale for GTF governance, organization,
capacity for awareness-raising, leadership and youth representation;

(ii) The 4P initiatives undertaken during year one of ProLPRAF, which serve as a
model for developing 4P initiatives for PRODEF;

(iii) Capitalization of smallholder producers through savings, using the Centre for



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

10

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

International Studies and Cooperation (CECI) model piloted by Catholic Relief
Services in Mauritania, which showed promising results that warrant scaling
up the initiative; and

(iv) Support for community associations for joint management of natural
resources and non-timber forest products.

D. Policy engagement
45. PRODEFI will support GTF federations and inter-professions in engaging in policy

dialogue with the Government on improving the economic environment for value
chains. The exchanges will relate mainly to: (i) policies to promote inclusive value
chains; (ii) promoting local products; (iii) implementing legislation on cooperatives
and other professional organizations; and (iv) policy on trade and tariffs. This policy
dialogue process will result in concrete proposals on matters such as health and
quality standards for value chain products, improving national legislation and
enforcement, and market opportunities that could lead to improving food and
nutritional security for households. Within this framework, the project will work with
others operating in the area of institutional support and policy dialogue to ensure
good coordination among interventions.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
46. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

47. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount equivalent
to ten million seven hundred and fifty special drawing rights
(SDR 10,750,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) in an amount equivalent to four million three hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 4,300,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for
the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA)



Republic of Nicaragua

Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nicaragua

Executing agency: Ministry for Family, Community, Cooperative and
Associative Economy (MEFCCA)

Total project cost: US$48.460 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$20.504 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier: Central American Bank for Economic Integration

Amount of cofinancing: US$15 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.99 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the
Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Nicaragua covers an area of 129,494 km² and has a population of

6.17 million people. The country has experienced macroeconomic stability and
sustained economic growth over recent decades. GDP increased between 2010 and
2014 by an average of 4.7 per cent per annum, reaching US$1,904 per capita in
2014. The agricultural sector accounted for 17 per cent of national GDP in 2014,
following a gradual reduction begun in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the sector
generates 31 per cent of employment and 70 per cent of overall exports, signalling
that Nicaragua’s economy remains in transition, with a significant presence in the
productive agricultural sector.

2. The 2014 National Household Living Standards Survey (NHLSS) found 29.6 per cent
of the population to be living below the poverty line and 8.3 per cent in extreme
poverty. These figures reflect a significant improvement on those from the 2009
NHLSS (42.5 per cent and 14.6 per cent, respectively). In rural areas over the
same period, the overall poverty rate decreased from 63.3 per cent to
50.1 per cent of rural population and the number affected by extreme poverty
declined from 26.8 per cent to 16.3 per cent. Despite this significant progress in
poverty reduction, half of the rural population still lives in poverty. Nicaragua is
highly vulnerable to extreme weather events: 25 per cent of the population lives in
locations at risk of hurricanes and tropical storms while 40 per cent is affected by
recurrent drought, with Dry Corridor inhabitants and food production feeling the
greatest effects.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The proposed project is aligned with the IFAD country strategy as articulated in the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) (2013-2017).
NICAVIDA is further aligned with current policy priorities and follows the axes of the
national “Dry Corridor Strategic Framework” implemented by the Government in
response to the severe social, productive and environmental conditions affecting
the area. Under that Framework and in support of the Government’s programmatic
approach, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit will coordinate the investments
of international and development organizations, such as the World Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation,
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) and IFAD.

4. As the factors contributing to rural poverty in the Dry Corridor not only persist but
worsen, the incidence of malnutrition in rural areas must be addressed. According
to the National Demographic and Health Survey 2011-2012, 21 per cent of boys
and girls aged less than five years in rural areas exhibit overall chronic
malnutrition. The Dry Corridor has a higher overall incidence (for rural and urban



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

areas combined) of chronic malnutrition (29.5 per cent in Madriz and 27.7 per cent
in Nueva Segovia). Agricultural activities are carried out against a backdrop of
deteriorating micro/sub-basins, depleting water resources and plant cover, and soil
degradation. The situation is further exacerbated by climate change and volatility,
with production projected to decline significantly.

5. NICAVIDA will support the economic diversification and productive transformation
strategies of families in rural areas, developing articulated links between the
diversification of their sources of income, environmental protection, adaptation to
climate change and food and nutrition security. To that end, the project builds on
lessons learned from previous IFAD-financed operations, including the Programme
for the Economic Development of the Dry Region in Nicaragua (PRODESEC), the
Technical Assistance Fund, the Inclusion of Small-scale Producers in Value Chains
and Market Access Project (PROCAVAL), the Agricultural, Fishery and Forestry
Productive Systems Development Programme in RAAN and RAAS Indigenous
Territories and the Adapting to Markets and Climate Change Project (NICADAPTA).
Those operations contributed to the implementation of national public policies and
proved successful in facilitating public investment processes, increased production
and productivity, food production, climate change-adaptation investments and
income generation.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The NICAVIDA project area covers 58 municipios in the Dry Corridor. As per

agreement with the Government, initial project phases will prioritize the 37
municipios with the highest rates of poverty and at greatest risk of food and
nutrition insecurity and climate vulnerability. Natural ecosystems in the Dry
Corridor are undergoing severe degradation, with 52 per cent of soils overused and
40 per cent strongly or severely eroded. Falling production has led to food
insecurity and a decline in household incomes in rural parts of the area.

7. The target population of NICAVIDA comprises poor rural people and indigenous
peoples, with or without land, with a particular focus on women and young people.
The project will directly benefit 30,000 families, approximately 152,000 people,
characterized by the diversity of the activities in which they engage, combining
strategies for agricultural production with labour market integration. Rural
households living in the 37 priority municipios in 2015 were estimated to total
122,000, 11.2 per cent of which identified as indigenous.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall objective of NICAVIDA is to contribute to the attainment of national

targets to improve the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples in
the Dry Corridor. The development objective is to support poor rural families in the
project area, including indigenous peoples, in boosting their incomes, enhancing the
nutritional content of their diets and strengthening their capacities to adapt to
climate change. Beneficiary incomes will be increased through the productive and
economic diversification of their activities, while their resilience to climate change
will be enhanced by the sustainable management of natural resources.

C. Components/outcomes
9. NICAVADA will be organized around the following three components:

 Component 1. Capacity-building and planning. This component will put in
place the conditions to allow families and their organizations, taking into
account their resources and climatic, economic and social context, to map their
own paths towards development that will allow them to improve their incomes,
strengthen their food and nutrition security, and enhance their resilience and
capacities to adapt to climate change.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

This component will address two strategic themes: (i) the food and nutrition
security of families, ensuring access to nutritious food and an adequate diet;
and (ii) natural resource management and adaptation to climate change,
strengthening capacities to manage natural resources sustainably,
incorporating climate change-adaptation practices and adopting strategies to
reduce vulnerability to production- and climate-related risks. This component
will achieve: (i) project targeting, both geographically and towards families,
indigenous peoples and communities, prioritizing women and young people;
(ii) adaptation to the territorial, socioeconomic and environmental context of
the Dry Corridor; (iii) the provision of training to build families’ capacities to
manage economic and social strategies; and (iv) capacity-building to increase
employment, business and productive opportunities.

The implementation of this component will be based on participatory
assessments used to develop family plans and business plans to promote
productive diversification and agricultural and non-agricultural income-
generating activities. Moreover, territorial plans will be developed, based on the
demands of families, organizations and institutions, to meet needs in terms of
productive infrastructure, the stewardship and management of natural
resources, access to water, road improvement and management of
microbasins.

 Component 2. Family, territorial and business investments. This
component includes the activities and resources for the implementation of the
family, business and territorial plans. Once approved by the project
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry for Family, Community,
Cooperative and Associative Economy (MEFCCA) pursuant to the relevant
approval mechanism detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM),
these plans will be financed under this component with funds allocated under
the Project’s Family, Territorial and Business Investment Fund (FTE). The PMU
will manage the FTE directly, in accordance with the standards and procedures
defined in the PIM.

The FTE will be able to finance: (i) territorial plans targeting investments in
public goods and services that will create conditions conducive to improving the
living standards of families in rural areas and of indigenous peoples; (ii) family
plans, seeking to improve how families use and manage their resources (land,
manpower, cash), agricultural and non-agricultural activities, and food and
nutrition security, and to boost income and quality of life; (iii) business plans,
aiming to promote the link between family income strategies, environmental
protection and adaptation to climate change. Such plans may include
productive agricultural activities, value-addition, access-to-market and small
business development activities, as well as commercial, service and
microenterprise activities.

 Component 3. Project management. This component seeks to ensure
effective and efficient project implementation and to build capacity for the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities, results and impact. A
timely, efficient and effective implementation system will be established within
MEFCCA at the central and district levels, with attention to inter-institutional
coordination. With regard to planning, monitoring and evaluation (PM&E), it is
hoped that IFAD-financed MEFCCA projects will have a single M&E system. This
component includes project management and administration, which comes
under MEFCCA’s institutional responsibilities, and shall be in coordination with
other IFAD-financed projects.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

10. Project activities follow an approach that places central importance on families and
on the territory of the project area. In this context, through the family, territorial and
business plans, it is hoped that the following will be achieved: (i) at the family level,
families are able to make adequate use of their resources (land, manpower, cash)
and pursue their own development strategies, improving food and nutrition security
and building resilience to climate change; (ii) at the territorial and indigenous
community levels, investments in public goods and services create an environment
conducive to improving the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples,
including behavioural changes that enhance natural resource management, resilience
to climate change and inhabitants’ nutrition; and (iii) in the context of business plans,
families and their organizations embark on a process of rural transformation, linking
income generation and diversification with environmental protection and food and
nutrition security, and strengthening their resilience to climate change.

B. Organizational framework
11. MEFCCA will be responsible for project implementation. A PMU will be established

under the MEFCCA Project Division to coordinate and manage the project. In
coordination with IFAD operations already under way, a number of specialized units
will be set up to deal with financial management, procurement, PM&E and
knowledge management and will service all projects in IFAD’s portfolio. District-
level MEFCCA offices will play a key operational role and will be responsible for the
activities in their respective districts. The project will involve measures and
activities requiring the active participation of specialized entities – such as the
Ministry for the Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA), the Nicaraguan
Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) and the Nicaraguan Institute of
Territorial Studies (INETER), among others – with which specific agreements will be
established.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

12. NICAVIDA will implement a PM&E and knowledge management system based on
lessons learned from previous IFAD operations in the country. The project will
establish an M&E system, with short-term reporting (institutional, administrative
and first-level Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) reports), medium-
term reporting (national and sectorial statistics and second-level RIMS reports) and
long-term reporting (National Human Development Plan indicators and third-level
RIMS reports). Knowledge management will ensure the use of information and the
incorporation of lessons learned on key issues such as fiduciary aspects, business
plan implementation, climate change adaptation and food and nutrition security.
The project will complement and support the NICADAPTA efforts to establish a
MEFCCA PM&E system. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following
the adoption of the financing agreement by the IFAD Executive Board and prior to
project launch.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
13. Financial management. MEFCCA will be charged with the financial management

of all project resources, in particular flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,
accounting, financial reporting and audit. A specialized financial management unit
will be established within MEFCCA for all projects financed or cofinanced by IFAD.

14. Flow of funds. IFAD will open and deposit the loan principal in an account in
United States dollars in the name of the borrower. To receive the loan funds, the
borrower shall open and maintain in the Central Bank of Nicaragua an account
designated in United States dollars, under the control of the General Treasury of
the Republic, in which advance funds shall be deposited and from which funds will



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

be transferred to the operational account(s) of the project in MEFCCA. The latter
accounts will be opened by the borrower on terms acceptable to the Fund.

15. Retroactive financing. Expenses incurred prior to the date of entry into force of
the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a total amount of
US$250,000, in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement.

16. Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out in
accordance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the
provisions of the loan agreement. The specialized procurement unit will plan and
execute procurement processes. Any procurement required under the plans
developed by beneficiary families and organizations will be completed in compliance
with private commercial practices, in accordance with the procedures set out in the
PIM and the MEFCCA “Technical and Financial Administrative Rules”, and shall be
compatible with IFAD Guidelines. Any procurement to be carried out under the
territorial plans through agreements or contracts with public or private institutions
shall be governed by the applicable laws and must comply with IFAD guidelines.

17. Audit. The annual accounts and financial statements of the project will be
independently audited, pursuant to the terms of reference and in accordance with
International Standards on Audit and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. Within
a period not longer than three (3) months from the effective date of project launch,
MEFCCA will engage an independent, external private company acceptable to IFAD
to audit the project. The annual report shall be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of the fiscal year.

18. Governance and control. Principles of good governance, transparency and
participation will be agreed by all relevant parties, primarily MEFCCA and the
groups, organizations, communities and institutions involved in the project. These
agreements and procedures will be reflected in the PIM.

E. Supervision
19. IFAD will directly supervise the project and carry out implementation support

missions. As far as possible, such missions will be conducted in combination with
the supervision of other projects of the IFAD-financed portfolio in the country. The
first project supervision mission will take place approximately six months from the
entry into force of the project financing agreement. That mission will evaluate
progress against the timeline established in the implementation plan, and verify
progress on fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions and
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement. The second mission will take
place six months after the first.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
20. The total cost of NICAVIDA over the six-year implementation period will be

US$48.46 million, comprising US$45.54 million in baseline costs (94 per cent of the
total cost) and US$2.92 million for physical and price contingencies (6 per cent of
total cost). Components 1 and 2 account for 93 per cent of base costs of the
project, with the majority of these funds going directly to beneficiaries and their
organizations. Project management (component 3) accounts for 8 per cent of base
costs.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

amountComponents Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building
and planning 1 731 15.9 5 811 53.4 3 330 30.6 - - 10 873
2. Family, territorial
and business
investments 2 985 8.9 11 873 35.4 11 670 34.8 6 984 20.8 33 512
3. Project
management 1 258 30.9 2 819 69.1 - - - - 4 078
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463

B. Project financing
21. NICAVIDA will be financed by: (i) the Government of Nicaragua, with a contribution

of US$5.9 million; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of US$20.5 million; (iii) CABEI, with a
loan of US$15.0 million; and (iv) the project beneficiaries, with US$6.9 million.
IFAD will finance 39 per cent of the investments, with IFAD’s highest allocation by
expenditure category corresponding to FTE (US$11.35 million, equivalent to 55 per
cent of IFAD financing).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investments
A. Vehicles 70 15.0 395 85.0 - - - - 465 1.0
B. Equipment 60 15.0 342 85.0 - - - - 403 0.8
C. Training 752 15.0 2 961 59.1 1 301 25.9 - - 5 015 10.3
D. Consultations 696 15.0 1 916 41.3 2 029 43.7 - - 4 641 9.6
E. Grants (FTE) 2 811 8.6 11 351 34.6 11 670 35.6 6 984 21.3 32 816 67.7

Total investments 4 389 10.1 16 966 39.1 15 000 34.6 6 984 16.1 43 340 89.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries 1 402 35.9 2 499 64.1 - - - - 3 901 8.0
B. Operating costs 183 15.0 1 039 85.0 - - - - 1 222 2.5

Total recurrent costs 1 585 30.9 3 538 69.1 - - - - 5 123 10.6
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
22. NICAVIDA will benefit 30,000 families in rural areas (approximately 152,100

people). It is estimated that: (a) 13,450 families will receive support to improve
their nutrition and food security, acquire non-agricultural income-generating
activities and improve their working conditions; (b) 14,500 families will receive a
combination of support in the areas of food security and agricultural production and
diversification, agricultural and non-agricultural income generation, and business
plans; (c) 2,050 families will receive a combination of the support above and will
develop productive processes and agricultural diversification through business plans
incorporating technology and cash crops. The economic internal rate of return is
22.7 per cent and the net present value is US$20.8 million.

D. Sustainability
23. The sustainability of the project will be ensured by: (i) its integration with the

Government's policy for fighting rural poverty and the strengthening and expansion
of that policy, and its response to the conditions affecting the Dry Corridor; (ii) its



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

coherence and alignment with the Dry Corridor Strategic Framework; and (iii) its
approach seeking to ensure the sustainability of families in terms of food and
nutrition security, income, climate change adaptation and natural resource
management.

24. The sustainability of food security, enhanced nutrition and increased production will
be ensured by the central importance given to rural families as the focus of
NICAVIDA activities and interventions, and by the resources allocated to food
security and nutrition. At the same time, NICAVIDA also supports income-
generating activities for families through small businesses, value addition and
access to better employment opportunities through training. The project has a solid
strategic direction and dedicates resources to climate change adaptation and
climate variability-risk reduction. The integration of these measures with productive
agricultural activities will promote their sustainability.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The approach and activities proposed under NICAVIDA aim to reduce risks relating

to food security, nutrition and climate change. The territorial investments and those
in farms aim to promote the sustainable management of natural resources, in
particular soil and water. The planned productive activities take into account
limitations reflecting the availability of tested technologies and the environmental
fragility of the land, and include measures for continuous monitoring and analysis
so timely preventative measures can be taken to mitigate such risks. Interventions
to improve access to water resources for human consumption and irrigation will be
accompanied by measures to improve the replenishment and protection of water
sources and analysis to ensure that improving access to water for irrigation does
not compete with its use for human consumption. In the present context,
institutional and political risks are limited. Risks relating to the efficiency of
management and administration, institutional coordination and agreements with
specialized institutions will be minimized by the application of measures drawn from
IFAD’s long experience implementing projects with MEFCCA and the Government.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The approach, objectives and implementation modalities of NICAVIDA are
consistent with IFAD policies and strategies. The project pursues the objectives of
the COSOP 2013-2017 and is aligned with IFAD’s core policies: (i) the IFAD policy
on targeting, applying direct targeting mechanisms based on analyses of poverty,
food and nutrition insecurity and climate change risk, geographic targeting so as to
include indigenous peoples, and self-targeting within these groups and
communities; (ii) the IFAD policy on gender and youth, replicating and scaling up
lessons from previous projects applied directly to the beneficiaries;( iii) the IFAD
Policy on the Environment and Natural Resource Management, as well as the
Strategy on Climate Change, which includes the objective of maximizing the impact
of IFAD investments in rural poverty in the context of climate change and volatility;
iv) the policies on food and nutrition security, around which the project’s strategies
are built; and (v) the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, applying
the principal of free, prior and informed consent, and with local territorial and
community authorities, recognizing the distinctive cultural identities of the
populations located in the project areas. The project is also fully aligned with IFAD
strategies devoting particular attention to building social capital, guiding
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities and promoting market-
oriented small business.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The project is aligned with: the National Human Development Plan; the Dry

Corridor Strategic Framework, which is the Government's instrument for addressing
development challenges in the dry zone; and the Government’s main rural
development and poverty-reduction initiatives and policies, such as asset-transfer



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and -recovery mechanisms, systems for the provision of technical assistance and
training. Designed in close consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Public
Credit and other relevant institutions, NICAVIDA will support the process of
transforming the productive capacities of families in rural areas, thereby
contributing to the achievement of Government policy objectives promoting the
links between the diversification of agricultural and non-agricultural income,
environmental protection, family nutrition and income generation for poor rural
people looking for an opportunity to get out of poverty.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The project is in line with the joint Government-IFAD strategy aiming to establish a

rural development model that ensures food security, improves nutrition, supports
families in adapting to climate change and promotes sustainable income-generating
activities. The project contributes to the building of a robust joint approach in the
Dry Corridor, with close collaboration between the Government, MEFCCA, other
institutions — such as the MARENA, INTA and INETER — and IFAD, under the policy
guidance of the Ministries of Finance and Public Credit and of Foreign Affairs. The
model aims to build, by replicating and scaling up experience gained in previous
projects, a broad rural development framework of policies, programmes and
projects that the Government and IFAD plan to replicate and expand.

Policy engagementD.
29. NICAVIDA builds on the success of previous projects, in particular PRODESEC,

PROCAVAL and NICADAPTA, and is aligned with Government and IFAD policies. The
planned implementation methodology and instruments comply with IFAD
guidelines. The proposal is aligned with and supported by the Government in its use
of MEFCCA’s decentralization system and a system for partial asset transfers in the
form of incentives, as well as provisions for the recovery of transferred resources
and policies on the environment and climate change adaptation, inter-institutional
cooperation and improved access to the financial system for beneficiaries and their
organizations. The project is aligned with the policy, institutional and regulatory
framework and with the policies and instruments implemented by the Government
and MEFCCA.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nicaragua and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy
of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Republic of Nicaragua is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nicaragua in an amount equivalent to twenty million
five-hundred and four thousand United States dollars (US$20,504,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President's report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene
and Mantaro River Basins Project (Sustainable
Territorial Development Project)

Republic of Peru

Public Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Peru

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, through the
Agro Rural Programme

Total project cost: US$74.512 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$28.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: repayment term of 18 years, including a graceperiod of six years, with an annual interest rate
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$38.764 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.248 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River Basins Project
(Sustainable Territorial Development Project), as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public
Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Peru, with GDP per capita in 2014 of US$6,541, is currently

classified among the middle-income countries. The Peruvian economy has been one
of the best performing in Latin America, and visible progress has been made on
poverty reduction in recent years according to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, Peru faced a challenging external context in 2014, together with
problems in domestic supply and declining public subnational investment –
aggravating the external shocks and leading to a marked deceleration in growth.
Although real GDP growth declined to 2.4 per cent in 2014 compared to 5.8 per
cent the previous year, Peru still posted double the regional average of about 1.2
per cent. Estimates place real GDP growth in 2015 at 3.26 per cent.

2. Peru continued to reduce poverty and extreme poverty levels in 2014, although at
a slower pace than in previous years. According to the National Statistics and
Informatics Institute (, poverty in 2014 stood at an estimated 22.7 per cent, 1.2
percentage points lower than in 2013 – meaning that over a quarter of a million
(289,000) people exited poverty. Overall figures for 2014 show that there were
6,995,000 Peruvians living in poverty. Average monthly income per capita for the
poorest rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly as a result of cash transfers under the Juntos,
Pension 65 and Beca 18 programmes. The incidence of poverty was higher in rural
areas at 46.0 per cent, three times the urban rate. Among the major causes of
rural poverty, the fact that communities are poorly integrated with the market
economy has been identified as one of the greatest obstacles to local development,
particularly in the Sierra region, causing the population to emigrate towards urban
centres.

3. A World Bank study done in 2013 indicates that 4.3 per cent of Peru's surface area
is occupied by agricultural activities. The main crops are coffee, potato, rice,
cotton, asparagus, sugar and maize. A modern and competitive agro-export sector
along the coast coexists with more traditional or subsistence farming in the Sierra
and Selva regions. Primary agriculture accounts for 9 per cent of GDP. Over the
last 12 years, Peruvian agriculture has grown at an average rate of 4.3. An
estimated 2.35 million families – close to 10 million people – depend on
agriculture, most of them concentrated in the Sierra. Agriculture in the Sierra
poses major challenges: low yields; small and fragmented plots with high
transaction costs; fragile soil with drainage, salinity and erosion problems; limited
availability of water; a lack of connectivity and an unpredictable climate.



EB 2016/117/R.13

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The project is based on IFAD's past and current interventions in Peru, is consistent
with the strategic objectives set forth in the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) and takes into account the recommendations of the midterm
review that took place in November 2011. The project complies with both IFAD's
own requirements and those of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), and
contributes to: (i) strengthening territorial planning and citizen management
processes; (ii) promoting strategic partnerships on public-private platforms for
access to markets; (iii) promoting the organization of productive linkages between
rural small enterprises; (iv) providing greater support for financial inclusion
through savings, insurance and financial education; (v) including initiatives that
favour sustainable natural resource management, with actions to mitigate and
prevent the effects of climate change; and (vi) promoting actions to increase water
availability and equal access to water, to help prevent social conflicts within the
territory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the area of influence of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro

River Valley (VRAEM), corresponding to the periphery in contrast to the central part
or direct intervention area. Both of these areas are considered priorities by country
authorities in view of their high incidence of poverty and extreme poverty and their
exclusion from the country's development.

6. The selected area encompasses 27 municipal districts in seven provinces in the
departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Apurímac and Cusco. Included are
a highland or Sierra area at between 3,000 and 4,500 metres, a number of inter-
Andean valleys at between 1,500 and 3,000 metres, a foothills or Ceja de Selva
area at between 300 and 1,500 metres and part of the Amazon plain or Selva at
less than 300 metres.

7. Within this area, 76.5 per cent of the population is rural, using the strict definition
of a disperse rural population. That percentage rises to 87 per cent if villages with
less than 2,000 inhabitants are included. In addition, 74 per cent of the population
in the area are living below the monetary poverty line. Of these, 39 per cent are
extremely poor and 33 are poor but not extremely poor – values that place these
districts among the country's most vulnerable. Among those living in the project
area, 73 per cent are under 29 years of age and 66 per cent are indigenous.

8. The 27 districts located in the project area have a combined population of 58,681
families. Of these, the project will serve 50,936 rural families who are living in
conditions of rural poverty according to the 2014 national household survey.

9. Among the around 50,000 poor rural families making up the project's target
population, 27,000 families will benefit from the development services to be
provided under components 1 (governance and investments in territorial natural
resources) and 2 (local economic initiatives), and 23,000 poor rural families will
benefit from activities under component 3 (connectivity and territorial
infrastructure). The remaining 7,745 families (13 per cent of the population in the
intervention area), who reside in areas considered urban in Peru, will not be
included in the project's target population.

B. Development objective of the project
10. The goal of the project is to contribute to reducing poverty among rural families

through social and productive inclusion. The development objective is to increase
the human, social, natural, physical and financial assets of the project
beneficiaries.



EB 2016/117/R.13

3

C. Components/results
11. The project will be implemented over six years and will include the implementation

of three major components, in addition to project management and administration:

(a) Component 1. Governance and investments in territorial natural
resources. This component will focus on communities and families and will
build institutional capacities in the territory, including in local and provincial
governments, supporting initiatives to improve communal goods and
properties. The component activities will contribute to improving the
endowment and quality of natural resources in territories owned by the
beneficiaries and their community and indigenous associations – including
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and building capacities and
competencies for sustainable natural resource management and
development.

(b) Component 2. Local economic initiatives. The objective of this
component is to build a sustainable network of associations among potential
project beneficiaries to promote and expand opportunities for economic
development and social inclusion, providing support for economic activities by
interest groups such as farmers organizations together with financial inclusion
of families and associations. In a fragile and diverse associational context, the
component will support the creation, development and consolidation of
economic associations of beneficiaries that are oriented towards improving
their livelihood strategies and achieving greater and better participation in
markets for goods and services. To this end, the component will implement a
flexible and cumulative strategy with specific arrangements to support rural
producers organizations, based on the different types and levels of
associative development among rural people.

(c) Component 3. Connectivity and territorial infrastructure. The objective
of this component is to maintain physical conditions in the area of influence
where the project beneficiaries are located, in order to generate synergies
with interventions under the other components. In a context of relative
isolation caused by deteriorating rural roads, scarce communication services
and limited development of water and natural resources as a result of low
levels of investment in irrigation, the project will, inter alia, facilitate market
access in the intervention area for rural people, create jobs with start-ups or
contracting of communal or associational microenterprises for routine
maintenance of roads, provide for irrigation infrastructure at community
level, and promote water harvesting and collection.

(d) Component 4. Project management and administration. Under this
component, support will be provided on a cross-cutting basis to the three
preceding components to achieve the results and meet the targets set by the
project. This component includes project administration, knowledge
management and M&E.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
12. The project will employ the following five main approaches:

(a) Territorial development: This approach combines two main aspects:
(i) institutional development to promote consultations among local and
external agents and include poor people in production transformation
processes and benefits; and (ii) production transformation to link the
territory's economy with dynamic markets.

(b) Community-driven development: Implies a degree of delegation of
accountability to communities to manage their own development, including
the design and implementation of subprojects. This approach facilitates



EB 2016/117/R.13

4

access to social, human, financial and physical capital and assets by rural
poor people, by transforming development agents from top-down planners to
bottom-up providers of client-oriented services.

(c) Geographical targeting: Takes into account government priorities defining
the VRAEM area of influence as a priority area in view of the high incidence of
poverty.

(d) Scaling up: The project is consistent with the scaling up approach adopted
by IFAD, encompassing the various dimensions of scaling up: (i) fiscal and
financial; (ii) political; (iii) policy-based; (iv) organizational; (v) cultural; and
(vi) learning-based.

(e) Social inclusion as cross-cutting intervention: The project benefits rural
women, men and young people in situations of poverty and recognizes the
tangible and intangible assets of campesino and indigenous populations. This
approach promotes the empowerment of the target groups and rural
associational development.

B. Organizational framework
13. The agency responsible for the project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Irrigation, through the Agro Rural programme acting as a central executing unit
(CEU) with the legal authority to administer the project, in close coordination with
three of its branches located in the regions of Huancavelica, Ayacucho and Cusco,
and with close coordination and collaboration from municipal and provincial
administrations.

14. Project implementation will be the responsibility of a project coordination unit
(PCU) reporting to Agro Rural through its agrarian development director and in
charge of coordinating physical and financial activities and monitoring progress on
meeting the targets set. The PCU will be composed of a project coordinator and
eight specialists in the following areas: (i) M&E; (ii) financial inclusion;
(iii) entrepreneurship; (iv) infrastructure; (v) natural resource management and
climate change; (vi) social inclusion; (vii) administration; and (viii) accounting and
support staff. Each local agency will have a team made up of a coordinator, an
administrative assistant and various specialists.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
15. The project will employ a system of planning, M&E, learning and knowledge

management that is in line with national regulations and with IFAD guidelines.

16. Planning. The project will be implemented on the basis of annual operating plans
(AOP) and procurement  plans subject to IFAD no objection. Progress made on
implementing the plans will be recorded in semi-annual progress reports.

17. M&E. The responsible agency, through the PCU, will conduct the baseline study
during the first 12 months of implementation, and will set up the M&E system and
an M&E plan that will be an integral part of the AOP. The system will report on
progress made in the process of strengthening associational social capital
throughout project implementation using participatory instruments. Agro Rural will
provide information to the SNIP monitoring operating system (SOSEM), which will
allow for verification of progress made on implementing public investment projects.

18. Knowledge management and learning. The main objective of learning and
knowledge management activities will be to enhance existing knowledge assets in
the project intervention area and disseminate content in an appropriate and timely
way to inform users.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The financial management of the project will be the

responsibility of Agro Rural under the CEU procedure, as follows: (i) include project
resource requirements in its annual budget and arrange for approval by the



EB 2016/117/R.13

5

Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) implement and supervise implementation of
the project; (iii) perform financial and accounting administration and disbursement
functions; (iv) conduct tenders and contracting processes; and (v) hire external
auditors. Project accounting will comply with the provisions of the integrated
financial information system that is mandatory for all public sector entities
including budget and administrative modules.

20. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will open a sub-account in
United States dollars within the single Treasury account as a designated account to
receive IFAD loan proceeds. These funds will then be transferred to a project
operating account in local currency, to be opened at Banco de la Nación and
administered by Agro Rural. The borrower will open an account in local currency to
hold the counterpart funds. Agro Rural will transfer the project proceeds to the
CEU, which will make payments for procurement and allocate resources to fund
initiatives by the project users.

21. Procurement. The procurement of works, goods and services will take place in
accordance with IFAD guidelines on procurement of goods and services. The PCU,
together with the administrative office and procurement unit of Agro Rural, will
prepare a procurement plan as part of the AOP specifying the procurement method
and determining the goods and services required, in addition to timelines,
estimated costs, procedures and sources of financing. Procurement will be done
generally by the producers organizations benefiting from the project and hence
receiving specific technical training in areas such as procurement of minor works
and procurement of production equipment, information technology equipment and
others needed for management.

22. Audit. The audit arrangements will include internal processes and will adhere to
IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In accordance with national regulations, Agro
Rural is subject to internal audit by its internal control office, which reports to the
Office of the Comptroller General (CGR). The annual consolidated financial
statements of the project will be audited independently in accordance with terms of
reference acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with international auditing standards
and IFAD guidelines on project audits. An external auditor acceptable to both IFAD
and CGR will be employed. All project accounts will be audited, including both IFAD
financing and counterpart funds. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD within
six months after the close of each fiscal year. For audit purposes the fiscal year will
coincide with the calendar year.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with the prevailing

guidelines on direct supervision.

24. Approximately six months after the start-up workshop, IFAD will organize a first
supervision mission with the following objectives: (i) detect possible problems or
difficulties encountered in the initial implementation; (ii) review progress made
against the targets set; (iii) review the AOP being implemented and proposals for
the subsequent AOP; (iv) consult with project users on their perceptions of the
project and their participation levels; (v) review expenses incurred and
procurement carried out to date; (vi) verify compliance with the financing
agreement; (vii) prepare the project status report; and (viii) perform the financial
management evaluation. Commencing in year two of project implementation, and
in accordance with the guidelines on direct supervision, IFAD will, together with
Agro Rural, organize monitoring activities, provide support for implementation and
supervision and, in addition to meeting the objectives outlined above, analyse the
process of social mobilization and formation of groups of possible beneficiaries,
paying special attention to rural women and young people and indigenous peoples.



EB 2016/117/R.13

6

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The project will have a total cost of approximately US$74.512 million. The first

component calls for spending of US$6.046 million (equivalent to 8.1 per cent), and
the second for spending of US$51.011 million, representing 68.5 per cent of the
total. The third component will involve spending of US$8.849 million (11.9 per
cent) and the fourth component US$8.606 million (11.5 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD Beneficiaries Borrower/  counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Governance and
investments in territorial
natural resources 5 627 93.1 419 6.9 6 046 8.1
2. Local economic
initiatives 21 507 42.2 7 248 14.2 22 256 43.6 51 011 68.5
3. Connectivity and
territorial infrastructure 8 849 100 8 849 11.9
4. Project management
and administration 1 365 15.9 7 240 84.1 8 606 11.5
Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100

B. Project financing
26. Financing for the different project components includes: IFAD’s contribution, valued

at US$28.5 million, or 32.2 per cent of the total; the Government of Peru’s
contribution of ordinary resources in the amount of US$38.764 million, or 52.0 per
cent; and contributions by beneficiaries in the amount of US$7.248 million or 9.7
per cent of the total.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 568 8.8 16 242 91.2 17 810 23.9

2. Vehicles 338 100.0 419 0.5
3. Equipment and
supplies 168.5 45.3 203.5 54.7 372 0.5

4. Consultancies 2 965.5 63.5 1 707.5 36.5 4 673 6.3
5. Grants and
subsidies 21 360 51.2 7 248 17.4 13 087 31.4 41 695 56.0

6. Training 2438 72.2 937 27.8 3 375 4.5
7. Salaries and
benefits 4 699.5 100.0 4 699.5 6.3

8. Operating costs 1 549.5 100.0 1 549.5 2.1

Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100.0

C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
27. Project implementation calls for obtaining the following benefits for participating

families and communities: an increase in physical assets for communities,
improved agricultural productivity, sustainable natural resource management, and
increased social capital promoting start-up and development of economic
associations to improve their access to value chains and promote their participation
in the benefits of territorial development. Over the long term, this will result in



EB 2016/117/R.13

7

higher incomes, greater employment, higher yields and better quality agricultural
products and by-products.

28. Financial analysis shows internal rates of return (IRR) for the activities funded by
the project at above the interbank rate of 13.19 per cent, ranging between 26 per
cent and 137 per cent. Net present values (NPV) range between US$45 and
US$12,456, showing that the project is financially feasible. Both models indicate
that family labour will be freed up, so that additional off-farm income and a
reduced workload for women can be expected.

29. An economic analysis indicates that the project is economically feasible, with the
following results: (i) an economic rate of return (EIRR) of 32.5 per cent; and (ii) an
economic NPV of US$214 million at a discount rate of 9 per cent, indicating a
profitable investment.

D. Sustainability
30. The project will ensure that its interventions are sustainable by increasing and

strengthening the social fabric and generating confidence by promoting
associational development processes. At the same time, it will build confidence and
open up opportunities for the development of individuals, families and
communities. Once conditions have been created for groups of individuals or
families to associate and carry out shared activities, the sustainability of such
groups will depend upon the social cohesion established and on external factors.
Political sustainability will be ensured by commitment on the part of national
authorities to address problems in the project area, promoting solid technical and
financial linkages with sector institutions and subnational governments.

31. Social sustainability will be based on already existing community organizations,
such as the campesino and indigenous communities present in the intervention
area, which will ensure social sustainability. At the same time, the sustainability of
the interest groups associating to undertake economic initiatives will be realized by
means of ongoing support to strengthen associative principles and consolidate
them.

32. Local governments will be strengthened and trained to improve the administration
of resources and respond to the population's needs, which will contribute to
institutional sustainability. The economic and financial sustainability of the
economic initiatives undertaken by associated groups is expected to be brought
about by providing specific advisory assistance in market analysis, support from
mentoring institutions and relationships with potential clients for the products or
services cofinanced by the project.

33. Technical sustainability will be ensured by promoting local talents to operate the
initiatives identified by the project clients. Environmental sustainability will be
ensured by promoting and adopting best practices in natural resource
management.

34. Finally, the sustainability of investments in road maintenance will be the
responsibility of the municipalities under the conditional programme transfers
managed by MTC with resources provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
To ensure that the roads covered by scheduled and emergency maintenance are
included in regular maintenance plans, specific clauses will be included in the
agreements to be signed with provincial road authorities and municipalities in the
implementation area to ensure compliance with current Ministry of Economy and
Finance policy.

E. Risk determination and mitigation
35. Implementation of the project will involve moderate risks, and the measures

planned to mitigate them are outlined in table 3:



EB 2016/117/R.13

8

Table 3
Risks and mitigation measures

Risk Level Mitigation measures

Administrative and bureaucratic
constraints on implementation

Moderate Participation by all stakeholders

Limited institutional capacity at regional
and local levels

Moderate Training for provincial and local
governments

Restricted coverage by agency
responsible for implementation

Moderate Budget support

Limitations on the use of local talents
Moderate Creation of a mechanism to recognize

local talents

Limitations on process of empowerment
of communities and groups

Moderate Strengthening of community
representation and agreements with
local governments

Possibility of benefits capture Moderate Setting amounts of incentives or rewards
that do not incentivize capture and
filtration

Climate phenomena, including collapse
and landslide

Moderate Active participation in road upgrading by
community enterprises

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The proposed project is aligned with the overarching goal of the IFAD Strategic

Framework 2016-2025 and contributes to all three strategic objectives: increase
rural people’s productive capacities, increase rural people’s benefits from market
participation, and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resistance of rural people’s economic activities. Moreover, the project approach and
implementation strategies are in compliance with the policies and strategies on
targeting rural poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment,
engagement with indigenous peoples (including free, prior and informed consent),
natural resources and environmental management, climate change, social,
environmental and climate procedures (SECAP note, category B), rural finance, and
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. The project is consistent with the national policy environment promoting rural and

territorial development, decentralization and development of production. The
proposed project, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
through Agro Rural, will be consistent with the Medium-term Plan 2013-2016 and
its objective to reduce poverty and extreme poverty, improve local institutions and
management, generate competitiveness in agricultural production, and improve the
inclusion of producers by facilitating the sustainability of natural resources. The
proposed project will also be harmonized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
programme Strengthening the Competitiveness of Rural Associative Enterprises
(PROCOMPITE) and its objective to achieve sustainability in production value chains
through development, adaptation and technology transfer. In addition, the use of
technical teams of local governments will build capacity to mobilize resources from
the Rural Economic Inclusion Fund (FONIE) to rehabilitate rural roads.
Furthermore, the project is fully justified and responsive to the decision by country
authorities to address problems in the intervention area under the VRAEM
Comprehensive Territorial Plan, which pursues the overall objective of shaping an
environment of security, legality and social peace that will improve the quality of
life and social inclusion of the inhabitants by making production activities more
profitable in the area.

C. Innovation and scaling up
38. Implementing the project will involve the use of new mechanisms in addition to

those already used and proven effective in previous IFAD-funded projects in Peru –



EB 2016/117/R.13

9

such as allocating financial resources competitively and transferring them to hire
technical assistance, processing and commercialization services, following a
participatory approach to identify, formulate, implement and monitor subprojects
using local resource allocation committees, with financial inclusion and the creation
of collaboration mechanisms with local governments to invest in business
facilitation.

39. In this project, the innovations in implementation will include strong support for
local and provincial governments in defining territorial assets, and shared financing
by administrative agencies within those governments to improve planning and
implementation of territorial investment projects, including: investing in road
network maintenance to mitigate barriers of connectivity to market access; using
mobile banking as a way of facilitating financial inclusion on a massive basis; and
creating incentives for the development of new financial products and services. The
inclusion of indigenous communities will mean adopting new mechanisms for
managing natural resources and financing community initiatives, with technical and
financial assistance. A systematic strategy will also be followed to build associative
capacities among beneficiary people, supporting organizational development
processes with results-based incentives. Finally, in addition to reinforcing gender
equity, the project calls for strategies, actions and financial resources to diversify
economic opportunities, including access to employment and decent employment.

D. Policy engagement
40. The project calls for actions and resources to promote and facilitate policy dialogue

using lessons learned and recommendations arising from the project
implementation process – to remove barriers that prevent poor rural people from
sharing in the benefits of territorial development. To this end, policy dialogue will
seek to have an influence on the actors involved in decision-making processes at
the local, regional and national levels. Generally speaking, the project will seek to
build an enabling environment from a policy, institutional and regulatory point of
view to advance the interests of poor rural people. Special attention will be paid to
constructing platforms for dialogue between and by indigenous communities,
seeking to open up a space whereby they can have an influence and improve their
participation and their social and economic inclusion.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Peru and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

42. The Republic of Peru is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary conditions to the
Republic of Peru in an amount equivalent to twenty million six hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 20,650,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President













































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project

Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project


Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





