









COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA16622

Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Djibouti Project ID: P157282
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P117355

Project Name: DJ- Second Additional Financing for the Rural Community Development and 
Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO) (P157282)

Parent Project 
Name:

DJ-Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization Project 
(PRODERMO) (P117355)

Region: MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

21-Mar-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-May-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Animal production (30%), Irrigation and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension 
and research (30%), Flood protection (10%)

Theme(s): Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (30%), 
Climate change (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Economy and Finance in Charge of Planning and Industry
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic Resources 
(MAEPERH)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.50
International Development Association (IDA) 7.00
Total Project Cost 7.50

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:



Page 2 of 8

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Djibouti is extremely water scarce with conditions set to be exacerbated by population growth and 
climate change. As a consequence, access to safe drinking water is a daily challenge for the 
majority of the population, particularly for people living in rural areas. Poverty and food 
insecurity affect more or less the entire country and both are recognized to be highly correlated 
with water access issues. The extreme aspect of the geo-climatic profile leads to low erratic 
annual rainfall that averages hardly 150 mm, to the absence of perennial surface freshwater flow, 
and to the slow renewing of its aquifers. The current situation shows that more than 70 percent of 
the rural population and its herds do not have access to water within a reasonable distance. During 
the three-to four-month dry season, pastoral households are subject to the lack of access to water 
that represents a major constraint to human and livestock mobility, and to the proper use of the 
limited and sparsely distributed agro-pastoral resources.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Climate change impacts are projected to exacerbate these already precarious water resource 
challenges. Climate change is expected to induce an increase of the temperatures by 1.7-2.1 C by 
2050, while precipitation is set to decrease by 4-11 percent . This could lead to an increase of both 
severity of dry spells and intensity of wet extremes, thus accelerating land degradation, floods and 
erosion. Sea level rise is also projected to further exacerbate these impacts through saltwater 
intrusion of coastal aquifers. 
 
The Government of Djibouti (GoD) considers securing access to water and energy as the foremost 
major challenges that are prerequisites to reducing poverty and ensuring a nation-wide sustainable 
socio-economic development. To tackle the country’s structural gap in water resources demand 
and supply, the GoD is in quest of support from key partners for the development of non-
conventional water resources mobilization facilities including desalination plants, sewage water 
treatment plants and transboundary water transfer from Ethiopia.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to increase access of rural communities to water and enhance their 
capacity to manage water and agro-pastoral resources in the project areas using a participatory 
approach to community-based development.

Key Results 
� Increase in the number of rural households with access to drinking water within a 
reasonable travel time (two hours round trip) in the project areas   
� Increase in the number of heads of livestock with access to water within a reasonable 
distance (20 km radius) in the project areas; 
� Increase in available grazing biomass  in the targeted rangelands in the project areas.  
� Communities in the project areas are organized in community-based structures (CPLs, 
CGEPs and women/fishermen associations) that actively prepare and implement SAAHPs 



Page 3 of 8

� Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflect their needs

D.  Project Description

The AF-2 investments will aim to upscale up activities under the parent project to surrounding 
naturally and socially linked pastoral areas, including (i) Community investments (water 
mobilization and soil conservation; agriculture, livestock and Fisheries development; and income-
generating activities), (ii) capacity building and technical assistance and (iii) Project management 
and coordination.

Component Name
Priority Community Investment Subprojects
Comments (optional)
The proposed AF-2 would finance US$4.0 million (57%), to scale-up existing activities, e.g. 
priority community investment sub-projects. The funding covers consultant services for carrying 
out the detailed design and supervision, as well as goods and civil works for the implementation 
and the operation of the community sub-projects. Community investments will be demand-driven 
and will comprise the following sub-projects: (i) water mobilization and soil conservation; (ii) 
agriculture, livestock and Fisheries; and (iii) income-generating activities.

Component Name
Capacity Building and  Provision of Technical Assistance
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.6 million (23%) will be allocated to scale-up existing activities, e.g. capacity-
building activities and the provision of technical assistance. the AF-2 will finance capacity-
building activities for the PMU, the grassroots organizations such as Water Users Associations 
(WUA) and community groups to support the formulation and the implementation of 
participatory schemes, while improving local contingency planning to better face the impact and 
challenges in the aftermath of extreme events. The component will sensitize and mobilize 
beneficiary communities and other stakeholders to facilitate effective involvement in the planning 
and the project implementation process as well as their awareness on nutrition, sanitary and water 
quality issues. The use of ICT.

Component Name
Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.1 million (15.7%) will be allocated to further support project coordination and 
management activities. This component will support the PMU through the provision of goods, 
works, consultant services, training and incremental operating costs associated with project 
management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and audits. Incremental costs to be 
financed include incremental contractual staff costs, office rehabilitation works, equipment and 
operations, transportation equipment and operations, and domestic travel, to name a few.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The geographic targeting principles of the proposed AF-2 area of interventions consist mainly in 
scaling-up the activities of the parent project in the neighbor pastoral areas and new fishing areas, 



Page 4 of 8

while consolidating current achievements in the already covered areas. The unit of project 
intervention is based on traditionally recognized local communal grazing areas or "parcours", 
shared by a particular group of localities and communities who possess traditional grazing rights 
over a common area of rangeland. In total, the project area will cover in addition to the 12 
"parcours" already covered by the parent project, six additional with the AF-2 financing: three in 
Obock, (Fididiss-Allaylou, Moulhoulé-Andoli, and Saday-Waddi), one in Tadjoura (Garabtissam-
Balho) and two in Dikhil (Kori-Gagadé and Dawdaya-Der Ela). Two additional fisheries sites will 
also be included in the project areas, e.g. Goubet and Arta-Plage. The extension of PRODERMO 
project activities to the socially linked neighbor pastoral routes  and new fishing areas through 
additional financing will not require additional environmental assessment beyond that which is 
already provided in the current Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework 
(ESIAF) prepared for PRODERMO. The existing Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be updated to address issues related to agricultural inputs, to ensure 
proper management and minimize any adverse impacts.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Fatou Fall (GSU05)
Ishanlosen Odiaua (GEN05)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
No changes are introduced to the institutional, implementation, procurement, or financial 
management arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic 
Resources (MAEPERH) through its existing PMU will continue to be the implementing agency 
responsible for the AF-2 implementation. As indicated previously, the PMU’s Regional Office 
located in Obock, Tadjourah and Dikhil will be reinforced with Staff and vehicles in order to support 
the implementation of the AF-2 activities in the new and additional project area. The other entities 
involved in the AF-2 implementation include the beneficiary communities organized into 
Community Management Committees (CGEPs); the Local Development Committee (CPLs); and 
other community groups, as well as the existing National Steering Committee which was established 
under the original project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The current ESMF was updated to include the 
extended areas supported by the PRODERMO-AF-2 
and to address issues related to agricultural inputs, 
ensure proper management, and minimize any 
adverse impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No
Forests OP/BP 4.36 No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No Similarly to the parent project and the AF-1 

operations, PRODERMO-AF2 will not finance any 
activities which will require the procurement of 
pesticides.



Page 5 of 8

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The policy is not triggered. The project will not 
finance any activities requiring involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in: 
a. involuntary resettlement of people and/or 
loss of (or access to) assets, means of livelihoods or 
resources; and 
b. involuntary restriction of access to legally 
designated parks and protected areas resulting in 
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced 
persons. 
 
The choice and mobilization of land parcels for the 
purposes of the specific project activities requiring 
land use will be achieved in a participatory manner 
and documented.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project might not have significant or irreversible negative impacts, the main risks can be 
controlled by the design and the operation of sub-projects. Groundwater depletion through 
increased used of boreholes can be mitigated through close groundwater monitoring and strict 
adherence to defined recharge regimes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no expected long-term negative social impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Under the parent project and the AF-1, the recipient has satisfactorily implemented the 
requirements of the existing ESMF. The project has designated focal points for the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) implementation in the regions where the project is being 



Page 6 of 8

implemented. Beneficiary communities have also received training on Environmental and Social 
requirements in order to ensure that implementation continues along the various levels of the 
project. Environmental and social screening is carried out regularly with the requisite 
documentation. The PMU prepares monthly reports on the implementation of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) requirements and shares these with the Bank for 
review. 
 
The project triggers OP/BP 4.01. To meet the requirements of the policy, the recipient has 
prepared an ESMF. The ESMF outlines the screening procedures for the sub-projects, as well as 
the institutional implementation arrangements. 
The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12. For the parent and the AF-1 operations, the recipient 
prepared documentation tools to ensure that choice and mobilization of land parcels are voluntary 
and participatory.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The revised ESMF was consulted upon in 18 localities, one for each pasture, including women.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 16-Mar-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 16-Mar-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
n/a


























































World Bank Document


 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0101994  

 

Program Name Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3  
Additional Financing 

Region Africa 

Country Rwanda 

Sector Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P161000 

Parent Program ID P148927 

Recipient Republic of Rwanda 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 

Date PID Prepared December 6, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

December 23, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

February 28, 2017 

 

 

 Country Context 
 

Rwanda is a small (26,000 km2) landlocked country with few natural resources and a population 

of 10.7 million (2012) and projected population of 13 million by 2020.  Its hilly terrain covers 85 

percent of the land mass and the country has the highest population density in Africa with 416 

people per square kilometer, with 53 percent of them female. Rwanda has made a remarkable 

transition from genocide to peace and development. Between 2000 and 2012, GDP growth 

averaged 8.1 percent per year. Development efforts and results have been significant. Rwanda 

experienced 14 percentage points reduction in the poverty headcount, from 59 percent in 2001 to 

45 percent in 2011 and with the remaining poor on average much closer to the poverty line in 

2011 than in 2001. Developments in agriculture were key drivers of this poverty reduction 

accounting for more than 45 percent in total due to increased agriculture production (35 percent) 

and increased agriculture commercialization (10 percent). Self-employment in small off-farm 

non-agriculture business accounted for an additional 13 percent of poverty reduction. Part of this 

self-employment was associated with agriculture value chain employment. 

 

Despite this impressive performance in the last decade and particularly in the last 5 years, 

significant challenges remain. While improving, Rwanda remains a low income country with 

annual per capita income of US$644 in 2012 (with more than 45 percent below the national 

poverty line). About one in four rural households live in extreme poverty. Poverty is still mostly 

a rural phenomenon with 49 percent of the poor in rural areas compared to 22 percent in urban 

areas. Poverty is highest (76.6 percent) among households (often landless) who obtain more than 

half of their income from working on other people’s farms. The land distribution is skewed – 36 

percent of households own 6 percent of farm land, with an average of 0.1 ha per household 

(compared to the national average of .33 ha per household). Women are more likely to fall into 

this category.  In addition, women provide the bulk of labor in the crop sector, but function 

mainly at subsistence level with insufficient skills, access to markets and control over land and 

other agricultural services. If Rwanda is to achieve its targets to reduce the number of people 

living below the national poverty line to less than 20 percent and eliminate extreme poverty by 

the year 2020, continuation of the past strong growth performance will not be sufficient. A 

further acceleration of inclusive growth would be needed, on top of further reductions in 

inequality. 

 

The strategy for stimulating rapid and sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty is 

articulated in Rwanda’s Vision 2020. Vision 2020 is the national vision and policy framework 

which articulates key priorities for the country’s development by the year 2020. This vision is 

further laid out in the Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 

(EDPRS 2) which delineates the agriculture sector as a key sector and a significant engine of 

inclusive growth for the country. Likewise, in the recent report Rwanda Economic Update, 

Maintaining Momentum it states that increasing agriculture productivity is the main driver of 

poverty reduction in Rwanda. Agricultural transformation, especially through competitive value 

chain development, is expected to boost growth in both the formal and informal sectors, with the 

effect of reducing the proportion of the population dependent on agriculture from the present 73 

percent (2009) to less than 50 percent in 2020. In addition, while agricultural productivity is 

increasing, there is considerable potential to accelerate and continue to raise productivity, 

increase commercialization of agriculture production, increase self-employment in small on and 

off-farm business and achieve significant poverty reduction, income gains and increased 

prosperity.  Gender equity and equality has also been highlighted as a foundational and cross-

cutting issue under EDPRS 2 and the Third Phase of the Transformation of Agriculture Sector 

Program (known by its French acronym, PSTA 3) building on a solid foundation with the highest 

percent of women in parliament in the world at 64 percent and 32 percent women's participation 

in all decision-making local government bodies. Accordingly, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 

has made a strong commitment to continue to increase gender equity and equality particularly at 

the local level, and is determined to see it well integrated in government policies and programs at 

all levels. 
 

 

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context 
 

Accounting for 32.7 percent of the GDP (2015), agriculture is a critical driver of economic 

growth (7.6 percent, 2000-15) and poverty reduction, contributing to 35 percent of the total 

decline in poverty rates over the past decade. A well-established policy framework, facilitating 

enhanced access to better agricultural inputs, has greatly contributed to the positive agriculture 

sector performance.  As a result, the total production of cassava and maize, as well as milk, meat, 

fish and eggs, more than doubled between 2005 and 2015. 

 

Despite these positive developments, Rwanda has yet to meet its production potential. Although 

key agricultural yields have greatly increased since 2000 (e.g. cereal and cassava yields have 

trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled etc.), they reached a plateau in 2011. At their current 

levels, they are estimated to be at 40-50 percent of their productivity potential, resulting from 

suboptimal use of production factors. Similarly, livestock yields have remained consistently low 

over time. 

 

A contributing factor is small farm size – a rural household, on average, cultivates 0.6 ha, and 


has 2-5 animals – and 96 percent of rural households are directly reliant on agriculture as their 

main or only source of income. The projected increase in the rural population, an estimated 

additional 2.5-3.5 million people by 2032, is likely to add more pressure on land resources and 

farm incomes, unless alternative employment opportunities become available. 

 

In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition, with a stunting rate of 37.9 percent, 

while its food security index lies below the average of the Sub-Saharan African countries. Some 

20 percent (2015) of Rwandan households remain food insecure, and most of them are located in 

the western and northern parts of the country. 

 

 

 Program Scope 
 

The proposed operation supports the Government of Rwanda’s strategic objectives of the 

Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3 with aims to enhance food security and 

nutrition contributing to a reduction in poverty and inclusive economic growth. The operation 

supports four broad program areas: (i) agriculture and animal resource intensification; (ii) 

research, technology transfer and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value chain development 

and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional development and agricultural cross-cutting 

issues. 
 

 

 Program Development Objective(s) 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to increase and intensify the productivity of the 

Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and expand the development of value chains. 
 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Additional Financing (AF) will introduce a new disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) on the 

development of an updated National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and increase several of the 

existing DLI targets. Increasing the DLI targets and incorporating a new DLI will support GoR’s 

on-going efforts to maximize the productivity of the agriculture sector while transforming the 

overarching policy environment. 

 

The updated NAP will provide an overarching vision for the agriculture sector. It will place 

significant emphasis on sustainable production and food security. However, the policy will not 

include specific policy instruments. Individual policy instruments for all sub sectors will be 

reviewed, revised, or developed. All policies will need to be compliant with the principles 

outlined in the NAP (including those of protecting the environment while maintain food 

security). This approach ensures that sustainable practices will be mainstreamed throughout all 

sub sectoral policies. 

 

The assessment of these adjustments to the Program is as follows: 

 

a) DLIs that are focused on improving the productivity of land and increasing the 
productivity of key crops (DLI 1, 2, 3 and 4) will not induce new environmental and 


 

social risks but may request to pay more attention to potential direct, indirect or 

cumulative risk generated from activities such as expansion of irrigation, as some 

irrigation structures will include canals, as well as small dams. As with any irrigation 

structure, these dams may have safety-related risks, which were effectively managed by 

the GoR during RSSP investment projects. Other potential impacts include water quality 

and quantity degradation (both surface and ground water), surface water sedimentation, 

and spread of waterborne diseases. 

b) Inclusion of DLI 8 focusing on the production of an updated NAP which will integrate 
new initiatives, such as the climate smart Agriculture and Information Communication 

Strategy, which could benefit environmental management.  

 

The level of risk remains moderate and can be addressed through: (i) the existing GoR 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) including the small dam safety 

guidelines and the Environmental and Social Implementation Manual (ESIM). The process for 

rolling out the ESIM to all Districts is part of the on-going decentralization process. The rollout 

to 30 Districts is expected to be concluded by September 2017; and (ii) exclusion of high-risk 

interventions which include activities that are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts 

on the environment and/or affected people. Among these high-risks interventions are dam 

construction/irrigation or drainage infrastructures on transboundary water resources. 

 

While the existing ESMS is adequate, it will be strengthened to further benefit and improve the 

GoR’s understanding of social issues in the following areas by: 

 

 Strengthening measures to enhance GoR’s capacity to implement the ESMS Program. As 
a result, this new action includes a “capacity building program based on the ESIM, and 

the small dam safety guidelines” to benefit the District officers. This program will ensure 

that: (a) the ESIM has sufficient guidelines on small dams; and (b) all relevant staff are 

trained in the ESIM. The manual and training program will be prepared by involving the 

relevant MINAGRI SPIU teams which are already conversant with the safeguards 

policies; and implemented before the end of the Program. 

 

 The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) database will be fully functional (including 
relevant staff training) within MINAGRI by July, 2017. This will be supported by the 

development of a communication strategy (included in the updated PAP) to ensure there 

is awareness of the database and that the outcomes of grievances are made public. 

 

 

 Financing 
 

The updated financing table for PSTA3 (see Table below) reflects original commitments from 

2013, as well as actual (to June 30, 2016) and projected contributions (to June 30, 2018).  

Table: Updated PSTA Financing to June 2018
1
 (US$ Millions) 

                                                 
1
 The PAD for the original PforR operation indicated that the PforR represented 12 percent of PSTA financing from the World 
Bank, USAID, and other DPs exploring the viability of providing co-financing as part of ensuring aligned donor support to the 

sector. The PAD clarified that co-financing would not change the overall budget envelope and would not bring additional 



5 

 

Source 

Original 

Commitment 

to PSTA 3  

Actual 

contribution as 

of June 30, 2016  

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2016/17 

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2017/18 

Total 

(Actual + 

Projected) 

Government  300.0 132 60.0 60.0 252.0 

IDA (Agriculture PforR)  100.0 66.3 22.7 0.0 89.0 

EU  160.0 52.0 37.0 37.0 126.0 

IDA (LWH, RSSP, FRDP)  194.0 106.4 31.9 31.9 170.2 

USAID 138.0 121.0 28.5 25.0 174.5 

IFAD 120.0 43.0 21.0 21.0 85.0 

DFID  39.4 20.3 2.8 2.7 25.8 

MDTF (DFID) 50.6 29.1 15.4 6.1 50.6 

Netherlands  10.0 8.6 1.4 0.0 10.0 

Swiss  6.0 6.0 
 

 6.0 

Japan/JICA  32.0 20.7 11.0 8.0 39.7 

AfDB  20.0 56.6 
  

56.6 

FAO  30.0 18.0 8.0 10.0 36.0 

Sub-total 1200.0 680.0 239.7 201.7 1121.4 

Financing Gap     78.6 

(-) IDA (Ag PforR AF)   23.0 23.0 46.0 

(-) MDTF (Ag PforR AF)    5.0 5.0 10.0 

Revised Financing Gap     22.6 

Total 1200.0 680.0 267.7 229.7 1177.4 

 

Foreign exchange rate losses have resulted in a total financing gap of US$78.6 million from both 

GoR and IDA-financed programs. Included in the above projected contribution for 2016/2017 

and 2017/2018 is the proposed AF from the IDA Credit (US $46 million) and the MDTF Grant 

(US$10 million) totaling US$56 million. The combined proposed AF would reduce the financing 

gap to US$22.6 million. 

 

 

 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The Public Sector 

 

The lead government ministry for the agriculture sector is MINAGRI.  Organizationally, it is 

composed of four main entities as follows: 

 

MINAGRI Central guides policy, strategy and key programs for the Ministry. It comprises the 

Minister and Principal Secretary, and four departments/directorates: Planning, Inspection, Crop 

Production, and Animal Resources. 

 

Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB) is a semi-autonomous implementation agency of MINAGRI 

that is responsible for promoting food crop production. It has a national network of research 

stations, projects and staff that focus on improved production and yields of food staple crops. It 

has agronomists based in four zones corresponding to the four provinces, and who are 

responsible for expanding farmer access to enhanced extension services. The RAB is also 

responsible for all research and certification of seeds and houses two Task Forces (Irrigation and 

Post-Harvest Infrastructure) which will be assimilated within MINAGRI’s structure as of July 1, 

                                                                                                                                                             
resources, but would mean switching modalities from either sector budget support or project financing to programmatic 

financing (PforR). Apart from DfID, no other donors are providing programmatic support through co-financing of the PforR or 

participation in the MDTF. 



6 

 

2014 as they have completed their mandates; 

 

National Agricultural Export Board (NAEB) is similarly a semi-autonomous implementation 

agency of MINAGRI that is responsible for export crop production. It has concentrated in the 

past on coffee and tea, but is broadening its mandate to cover and expand horticulture and non-

traditional export crops. It also has a national network of projects and staff focusing on improved 

production, yields and competitiveness of export crops. It also has agronomists based in some 

districts and on plantations responsible for expanding farmer access to improved extension 

services in support of increasing export crops. 

 

Single Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) were established to ensure efficient and timely 

implementation of a large portfolio of donor funded projects and are headquartered at MINAGRI 

Central.  Most of the projects being implemented by the SPIUs cover most of the 24 SPs. Three 

SPIUs are responsible for managing projects/operations funded by three key DPs: (i) IFAD 

funded projects: the Kirehe District Water Management Programme; Project for Rural Income 

Through Exports; Climate Resilent Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP); (ii) 

AfDB-funded Projects: Bugesera Natural Rural Region Infrastructure Support Project; Livestock 

Infrastructure Support Project; and (iii) World Bank funded projects: LWH (basket fund), RSSP 

3, and the FRDP. 

 

In addition to MINAGRI, six additional government ministries have significant responsibilities 

in the agriculture sector, as follows: 

 

The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) is responsible for 30 Districts, which in turn, 

are responsible for expanding local level service delivery. They promote agriculture development 

as part of their responsibility for local economic development. Funds are earmarked in District 

budgets for implementation of MINAGRI priorities as defined in PSTA 3 (currently 10 percent 

of MINAGRI’s total budget). Although these resources pass directly to the Districts from 

MINECOFIN, they form part of MINAGRI’s overall budget ceiling and programs. Each District 

and sector has an agronomist that is responsible for local level implementation of agriculture 

activities. These agronomists work closely with RAB and NAEB agronomists who work in the 

Districts. The on-going local government restructuring exercise is expected to further expand 

fiscal decentralization, including expanded earmarking of funds from MINAGRI and other 

central ministries, and strengthen local government implementation capacities. The 

implementation of the ASIP, as well as PforR program will involve expanded roles of the local 

government actors, while also restructuring central government organizational and staffing 

structures to be more supportive of these decentralization changes/reforms. MINALOC also 

collaborates on implementation of the National Nutrition policy with MINAGRI, ensuring 

community training and service provisions to improve nutrition outcomes. 

 

The Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA) is responsible for state forests around the 

country, although MINAGRI is responsible for on-farm agroforestry. MINIRENA is also 

responsible for environmental protection and in this capacity has its own programs of hillside 

terrace construction, which reinforce the land conservation terracing that MINAGRI undertakes. 

MINIRENA is also responsible for the RNRA water resources department, and seeks closer 

collaboration with MINAGRI. 

 

The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM) has the key responsibility of promoting 



7 

 

business and trade growth and development, including expanded agribusiness. It leads the 

development of policy and strategy to accomplish Rwanda’s goal of an expanding, competitive 

and healthy private sector. 

 

The Ministry of Infrastructure’s (MININFRA) Rwanda Transport Development Agency (RTDA) 

has the responsibility of supporting Districts and monitoring implementation of feeder roads 

rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance. RTDA works closely with the Districts in 

procurement, contract management and management of social and environmental systems.  In 

addition, MININFRA/RTDA provides guidance on technical standards and specifications.   

 

The Rwanda Development Board (RDB) is responsible for investment promotion in Rwanda. 

Although it concentrates on foreign direct investment (FDI), it also promotes local investment. It 

brings together all the government agencies responsible for investment under one roof. This 

includes key agencies responsible for business registration, investment promotion, environmental 

clearances, privatization and specialist agencies which support the priority sectors of 

Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and tourism as well as Small and Medium 

Enterprises (SMEs) and human capacity development in the private sector. RDB has a 

substantial portfolio of agriculture and agri-business investment projects which it is promoting 

for private sector-driven investment, including expanding the public and private partnerships. 

 

The Rwanda Development Bank (RDB) is the government’s main investment arm and offers 

long and medium-term loans. The GoR is pursuing privatization of the Bank and has signed an 

MOU with a prospective investor. In April 2014 the RDB had an agriculture and agri-business 

loan portfolio of RWF 33.3 billion accounting for a significant proportion of the Bank’s total 

lending. Most agricultural loans were for coffee and tea production and processing and the 

import of fertilizer. On May 16, 2014 the International Finance Corporation (IFC) issued its first 

bond denominated in Rwandan francs, raising RWF 15 billion (about US$22 million) to expand 

the availability of long-term local-currency finance for local businesses through the RDB. 

 

The Private Sector 

 

In addition to the public sector agriculture entities, there are two organizations dedicated to 

supporting private sector actors in agriculture as follows: 

 

The Private Sector Federation (PSF) is the representative umbrella body for the private sector in 

Rwanda and advocates and dialogues with government for policies and programs which will 

promote the growth of the private sector. Amongst its objectives are business promotion and 

development, building private sector capacity and effective private sector advocacy. It is 

composed of nine chambers, including the Chamber of Rwanda Farmers. The Chamber conducts 

a program to train farmers and build entrepreneurship. The member associations of the Chamber 

cover most of the major agricultural commodities produced in Rwanda. 

 

The Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) is the representative body for the cooperative 

movement in Rwanda. There are 1,953 agricultural and 1,307 livestock cooperatives operating as 

farmer associations involved in crop production, agricultural savings and credit, livestock 

development and processing and marketing of outputs. RCA promotes the interests of the 

cooperative movement and runs support and training programs in helping cooperatives function 

and perform as private sector entities 


 


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA19546

Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Western Africa Project ID: P158983
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P122065

Project Name: Additional Financing for West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP- 1C) (P158983)

Parent Project 
Name:

West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP-1C) (P122065)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Nov-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

06-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries, 
Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00
IDA Credit from CRW 8.00
Total Project Cost 68.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No


B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
African agricultural development acquired new momentum when, in January 2014, the African 
Union adopted the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and 
Transformational➢❬¢ in which African Heads of States and Governments recommitted 
themselves to the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) principles 
and values to uphold the 10 percent target for public spending on agriculture, to double 
agricultural productivity, and thus to sustain annual growth in agricultural GDP at 6 percent or 
higher. 
 
During the same period, there was a renewed commitment of development partners to engage and 
invest in the agricultural sector. Several initiatives are being launched, including from the United 
Nations, the African Development Bank and the World Bank. The United Nation adopted the new 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), and the second of the seventeen proposed SDGs is to end 
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agricultural. The 
African Development Bank launched (Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in 
Africa, 2016-2025) which aims to end hunger and rural poverty in Africa in the next decade. 
Also, the World Bank has committed itself to twin goals: eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 
and boosting shared prosperity, measured as the income of the bottom 40 percent in any given 
country.
Sectoral and institutional Context
One of the main challenges in West Africa is satisfying the demands of a rapidly growing 
population that is expected to increase from 300 million in 2011 to about 500 million by 2030. 
The 2008 food, fuel, and financial crisis has demonstrated the need to base food security in West 
Africa on the utilization of the region's huge agricultural potential, as this option would 
simultaneously contribute to economic growth and reduction of poverty. Moreover, meta-analyses 
conducted by International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) have shown that the benefits 
from productivity growth attributed to agricultural research exceed their costs by a factor of 10 or 
more whereas high rates of return on investments in science for agriculture, to the order of 40-60 
per cent, have also been consistently proven. 
 
Gains from smart investments in agricultural R&D were amply demonstrated by WAAPP impact 
analysis completed under the first phase of WAAPP in Mali, Senegal, Ghana, Cote d➢❨ Ivoire 
and Guinea. The analysis found that: (i) WAAPP beneficiaries have increased their yields and 
income by at least 30 percent over the control group; (ii) most of these gains resulted from the 
adoption of new varieties, improved crop management practices and improved small scale food 
processing technologies; and (iii) the immediate pathways exist to achieve rapid growth in 
agriculture through greater focus on productivity enhancement using a regional integration 
approach. The analysis also showed that program beneficiaries experienced a reduction in hunger 
by half and also improved their nutrition standards.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
To generate and accelerate the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries' 
top agricultural commodity priority areas that are aligned with the sub-region's top agricultural 
commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP.



Page 3 of 11

Key Results 
As it concerns the achievement of the WAAPP in the targeted countries, as of October 2016, the 
project has reached in the four countries a total of more than 1 million direct beneficiaries 
(1,153,000), about 26 technologies have been generated by the NCOS in Benin and Niger and the 
rice research system in Guinea, close to 1.1 million hectares (1,083,000) have been covered by the 
new technologies and more than 650,000 producers/processors have adopted at least one new 
technology. The disbursement performance of the project is also satisfactory; more than 96 
percent of the parent project (WAAPP-1C) financing is disbursed, and an action plan is being 
implemented which will ensure full disbursement by the current closing date of December 2016.

D.  Project Description

The AF will build upon the achievements of the original project to complete, consolidate and 
expand project activities. Therefore there will not be change in the project development objective 
and component structure as well as or safeguard category. The proposed AF will also continue to 
use the implementation arrangements and technical design of the original project. 
However, the primary focus of the AF will be to scale up the adoption the innovations and 
technologies generated by the WAAPP (more than 174 technologies have been released by the 
Program to improve agricultural production, post harvest, processing and mechanization). Thus 
the AF will add a particular focus on marketing of these technologies and innovations in order to 
scale up their adoption and to increase food availability in the sub region, and thereby contribute 
to poverty alleviation and agricultural growth. And since some of these technologies have 
different level of marketability and their scope for adoption also varies markedly the AF will 
among others, include the contracting of a private firm/NGO by CORAF/WECARD to design a 
technology marketing strategy and a technology marketing specialists in each country to 
implement an action plan for the commercialization of the technologies. In this framework the AF 
will finance incubation centers and seed money for job creation for greater citizen engagement, 
youth and women, and provide incentives and mechanisms to actively involve the private sector 
and mobilize some of their resources for the development of the targeted value chains. 
 
And in order to take the above scaled-up activities of the AF into account, the project➢❨ s Results 
Framework will be updated to review the targets of the indicators and also include the new 
indicators on job creation/employment, nutrition, citizen engagement and private sector 
participation. In addition the closing date of the original project will be extended to correspond to 
the duration of the AF. The Risk ratings have been updated to reflect experience gained during 
implementation of the original project.

Component Name
(a) Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Sub-regional Cooperation in the Generation, 
Dissemination, and Adoption of Agricultural Technologies.
Comments (optional)
The AF will: (i) upscale the implementation of common regulations and strategies developed 
under the parent project; (ii) support the development and implementation of a regional strategy 
and national action plans to address the issues of nutrition and food safety in collaboration with 
FAO nutrition unit; and (iii) assist the countries in finalizing the setting up of their sustainable 
funding mechanism for technology generation and dissemination.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
(b) Component 2: Strengthening National Centers of Specialization/Strengthening of the 
Research System
Comments (optional)
The component will finance: (ii) for Benin and Niger, the implementation of  their action plans to 
transform the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence 
(RCOE) for agricultural research in maize and livestock, respectively; and (ii) for Togo and 
Guinea, which does not have an NCOS, the upgrading of their adaptive research systems to 
participate more actively in the network of the RCEO and bring and adapt in their countries the 
maximum technologies and innovations from the sub region.

Component Name
(c) Component 3: Support to Demand-Driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and 
Adoption.
Comments (optional)
The  component will finance: (i) financing through the competitive agriculture grant schemes the 
completion of the ongoing research and a limited number of new on-demand projects that may be 
commissioned; (ii) strengthening the regional technology market including organizing local and 
regional technology fairs; (ii) upscaling the adoption of existing technologies and innovations 
with a much greater emphasis on nutrition-sensitive and climate smart agriculture technologies 
that have high potential for accelerating job creation for youth and women (iii) implementing  an 
action plan to scale-up commercialization of the promising technologies to facilitate private sector 
investment and create more jobs for young agro-entrepreneurs; and (iv) strengthen the regional 
seed market and upscale the p

Component Name
(d) Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
The Project will continue to finance the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCUs) in Togo, 
Niger, Benin and Guinea selected additional staffs and specifically a technology marketing 
specialist in each country.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project in each of these fours countries has a national coverage. Although it would be mainly 
developed in R&D centers, newly availed WAAPP technologies will also be expanded to new 
farmers own lands to ensure technologies contribute indeed to alleviate poverty and shared 
prosperity. These technologies would be gender sensitive and youth-driven as the project seeks at 
engaiging more women and youth as citizen for sustainable development.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)



Page 5 of 11

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
The proposed AF does not foresee any changes in terms of implementation arrangements. The AF 
will be placed under the technical responsibility of the Ministry in charge of Agriculture in each of 
the participating countries and under the responsibility of CORAF for the regional level activities. 
The PCUs in each country and CORAF will therefore continue to coordinate project activities, 
prepare the Annual Work Program and Budgets (AWPB), organize the Implementation Support 
Missions (ISM) and ensure project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The PCUs and CORAF have 
a solid track record for Social and Environmental Safeguards, procurement, financial management 
and M&E, which have consistently been rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout the 
parent project implementation. CORAF and each PCU will be strengthened with an additional staff 
who will be specialized in Technology Marketing and Commercialization. The Guinea PCU will be 
reinforced with additional staffs including two social and Environmental specialists (each with 
specific responsibilities), a financial management specialist, a procurement specialist and a technical 
expert. Implementation of the AF activities will also be supported by strategic institutional and 
technical partners, as well as service providers (other agencies, NGOs, CSO, etc.) who will be 
contracted through the: i) result-based MOUs for public service providers and other Projects and ii) 
result- based contracts for private service providers and NGOs.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The AF is a Category-B project due to the fact that 
potential social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, site-specific and easily 
manageable. Because it is a continuation of 
WAAPP-1C the ESMF has been updated, revised 
and adapted within the context of the focus of the AF 
on scaling up technology adoption which follows the 
same line of intervention of the parent project. The 
ESMF includes further provisions for capacity 
strengthening at all levels for the successful 
implementation of the project safeguard measures, in 
compliance with national and Bank safeguard 
policies. The updated version of the ESMF was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The AF is not supporting any agricultural sites near 
wetlands, mangroves, or other critical habitats . It 
will work on improving productivity on existing 
developed land.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The AF is not supporting any extension of cropping 
area and therefore no damage of forests is expected. 



Page 6 of 11

It will develop its activities on land already under 
exploitation.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The AF will scale up the parent project 
achievements. The initial PMP was revised, updated 
and adapted to reflect the AF interventions and set 
forth the basic principles each member-country 
would follow to adequately handle the possible usage 
of pesticides, particularly as the AF will focus on 
dissemination of agriculture technologies. Upon 
completion, the updated version of the  PMP was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not finance activities that threaten 
culturral ressources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The AF is a category B project due to the fact that 
foreseen social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, sites specific and easily 
manageable.  OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for Guinea 
only because  of the expected land acquisition, loss 
of assets or loss of access to livelihoods support 
means upon which local beneficiary communities 
depend. To comply with OP/BP 4.12 policy 
principles and guidelines Guinea prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on how to 
comply with the above mentioned land use/right 
issues. Upon completion, the RPF was reviewed, 
cleared by both CORAF and World Bank and then 
disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites 
and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The AF is not involving any construction or 
rehabilitation of dams.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The AF does not affect or involve international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The AF is not in a disputed area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have no significant negative social impacts. 
Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers  in food crop production for national, regional 
and international markets - in which women play a critical role.The Project will work to ensure 



Page 7 of 11

that the circumstances of small-scale farmers, particularly women and youth, are accounted for in 
setting priorities. Adaptive research will be conducted in farmers➢❨  fields. Competitive grants to 
implement R&D will be open to producers➢❨  organizations and agribusiness associations and not 
only to research organizations. The Project will work with development operations and public/
private partnerships to scale up producers➢❨  use of technologies. 
 
As a Category B Project, the foreseen social impacts are expected to be local, mostly sites specific 
and easily manageable. The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been 
triggered only or Guinea - where the project will cover new commodities and new intervention 
areas, because of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of access to livelihoods 
support means upon which local beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 
4.12 policy principles and guidelines, Guinea has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/right issues. The RPF was amply 
consulted upon and stakeholders feedback provided in the annexes of the documents. 
 
Environment (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have a positive environmental impact 
through its support for agricultural technologies that promote better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and non-point pollution of water 
sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research 
stations. Research on transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If it becomes part 
of the research agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with social and environmental 
safeguards consultants with international good practice and the regulatory framework of the host 
country. In particular, such research must be done in accordance with the obligation of each 
country under international treaties to which it is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety (for Burkina Faso and Nigeria). Potential adverse environmental impacts associated with 
the NCoS activities will be of low intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under safeguard 
measures already in place for ongoing activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
NA

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
NA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This is an additional financing to a project which was implemented during a 5 year period. During 
the parent project phase a close supervision of the implementation of safeguards measures were 
conducted by the social and environmental safeguards specialists of the World Bank. In addition 
each country and CORAF appointed social and environmental safeguard focal points in charge of 
ensuring that the social and environmental safeguards are well implemented and mitigation 
measures are also identified and implemented. A capacity building plan was also implemented 
including two regional training workshops and several country level workshops for all safeguard 
focal points. The recent ISM in June 2016 rated compliance with safeguards policies as 
satisfactory for the 4 recipient countries and indicates that both the safeguards focal points have 
the required knowledge and are playing a key role in ensuring that safeguards measures are well 
implemented. However, it was convened that each PIU will recruit/appoint one qualified 



Page 8 of 11

environmental safeguards specialist and one qualified social safeguards specialist, to improve the 
safeguards performance. The ESMF and the PMP have been updated, including a better 
clarification of roles and responsibilities for safeguards implementation among the PIU staff; this 
role distribution will be inserted in the Project implementation manual (PIM). An RPF has been 
developed for Guinea as recommended by the policy, since Guinea will be developing a variety of 
new crops which would probably need additional lands acquisition or encroachment of which. in 
public domain, would need a proper handing and payment of compensation to the recipient 
communities. All these documents include measures to ensure that safeguard requirements are 
being properly complied with.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A comprehensive set of stakeholder were consulted during the preparation of the safeguards 
documents for the original project. Similarly, consultations were done during the preparation of 
the AF that included various beneficiaries, agricultural, social, and environmental, health agencies 
as well as some NGOs and other civil society agencies. Producers/processors and their 
organizations at the sub region levels (ROPPA) and at national levels were also consulted. 
Following the consultations the original safeguard documents were updated for the AF and each 
country organized a national stakeholder workshop to disseminate and validate the documents. 
Key issues and recommendations of the workshops were used to improve the safeguards 
documents. Recommendations from both the client and the Bank and from the stakeholders 
workshop have been reflected in the final draft of the ESMP, PMP and RPF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016



























































World Bank Document
Project infORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA646

Project Name Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania Investment 
Project (P125728)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, 

fishing and forestry sector (25%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P125728
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance & Planning
Implementing Agency Office of the Prime Minister
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Jan-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 20-Jan-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

22-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

03-Mar-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
Tanzania has been experiencing high rates of economic growth. This growth has been driven by 
economic liberalization, sound macroeconomic policy management, and expanding public sector 
spending. Growth accelerated from an average of 3.5 percent during the 1990s to around 7 percent 
over the past decade.  Improvements in tax administration and provision of foreign aid created 
space for a significant expansion in public spending, which increased from less than 16 percent of 
GDP in 2000 to almost 28 percent in 2011. Inflation was low from 2000 to 2005, but picked up 
pace from 2006 to 2011. It was briefly in double digits, and has now settled back to around 7 
percent. Fiscal policy has been largely prudent accompanied by strong growth in tax revenues.  
However, the government needs to keep its debt and debt service to reasonable levels, reduce the 
growing deficits of certain parastatals, and manage the commitments under the public pension 
scheme. There are a number of recent developments (including discovery of natural gas) that are 
expected to contribute to Tanzania’s positive economic performance. Looking forward, the 
economy is likely to remain on its current growth trajectory in the near future. 


Notwithstanding the country’s solid economic growth record, poverty rates have not declined 
significantly. In November 2013, the government announced the new official poverty figures. The 
basic needs poverty level in Tanzania mainland has fallen from 33.34 percent in 2007 to 28.2 
percent in 2012. Rural poverty has declined from 39.4 percent to 33.4 percent over the same period. 
Despite impressive macro-fiscal performance, and decades of concerted efforts to lift rural masses 
out of poverty, agricultural incomes have grown slowly. Economic growth has been concentrated in 
urban areas and in capital-intensive sectors, such as the mining, communication, construction, and 
banking sectors. In comparison, the growth in agricultural value added has been less than two 
percent per worker. This growth in the agriculture sector has not been high enough to reduce 
poverty in rural areas, where more than 80 percent the country’s poor reside.  
Limited opportunities for commercialization are at the heart of small farmers’ problems in 
Tanzania. The majority of smallholder farmers sell little of their production. Approximately three 
quarters of all maize, and approximately half of all paddy, is consumed within the village in which 
it is produced. The expansion of smallholder production of these food crops, as well as a range of 
cash crops such as cotton, tea and coffee is undermined by low productivity, and high transport and 
marketing costs. New strategies for agricultural commercialization are needed. 
The top leadership of the country is strongly committed to share prosperity more widely, and 
recognizes the economic importance of agriculture for rural growth and poverty alleviation. The 
government at the highest levels has made transformation of agriculture a major national priority. 
Learning from the experience of other countries, the Tanzanian government has embarked on an 
ambitious program to strengthen agriculture value chains and integrate larger numbers of small-
scale farmers into these competitive trade partnerships. These initiatives target the transformation of 
large numbers of semi-subsistence producers to become successful commercial farmers. There is a 
market failure in service provision to these smallholders to enable them to link up with modern 
agriculture value chains (which enables them to acquire modern technologies and markets; and 
learn by doing); hence government is committed to correcting this market failure by incentivizing 
agribusinesses through matching grants. The matching grants would help underwrite the risks 
agribusinesses face in bringing in more smallholders into their value chains, and smallholders 
would gain from the experience of more targeted modern services and improved markets for their 
output.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Tanzania has witnessed an expansion in agribusiness investment with supply chain links with 
smallholder farming. A growing number of these agribusinesses are pursuing contract or out-
grower farming with smallholders. These include investments in out-grower sugar, tobacco cotton, 
sorghum, barley, cocoa, dairy and horticultural crops. Agribusinesses are experimenting with 
alternative strategies for strengthening this co-investment. 
 
The Government of Tanzania (GoT) recognizes that the private sector is a critical partner in 
delivering development benefits. Particularly when it is linked to smallholder production potential, 
it can provide an important engine of agricultural growth. In 2001, the government adopted a new 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) targeting achievement of a green revolution in 
agriculture. To better implement this strategy, the government then prepared the Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP), highlighting the need for stronger public-private partnership to 
promote the commercialization of smallholder production. This commitment was reinforced in 
2009 with the signing of the Kilimo Kwanza (Agriculture First) resolution calling for greater 
investment in agriculture, and inclusive commercialization. 


The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) Program was developed by the 
GoT to operationalize the Kilimo Kwanza. The SAGCOT Program, as articulated in its core 
document, the Investment Blueprint, highlights commitment to a strategy of joint public-private 
investment targeting the development of agribusiness value chains across the country’s southern 
corridor. In aggregate, the Blueprint proposes that a public investment of USD1.3bn can leverage 
an additional USD2.1bn in private investment in order to bring 350,000ha of agricultural land into 
commercial production over the next twenty years. Tens of thousands of smallholders are expected 
to become successful commercial farmers, more than two million people are to be lifted out of 
poverty and food security will improve. The primary emphasis of the SAGCOT Program is to 
expand partnerships between agribusinesses and smallholder farmers in building larger and more 
competitive value chains.   Agribusiness investors are sought who are willing to work 
collaboratively with smallholder communities to raise productivity and incomes. Early successes 
have been highlighted for sugar and rice, where out-growers have achieved higher levels of 
productivity and income compared with smallholders in neighboring regions. Similar examples are 
cited for tea and horticultural crop farmers.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
To support the adoption of new technologies and improved market access by small-holder farmers 
through expanding and creating partnerships between small-holder farmers and agribusinesses in the 
Southern Corridor of Tanzania.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Strengthening of SAGCOT Support Institutions (total USD14.33 million, IDA USD5.95 million)
Comments (optional)
This component will strengthen the capacity of SAGCOT Support Institutions in order to pursue 
their functions of information and data provision, support of investment planning and guidance, 
government/private sector intermediation, business enabling environment and investment 
promotion.  The component will support two institutions: 
 
(i) SAGCOT Centre  
(ii) Tanzania Investment Centre (Government institution)

Component Name
Strengthening Smallholder Business Linkages (total USD85.76 million, IDA USD55.65 million)
Comments (optional)
The objective of this component will be to link smallholder farmers to agricultural value chains. The 
component will: (a) expand the number of smallholders linked to agribusinesses in successful 
commercial partnerships; and (b) improve the benefits derived by smallholders and rural 
communities from these partnerships in the form of growth in agricultural productivity, income and 
employment. This component will comprise two sub-components: 
 
(i) Fund Management 
(ii) Matching Grants

Component Name

Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (total USD8.41 million of which USD3.80 
million were provided by two Project Preparation Advances, IDA USD8.41 million)Comments (optional)
The component will establish project management and M&E systems and provide financing for 
salaries, office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. Complementarities will 
particularly be sought with other IDA funded programs such as the Private Sector Competitiveness 
Project and the Agricultural Sector Development Program.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 75.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5.00
International Development Association (IDA) 70.00
Total 75.00

V. Implementation
The Project will be overseen by the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO). A Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) meeting quarterly and on specific demand has been established. It is chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary (PS) of the PMO, and amongst others comprises PS from key line ministries, 
the Chief Executive Officers of the TIC, SAGCOT Centre, SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund (CTF), 
Rufiji Basin Development Authority (RUBADA), and representatives from smallholder farmers. 
The PSC will: (a) ensure coordination and cooperation among all participating agencies; and (b) 
endorse annual work plans and budgets for all project-related activities. 
 
The PMO has proposed that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) originally created for the IDA 
funded Private Sector Competitiveness Project be expanded to also coordinate the SAGCOT 
Investment Project. This PCU will have management oversight and reporting responsibilities for all 
components of the Project. This entity will integrate the financial and technical progress reports 
from each of the agencies being funded, and carry out the overall M&E for the Project. The PCU 
will also take overall procurement and financial management responsibility during the first six to 12 
months of the Project implementation until sufficient capacity has been built in the other 
implementing agencies (an assessment will be undertaken to assess the agencies capacity). The full 
staffing of this PCU as set out in the Operational Manual. All participating institutions will prepare 
annual work plans and budgets to be submitted to the PCU for approval by the PSC. 
 
IDA financing agreed with the Ministry of Finance that will flow to agencies other than the PCU, 
will be governed by subsidiary agreements acceptable to IDA (these agencies are the SAGCOT 
Centre and the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund). These subsidiary agreements lay out the fund flow, 
implementation and reporting requirements of the two entities. Direct funding to these entities may 
only begin once these subsidiary agreements, and an associated set of fiduciary systems including 
financial management and procurement systems acceptable to IDA, are in place. It is estimated that 
this will take place in the first year of implementation. 
 
The SAGCOT Centre will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.1 activities. 
Funding for the SAGCOT Centre will be committed in parallel with other Development Partners 
(initially DfID and USAID) to support the operations of the Centre as a whole. A Memorandum of 



Understanding (MoU) has been signed on September 30, 2014 between the SAGCOT Centre, GoT, 
DfID, the World Bank, Norway, EU, and UNDP. The MoU states that the funding will be 
committed against an indicative five year budget, and against an approved annual budget agreed by 
the SAGCOT Centre Board.  
 
TIC will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.2 activities.  The TIC will 
directly implement these activities and be responsible for procurement, financial management, 
input/output and progress reporting.  In the first instance, procurement under the Project will be 
implemented by the PCU until such time as TIC has reinforced its procurement capacity. 
 
Component 2 will be implemented through the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund. The institutional 
structure of the catalytic fund management is designed and specified in a Trust Deed. A Board 
comprising five members has been established. The Board has recruited an Executive Secretary and 
initiated recruitment of a Fund Manager, estimated to be selected soon after the approval of the 
Project.   
 
The grant application process under the Matching Grant Fund (MGF) will be managed by a 
professional and competitively recruited Fund Manager. The Fund Manager will periodically (at 
least twice a year) invite applications from eligible partnership between smallholders and 
established agribusinesses, and through a two phased process select those applications which satisfy 
the core criteria (benefits to smallholders, safeguard compliance, sustainability, etc.). The Fund 
Manager will have a specific duty to provide support to applicants, in particular to help ensure 
benefit flows to smallholders, and that smallholder interests are well represented in the application 
and the partnership. The final applications will be submitted to the independent Investment 
Committee to be appointed by the Board to review all grant proposals and make recommendations 
to the Board on those that warrant funding. The eligibility, selection process and implementation 
arrangements are detailed in the Trust Deed and further specified in the MGF Operational Manual. 
Grants will be funded on a reimbursement basis with expenses pre-financed by the investors and 
may be tranched. Grants payments made through the agribusiness may be allocated to the 
agribusiness investor, smallholders or some combination thereof, as requested in the application, 
and set out in the grant agreement.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖





















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC35817

Project Name Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE) 
(P154807)

Region AFRICA
Country Western Africa
Sector(s) Health (50%), Other social services (35%), Animal production (15%)
Theme(s) Other communicable diseases (40%), Health system performance (40%), 

Rural services and infrastructure (15%), Rural policies and inst itutions 
(5%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154807
Borrower(s) Ministere de la Sante et de la Prevention
Implementing Agency WAHO
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Nov-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

25-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

13-May-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The countries of West Africa belong to the Economic Community of West Africa States 
(ECOWAS), which comprises 15 countries and is home to more than 310 million people. ECOWAS 
is a regional organization that serves to promote economic integration across the West Africa 
region. The region is very heterogeneous in terms of cultural, economic and human development. 
Overall, member states rank low on the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) human 
development index; as of 2014, life expectancy at birth and gross national income per capita of 
countries in the region ranged from 45.6 to 75.1 and 873 to 6,365 respectively.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Over the last four decades, the world has witnessed one to three newly emerging infectious diseases 



annually. The West Africa region is both a hotspot for emerging infectious diseases and a region 
where the burden of zoonotic diseases is particularly high. In this region, emerging and re-emerging 
diseases at the human-animal-ecosystems interface are occurring with increased frequency. As 
evidenced by the recent Ebola epidemics in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, highly contagious 
diseases in this region cross borders easily and have the potential to turn into pandemics. These add 
to the ongoing burden of neglected and endemic human and animal diseases, including zoonosis.  
 
Pandemics and epidemics have potential catastrophic effects on human and animal life, ecosystems, 
and on national economies. From 1997-2009, major outbreaks of fatal infectious diseases such as 
the human pandemic influenza (H1N1), highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1), Creutzfeld-
Jakob disease, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and EVD caused an estimated US$80 
billion in economic losses. Additionally, a recent analysis by the World Bank (WB) shows that a 
severe pandemic such as the 1918 Spanish Flu could cost approximately US$3 trillion globally, an 
estimate comparable to the impact of the 2008 global financial crisis.  
 
The pandemic of H1N1; epidemics of SARS, H5N1 and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
Coronavirus (MERS-CoV); and recent outbreaks of EVD are reminders of persistent risk of 
infectious, zoonotic diseases, and the economic losses they cause. Animal losses from zoonotic 
diseases are also high. On average, about half of all annual losses of Livestock Units (LSU) reported 
on average by veterinary services to the OIE-WAHID database from 2006 to 2009 were the result of 
zoonotic diseases. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) represents an increasing global health threat as resistant pathogens 
can be transmitted across healthcare facilities, in communities, and across international borders. A 
review of some disease control and prevention measures adopted in the human health sector shows 
that resistance to inexpensive and effective antimicrobial drugs has emerged at an alarming rate, 
increasing the likelihood that many common diseases and pathogens (such as tuberculosis, malaria, 
HIV, gonorrhea, MRSA, CRE and Salmonella Typhi infections) could become difficult and 
expensive to treat. Similarly, challenges with insecticide resistance continues to be on the rise in the 
region and could undermine the significant gains in the control of vector born disease such as 
malaria, dengue, and yellow fever. Detection, monitoring, and responding to AMR relies on having 
strengthened and coordinated laboratory and surveillance capacities in the region. 
 
Control of the accelerating spread of communicable diseases in West Africa is also hampered by the 
limited capacities of individual country health systems for efficient surveillance, early detection and 
rapid response to infectious disease outbreaks that result in significant reversals in human 
development progress in the region including increased cases of morbidity and mortality, threats to 
food security, and substantial economic losses. For many countries in West Africa, years of civil 
conflict and underinvestment have resulted in weak health infrastructure, periodic disruption in 
service delivery, and critical shortages or gaps in the workforce (eg. epidemiologists, laboratorians, 
information technology experts, etc.). Mitigation of the risks posed by diseases with pandemic 
potential, including emerging zoonosis, will have to address these weaknesses in country health 
systems in the region. 
 
The effectiveness of disease surveillance and response systems is currently hampered by:  
lack of appropriate plans and resources to respond to health threats in a timely manner; 
scarcity and non-retention of trained and motivated human and animal health workforce resources, 
at both central and local levels; 


overall weakness of  human and animal disease information systems, including insufficient data 
collection and use of data for informing policy decisions and action, as well as for the prevention 
and mitigation of the cross-border spread of diseases; 
insufficient integration of parallel disease- specific surveillance systems;  
insufficient cross-sectorial coordination and collaboration among Ministries, in particular among 
those in charge of public health, animal health and the environment leading to inadequate 
operationalization of the “One Health” concept; 
inadequate human and animal health laboratory capacity, including inadequate specimen 
transportation networks, and low involvement of laboratories in the surveillance and response 
systems; 
disparity in detection and disease management capabilities among countries and insufficient 
regional cooperation. 
 
In June 2007, the WHO set forth a mandate via the International Health Regulation (IHR 2005) that 
requires country governments to develop, strengthen and maintain the core capacities of national 
public health systems to detect, assess, notify, and respond promptly and effectively to health risks 
and public health emergencies of international concern (PHEICs).  In the WHO Africa Region 
(WHO/AFRO), the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategy serves as a 
framework to fulfill the mandates of IHR (2005). However, till today, IDSR has not been fully 
implemented in most countries in the region, thus contributing to the limited capacity of the 
countries’ health system for systematic collection, analysis, confirmation, and interpretation of 
disease surveillance data, in addition to insufficient capabilities for preparedness and rapid response. 
Thus, the need to reinforce these capacities in this region as a mitigating risk for potential future 
pandemic outbreaks. 
 
Animal Health Sector 
The animal health sector in the ECOWAS region is characterized by a high incidence and 
prevalence of many contagious diseases, both zoonotic and non-zoonotic, impacting productivity, 
public health, rural development and livelihoods. Since December 2014, West Africa has witnessed 
a reemergence of an H5N1 outbreak.  Important weaknesses in veterinary public health systems 
caused long delays in detecting, reporting and putting other necessary mitigation measures in place 
to reduce the risk of spread and to eventually eradicate the virus. Lack of preparedness, insufficient 
human, physical and financial resources, and the lack of cross-sector collaboration were highlighted 
as key factors by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Organization for 
Animal Health (OIE) in all affected countries. A recent summary of evaluations of the performance 
of Veterinary Services (PVS) done by the OIE within ECOWAS also highlighted the insufficient 
budgetary resources, and a mismatch between human resources and actual requirements.  In terms 
of strategic actions for animal health, all countries identified the need to improve the surveillance 
cover, in line with the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code, and to control priority animal diseases 
(including through vaccination). 
 
Collaboration between Veterinary and Human Public Health Systems.  
West African countries do not have yet the requisite systems in place and are generally ill-equipped 
to prevent human infections and to mitigate the losses from exposure to diseases of animal origin. In 
addition to strengthening national veterinary and human public health systems and their regional 
cooperation, there is an urgent need to establish or reinforce and maintain strong collaboration 
between systems at national and regional levels in order to better manage risks that arise at the 
animal-human-ecosystem interface (the so called ‘One Heath’(OH) approach.). For that to happen, 

ar attention will be given to priority core public functions (veterinary public health and 
human public health) that would reduce these risks. Assessing these core functions, bridging divides 
among systems and ministries and reducing capacity gaps would constitute a critical element of the 
program. Country assessment tools now exist for both systems (Performance of Veterinary Services 
pathway; IHR monitoring framework costing tool) as well as well identified bridges for OH 
competencies. Attention to building systems for core functions and policy dialogue, based on 
credible assessments, rigorous analysis and adequate financing, will ensure sustainability and reduce 
disease risks. These efforts would support specific ongoing national and regional disease-control 
initiatives, already part of system-strengthening country program, and demonstrate the performance 
of collaborative systems in disease surveillance, prevention and control.   
 
Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Network 
The recent EVD epidemic in West Africa has been attributed, not only to environmental factors and 
human behavior, but also to weaknesses in the health systems of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
and their inability to detect and respond swiftly to public health threats, and moreover, to the lack of 
a regional surveillance and response network in West Africa. Containment of West Africa’s EVD 
epidemic that initially began in Guinea and spread to neighboring countries was hampered by the 
absence of the systematic collection and reporting and exchange of surveillance and laboratory data 
across country-borders in real time. The EVD epidemic dramatically illustrates the need for a more 
harmonized approach to disease surveillance and response, both within countries and within the 
West Africa region overall. The EVD epidemic highly underscores the importance of regional 
cooperation among West African countries for the prevention and control of potential cross-border 
disease outbreaks, as a key component of the post-Ebola health systems recovery strategy, and 
overall health systems strengthening efforts in the region.

Relationship to CAS
The project is in line with the WB’s mission to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. 
Communicable and non-communicable diseases are a major constraint on the health, education and 
potential earnings of people living in the ECOWAS region and have the greatest impact on the most 
vulnerable population.  Hence, the economic rationale for investing in these interventions is key to 
mitigating the economic burden not only on individuals but also on the country as a whole. The CPS 
for the nine countries targeted by this project emphasize the need to strengthen the capacity of 
health systems of which disease surveillance is a key pillar, in order to improve health outcomes and 
reduce vulnerability (To be updated with CPS for each country). 
 
The project complements both WBG and development partner investments in health systems 
strengthening, disease control and surveillance.  Establishing this complementarity is particularly 
important in the three countries most affected by the EVD epidemic.  For Example, in the context of 
the recent Ebola epidemic, the Government of Sierra Leone is eager to dramatically improve 
national disease surveillance and response capacity. Having experienced first-hand the devastating 
consequences of cross-border spread of Ebola, the government also acknowledges the paramount 
importance of regional disease surveillance and institutions for cross-border and inter-country 
collaboration. On 7-8 September, 2015, the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) 
and multiple partners met in Freetown to discuss the creation of a Sierra Leone's National Public 
Health Institute (NPHI). Core functions of this Institute will include surveillance and response, 
research aimed at answering important questions for policy and program design, and response to 
public health emergencies. The Government of Sierra Leone is acutely aware of its limited financial 
and technical resources and has already begun actively engaging partners to assist in the creation of 


the NPHI. US CDC, China CDC and Public Health England have already demonstrated significant 
interest. The proposed project can play a vital role in providing financial and technical assistance to 
the Government of Sierra Leone to create the NPHI, can convene the multiple partners around a 
harmonized agenda, and can ensure that what is created in Sierra Leone is integrated into regional 
systems.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project’s development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa.

Key Results (From PCN)
i. Percentage of participating countries that improve compliance with IHR (2005) and OIE 
international standards based on independent external evaluations;  
ii. Percentage of outbreaks for which cross-border investigations are undertaken; 
iii. Percentage of surveillance workforce who have been trained; 
iv. Percentage of satellite laboratories awarded 2-star or more status under the regional 
accreditation program based on WHO/AFRO 5-step accreditation process; 
v. Percentage of reported priority communicable diseases outbreaks with laboratory 
confirmation of etiologic agents as defined by IDSR and OIE/FAO; and 
vi. Number of regional rapid response teams set up and equipped, activated and demonstrate 
competency on a quarterly basis

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The project's development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa. 
 
The PDO seeks to address systemic weaknesses within the animal and human health sectors that 
hinder effective disease surveillance and response by: (i) strengthening the capacity of selected 
ECOWAS member countries to fulfill their obligations under the WHO IHR (2005) and the OIE 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code; (ii) reinforcing sustainable and effective regional collaboration and 
collective action to detect and respond promptly to priority infectious diseases threats in West 
Africa including zoonotic diseases; and (iii) establishing an efficient linkage of country health 
systems to regional laboratory, surveillance, and response networks. 
 
Ultimately, the project will contribute towards significantly reducing the burden of diseases 
particularly among the poor and vulnerable populations, mitigating the public health and economic 
risks posed by infectious diseases in humans and animals, and decreasing the threats of future 
disease outbreaks thereby promoting global health security.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖


Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 310.00 Total Bank Financing: 310.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 310.00
 Total 310.00


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18818

Project Name National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349)
Region AFRICA
Country Kenya
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national 

government administration (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(10%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Social Inclusion (30%), Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153349
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

02-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Jan-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing poverty, in 
particular in rural areas, remain.  Kenya’s poverty reduction from 47 percent in 2005/6 to about 39 
percent based on best estimates in 2012/13 , has been driven by solid growth across most of the 
economy, but improvements in income are not evenly shared amongst people but also amongst 
regions and inequality appears to be rising .  The scale of consumption poverty in Kenya is 
staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas.  Based on the last national household budget survey, 
close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was poor in 2005, the vast majority of 
the poor lived in rural areas, and were more likely to depend on income and consumption from 
crops and livestock, as a source of livelihood. Revised poverty estimates indicate that nearly 4 in 10 
Kenyans continue to live in extreme poverty. Poverty levels are highest in arid and semi-arid areas, 

with roughly 70 percent the population living in the “small share” (about 12 percent) of the more 
agriculturally productive regions of the country (source: CPS FY2014-18). Tackling poverty must 
address the difficulties of low-income rural communities as well as the distinct problems of urban 
poverty that also encompass secondary cities.  
 
Income inequality levels are not likely to have decreased in recent years, and achieving inclusive 
growth remains Kenya’s key development objective. Kenya’s Gini coefficient of 47.7 is above that 
of neighboring comparators, including Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Uganda. The richest 10 percent of 
the population garner 40 percent of the nation’s income, whereas the poorest 10 percent receive 
only 2 percent of national income. While fostering income growth of the bottom 40 is not currently 
a target set explicitly by the national authorities, in practice it is currently equivalent to fostering 
income growth of the extreme poor. Significant investment and economic reform must be part of the 
effort to cut the poverty rate by 2 percentage points each year from now to 2030 if extreme poverty 
is to be ended in that timeframe (source: CPS, FY2014-18).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture is the mainstay of Kenya’s economy, but is not reaching its potential to fully contribute 
to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The sector directly accounts for 25 percent of GDP, and 
provides 62 percent of formal employment, and 45 percent of government revenue.  However, 
although specific high-value sub-sectors like horticulture and tea have performed well, small-scale 
agriculture – the main livelihood for most of Kenya’s poor – has performed very poorly.  Despite 
demographic changes and urbanization, the majority of the rural population still derives their 
livelihoods from agricultural and related activities, at low levels of productivity. There is therefore a 
very strong linkage between agriculture and the overall performance of the economy as well as the 
wellbeing of the Kenyans (both rural and urban). 
 
Vulnerable groups in rural areas bear the highest incidence of poverty depending on how well they 
have been prepositioned to face shocks.  Social exclusion creates vulnerability particularly among 
women and youth.  Lack of stable income, secure shelter, isolation from markets, jobs scarcity, lack 
of access to information and technologies and knowledge, education etc. all act as drivers to social 
exclusion and lack of prosperity that is being experienced by rural families. In agriculture, women 
comprise more than 70 percent of the labor force, yet they own only 1-5 percent of agricultural land 
titles. In terms of non-agricultural employment, only 29 percent of those earning a formal wage are 
women and female youths are twice as likely to be unemployed as adult females. 
 
Management of natural resources and water catchments is critical to the well-being of the most 
vulnerable and to improving prosperity of rural communities. Kenya's growth prospects and main 
economic activities, especially agriculture, hydro-power generation and water supply are strongly 
linked to the country's environment and natural resource base.  However, such catchment areas in 
Kenya have undergone intensive environmental degradation resulting in the siltation of rivers, 
reservoirs and irrigation canals, which in turn exacerbates flooding and vulnerability.  Kenya 
already is one of the most degraded areas in the region with about 70 percent of the population 
living in the 12 percent of total land area that is classified as being of medium to high potential for 
agriculture and livestock production. Further, Kenya is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. Many of the economic activities and livelihoods rely on natural resources will be impacted 
by climate change related occurences, such erratic weather patterns, floods and droughts. Proper 
management and conservation of key catchment areas, as well as actions to respond to climate 
change (such as the adoption of climate-smart agriculture practices, or strengthening the adaptive 


capacity of communities through improved access to information and services) are key strategic 
requirements for increasing for increasing agricultural productivity, poverty reduction and economic 
growth. 
   
The 2010 Constitution gives hope in addressing some of the exclusion witnessed in the past.  
Devolution to 47 Counties paves way for a more equal distribution of resources and better service 
delivery. The Constitution Bill of Rights emphasizes the need to protect the vulnerable and 
marginalized members of Kenyan communities. Much needs to be done in practice to ensure that it 
rectifies the unequal distribution of investments and services and does not instead cause service 
delivery to deteriorate. The Constitution also recognizes improved governance, transparency and 
citizen participation as essential to realize Kenyan aspirations.  
 
The Constitution and the Government’s ambitious devolution process bring major new 
opportunities, as well as near-term challenges, for enhancing poverty reduction, citizen 
participation, agricultural productivity, as well as governance. Counties now play the primary on-
the-ground role in delivering agriculture services that previously were managed by the national 
government.  Key functions related to these services were transferred to the Counties in August 
2013, and the “Equitable Share” includes significant resources that had formerly been allocated to 
national ministries to carry out these services, with national government retaining a policy making 
role. There is a major need, and window of opportunity, to support Counties to put in place 
institutional structures, mechanisms and staffing to deliver on their mandates. Many Counties are 
looking for mechanisms, such as community-led development programs, that can help to mobilize 
their citizens to take an active role in delivery of services.  
 
Kenya has significant experience supporting community-led development, agriculture and citizen-
centered governance, specifically gained from the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development 
and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD/FM) Project and the Kenya Agricultural Productivity and 
Agribusiness Project (KAPAP) .  Both projects are delivering on their development objectives and 
have demonstrated new approaches to mobilizing communities and small-scale agriculturalists, 
while facing implementation and governance challenges that have afflicted multiple projects in the 
Bank’s Kenya portfolio. These types of operations have demonstrated results in mobilizing poor 
communities to undertake initiatives that improve local livelihoods, and have progressively sought 
to incorporate lessons learned from similar community-led initiatives in South Asia and other 
regions. Experience thus far suggests that unlike top-down approaches, effective community-level 
planning and execution encourages innovative development solutions that reflect local priorities.   
 
Rural transformation in an inclusive and sustainable manner is the long-term vision of the 
Government of Kenya (GoK).  To achieve this inclusive transformation, a series of multi-sector 
programs will be required over the next 5 to 15 years. The Bank, in response to the GoK’s request to 
scale up community-led and market-driven approaches in the agricultural sector as the first program 
in the series, proposes a Kenya National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349) 
to be implemented over five years with an approximate IDA envelope of US$200 million.

Relationship to CAS
The Government, as well as the World Bank’s new Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS/
FY2014-18), places a strong priority on supporting agriculture and the devolution process to 
enhance poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Enhancing the role of agriculture in generating 
shared prosperity and poverty reduction, as well as in supporting national and County governments 


to provide effective decentralized service delivery are key priorities.  The agricultural sector is 
identified as one of the key sectors of the economic pillar in the “Kenya Vision 2030” which is 
operationalized by the Second Medium Term Plan (2013-2017), as well as other key policies such 
as the Agriculture Sector Development Policy aiming to achieve 5 – 7 percent annual agriculture 
sector growth. The CPS identifies agriculture as the sector with the most potential to make a 
significant difference to Kenya’s rural poor, including women, who make up 70 percent of the rural 
labor force; and to deliver on national objectives for shared prosperity.   
 
Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy. The proposed program is fully aligned with the focus 
areas of the CPS and will contribute to its objectives through the Bank’s three key domains of 
engagement in Kenya.  First, under Domain 1 – “Competitiveness and sustainability: growth to 
eradicate poverty”, the proposed project would help achieve the high level objective of improving 
agriculture productivity and sustainability . Second, the proposed project would directly contribute 
to Domain 2 – “Protection and potential: delivering shared prosperity”, where the focus is to protect 
the vulnerable and help them develop their potential. The CPS recognizes that agriculture is one of 
the high priority areas interventions to target support for the poor that directly links with helping 
farmers in rural areas. Engaging communities and supporting especially women and youth are also 
recognized to be important. Third, the proposed project would also assist in achieving the two high 
level objectives of operationalizing the devolution framework for local decision making and smooth 
delivery of decentralized services under Domain 3 – “Consistency and equity: delivering a 
devolution dividend”.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed development objective is to reduce vulnerabilities and promote inclusive agricultural 
and other livelihoods of the small-scale and marginal farmers in the targeted communities.

Key Results (From PCN)
Achievement of the PDO and key results are proposed to be measured by the following  indicators: 
(a) Direct project beneficiaries (number) of which female (percentage)- this core indicator will 
essentially measure the number of vulnerable and poor/small and marginal farmers (bottom 40 
percent, disaggregated by gender) benefitting from project interventions both in terms of 
infrastructure and livelihoods; (b) Communities and Counties, through their own institutions, 
implementing, operating, and managing their development activities (number); and (c) Increase of 
household incomes and assets of small and marginal farmers (less than 2 acres) (percentage).  A 
detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Approach and Scope: To promote inclusive and sustainable agricultural and livelihood 
development, the proposed project interventions will use a three-pronged approach along the key 
guiding principles of: participation, inclusion, poverty targeting, transparency, accountability, value-
for-money, and self-help. First, to address key aspects of rural development that cut across cultural, 
ecological, and socioeconomic areas , the project design will use a holistic, integrated landscape 
approach that looks at all resources (natural capital (land, water, and other natural resources), 
physical capital (infrastructure, etc.) and social capital (communities, institutions, etc.) to develop 


strong horizontal and vertical collaboration with stakeholders to managing competing demands. 
Second, to effectively identify and address distinct local needs, the project will use a community-led 
approach that has been successfully providing services to rural populations in Kenya. Participation 
of the beneficiary population and County governments in all stages of the process would be 
essential for ensuring ownership and sustainability of the investments. Third, the project will adopt 
a market-driven approach to ensure that agricultural development and livelihood promotion are 
linked to markets/private sector thereby contributing to increased economic transformation and 
improved livelihoods of the target population. With focused support, a sizeable group of small 
farmers and other vulnerable groups can be a source of much needed employment and growth in the 
rural areas. The project will also place a strong emphasis on sustainability – how to build and 
sustain community-led institutions and farmer-led market associations that can raise adequate 
revenues to sustain and expand operations, and are incentivized to deliver tangible benefits for poor 
and vulnerable populations.  
 
Project Area.  Selection of the proposed project area will be defined during preparation recognizing 
that some degree of geographical concentration will be needed in order to provide widely shared 
benefits.  Roughly, the project will cover about 10 to 15 counties, benefitting about 500,000 farm-
families, about 2. 5 million population . Selection of the project area will be in done following an 
overall holistic/landscape approach, ensuring close collaboration and coordination with proposed 
IDA-supported rural roads, rural energy and devolution projects currently under preparation. The 
selection criteria could include: (i) agricultural and livestock potential areas; (ii) number of poor 
people living in rural areas; (iii) human development indicators such as malnutrition, food 
insecurity, sanitation coverage, etc.; (iv) willingness of County governments and communities to 
commit to the program’s objectives/principles and provide cash/labore or in-kind support, and; (v) 
clustering approach – in terms of both physical/biological clustering as in case of watershed, and 
economic clustering.  
 
Project Components: The project will comprise 4 components:  
 
Component 1: Support to Farmer/Community Institutions and Agricultural/Rural Livelihoods 
(roughly US$100 million of IDA Credit): This component will provide support and resources to 
communities for building and strengthening their institutions (farmer/producer groups, cooperatives, 
etc), improving agriculture and rural livelihoods (extension, technology, irrigation, natural resource 
management, finance, etc), reducing vulnerabilities such as unemployment (especially youth), 
disability, food insecurity and malnutrition, and improving quality of life (small access roads/
bridges, water, etc). This component could provide support through two windows aimed at: (a) 
providing financing for public goods, and; (b) promoting agricultural and rural livelihoods as 
private goods. The funds will be released directly to the communities in tranches based on their 
performance, and will be managed at the community level. Investments would need to be made in 
land rehabilitation and land conservation measures also to arrest erosion-induced declining land 
productivity, and connecting the farmers as well as community to roads and markets.   
 
Component 2: Strengthening Inter-community/Producer Cooperatives and Investments for 
Agricultural Value Chains (roughly US$60 million of IDA Credit): This component will support the 
strengthening of higher level farmer institutions (cooperatives, producer federations, natural 
resource users associations, etc) that help farmers and communities work together to improve 
productivity and value-addition, and to achieve efficiency and economies of scale of local activities. 
The component will also support activities that require cooperation within and across multiple 


communities. Key activities proposed under this component include: (i) strengthening producer 
federations and cooperatives; (ii) developing value-chains and commercial agriculture; (iii) 
improving catchment management practices; (iv) promoting innovative technology, farming 
methods, and good agricultural practices that help target beneficiaries to improve efficiency and 
quality of their production; and (v) complementing existing subsistence strategies that promote 
climate resilience with new measures such as efficient irrigation, new crop varieties (e.g., drought 
and disease tolerant, quicker-growing), and erosion controls. These climate smart techniques and 
dissemination of climate information (e.g., seasonal forecasts and long-term trends) can address 
more intense rainfall events and water conservation measures. Component 2 will build synergies 
with other initiatives at the national level and in the project area such as feeder roads development, 
rural electrification and devolution, etc., in order to have a multiplier effect on achieving sustainable 
results.   
 
Component 3: Building Capacity of County Governments and Other Partners to Support 
Community-Led Development (roughly US$30 million of IDA Credit): This component will 
support County governments and other partners (including communities) to strengthen their roles 
and capacity as enablers of community-led initiatives for farmers and vulnerable populations. 
Proposed activities to be supported will include: (i) integrating community-led initiatives in County 
Integrated Development Planning and Budgeting processes; (ii) building County capacity including 
policies, staff, processes/systems, and monitoring; (iii) identifying and monitoring progress and 
needs of poor and marginalized communities, and; (iv) developing platforms to share information 
on ongoing initiatives, identifying and disseminating good practices, and enhancing coordination 
among different actors.   
 
Component 4: Coordination, Facilitation and Monitoring (roughly US$10 million of IDA Credit): 
This component will support overall national level coordination, facilitation, management, technical 
support, and monitoring, learning and evaluation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 200.00
Financing Gap: 0.00























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 
 

 
 
 

MALAWI 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT 
(AIYAP) 

 
APPRAISAL REPORT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 
BORROWER:      Government of Malawi  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:                             Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water 

Development  

 

Financing plan 

 

Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

16.00 million  

 

Loan  

EU  1.60 million  Grant 

Government  1.76 million  In- Kind 

TOTAL COST 19.36million  

 

 

Important Financial Information (ADF Loan and EU Grant) 

   

 ADF Loan EU Grant 

Grant/Loan Currency UA EUROS 

Type of Interest N/A N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee 0.5% N/A 

Service Charge 

0.75%on 

disbursement/outstanding 

loan 
N/A 

Tenor 40 years N/A 

Grace Period 10 years N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV value at 18% (USD 3.8 million) 

EIRR (base case) 26%, NPV value at 12% (USD 7.2 million) 

   

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 
Concept Note Approval  

 
February , 2016 

Project Approval September, 2016 

Effectiveness February, 2017 

Completion June, 2022 

Last Disbursement September, 2022 

Last Repayment  



 

iv 

Project Summary  

1 Project Overview  

1.1 The Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project (AIYAP) is to 

deploy irrigation infrastructure as an enabler and facilitator to address the twin problems of food 

insecurity and high rate of youth unemployment within the context of 2011-2016 Malawi Growth and 

Development Strategy (MGDS) which identifies agriculture and food security, irrigation and green belt 

initiatives as drivers of economic growth. Malawi’s agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to the adverse 

impacts of climate change and extreme weather events, such as dry spells, droughts and floods. The 

sector is also characterized by low level of irrigation development, and low uptake of improved farm 

inputs. In addition, low profitability of smallholder agriculture is influenced by weak links to profitable 

markets which make value addition seemingly impossible because of lack of information between the 

farmers and the processors, high transport costs, weak farmer organizations, poor quality control, lack 

of market information, as well as limited participation of the youth in agricultural development and 

businesses. The proposed project, will develop two large scale irrigation schemes at Linga (Nkhata-

Bay) and Dwambazi (Nkhotakota) covering 1945 hectares, targeting 10,000 beneficiaries with special 

focus on the youth (about 50%). The project is to use irrigation infrastructure as an enabler to scale up 

the production of maize, rice, sugar and horticulture production and value chain in project areas in 

particular and Malawi in general.  

 

1.2 The project apart from mitigating the challenges arising from dependency on rain-fed production 

will also promote youth ownership of agribusiness, access to funding/credit through seed funds, loan 

facilities and risk sharing from Micro Finance Institutions, agro -processing, engaging in value addition, 

modern methods of crop diversification and market linkages. Socially, the project by introducing youth 

skill acquisition, entrepreneurship development and job creation will address social vices such abuse, 

prostitution, violent crime etc. In addition, the project will also reduce rural and urban migration as well 

as cross border migration of youth in the targeted areas. It is estimated that within four and half years 

the project will produce 500 Agripreneurs, train about 100 artisans for the maintenance of irrigation 

infrastructure, launching 175 new agribusinesses and employing about 4600 additional persons, 

including out-growers. It is expected that at least 50% of the beneficiaries will be female.  

 

1.3 The project has four components namely (i.) Irrigation Infrastructure & Watershed Management, 

(ii.) Youth Entrepreneurship, market linkages, agro-processing and Value Addition (iii.) Agro-

Cooperative Development and Enhancement and (iv) Project Management and Institutions 

Strengthening.  

2 Needs Assessment:  

The need for the Project is justified by the priorities in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategies 

II (MGDS II: 2011-2016) which emphasizes on agriculture, food security, irrigation and water 

development.  As a consequence, there is an urgent need for transformation of the agriculture sector to 

enhance sustainable growth and break the cycle of food insecurity as espoused in the National Export 

Strategy, 2015 Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework and the draft National Irrigation 

Policy, Green Belt Initiative and the National Agriculture Policy focusing on commercialization of 

agriculture.    In addition, the 2013-2018 Malawi National Export Strategy, identifies agriculture value 

chains driven by private operators including smallholder farmers, youth entrepreneurs, women’s 

groups, MSMEs and large businesses to boost and diversify exports in order to improve Malawi’s 

growth prospects as the bedrock of the economy. The Project is a direct response to GoM’s desire to 

enhance agricultural productivity by promoting irrigated agriculture and dynamize the sector through 

active youth participation in agribusiness for job creation in order to meet the objectives of these 

policies. 

 

 



 

v 

3 Cost and Financing   

The project total cost of AIYAP is estimated at $US27.50 million (UA19.36million), to be financed by 

the Bank UA16 million ADF loan, EU €2 million grant (parallel financing) about  UA 1.6 million and 

Government contribution in kind estimated at UA1.7 million.   

4 Implementation  

The project will have a PIU which staff will be externally recruited through a competitive process and 

serve on full time basis. The project will recruit competitively a Technical Adviser (TA)   at the 

commencement of implementation ENABLE YOUTH sub-component of the project. The TA will work 

with the Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for one year after which 

LUANAR will take over the full implementation of the component. The PIU will be reporting to the 

Principal Secretary for the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a 

Technical Committee comprising Directors of relevant Departments to assist with the implementation. 

The composition of the Committee will be determined by the Government. The Technical Committee 

will report to the Project Steering Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work 

plans and budgets and guide the project on policy matters.  

5 Bank’s Added Value  

The Bank’s intervention in this project will add significant value to the investments already made in 

agriculture and irrigation projects by the Government of Malawi, the Bank and other development 

partners. It will give impetus and acts as boost to the efforts/programmes of the GoM in youth 

development through entrepreneurship in agriculture value chains and agribusiness. The project is in 

line with the TYS 2013-2022 which focusses on inclusive growth and transitioning to green growth. 

The project focus on youth unemployment through skills development and entrepreneurship in is line 

with the TYS. Finally, the Bank’s intervention has the multiplier effect on economic development 

through infrastructure development and private sector development in line with the Malawi Country 

Strategy 2013-2017 and is aligned to three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ i.e. Feed Africa, 

Industrialise Africa, and Improved livelihood. 

6 Knowledge Management  

The knowledge gained through the implementation of several projects and studies in the sector in 

Malawi has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same pattern, the knowledge that will be 

generated by this Project will contribute significantly to the design and implementation of agricultural 

interventions within the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) arrangement and build the 

capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MAIWD) and other 

Ministries particularly the Ministries of Labour, Youth and Manpower Development, and Trade and 

Industries. Consequently, useful information will be generated for similar future interventions. AIYAP 

will, in addition to irrigation development, focus on agro-processing and value addition, agriculture 

cooperative development and agribusiness along agriculture value chains as well as building of 

entrepreneurship skills and generations of bankable projects in agriculture value chains which will 

provide lessons in the post-harvest management, processing and marketing of various crops to inform 

project designs of similar projects in the future. The Bank is a key member of the Donor Committee on 

Agriculture and Food Security (DCAFS) and the lessons learnt from this project will be shared with 

other Development Partners through DCAFS platform. ASWAp, through the Bank, will provide 

information generated from AIYAP to key stakeholders for knowledge sharing and coalition building 

through the agriculture sector working group. The results from the various studies and surveys, 

including the socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired 

knowledge attributes into practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit 

flows.  

 



 

vi 

Results Based Logical Framework 

Country and Project Name: Malawi: Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project 

Purpose of the project: To increase agricultural productivity and incomes of households, develop youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and poverty reduction in the project area. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICA-

TION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicator 
 (including CSI) 

Baseline (2015) Target (2019) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

To Improved standard of living through 

enhancement of income 

. % Reduction in Poverty Level Nkhotakota(44.5), Nkhata Bay (32.1) 

 

Nkhotakota – (40.5), Nkhata Bay (28.1) 

National Statistical 

Office (NSO), 

Integrated Household & 

demographic survey 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions, mid-term and 

end evaluations  

Assumption: Sustained economic 

growth and good governance 

 

Risk #1. Poor Farmers Organisation 

Mitigation: Strengthen of farmers 

unions and cooperatives 

 

Risk 1: Unpredictability of 
agricultural markets due to trade 

restrictions and price controls on 
some items.  

Mitigation: The Government is 

being urged by DPs, to deregulate 
agriculture markets including 

removal of bans and pegging the 

price on some strategic crops such as 

maize.   Enactment of the Goods 

Control Act would help to improve 

market predictability.      

4.5.2  Volatility of the world 

commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys 
accessibility to SADC market and 

the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and 
value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: 

Project cost overruns due to 

exchange rate fluctuations, 

uncertainties in economic situation 
of Malawi and SADC and the rise in 

the cost of materials. 

 Mitigation: Project is costed in 
USD and efficient procurement 

timing to address the increases, as 

well as adequate price contingencies 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

 

2.1.Increased crop production and productivity 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Increase in number youth engaging in farming 

and Agribusiness 

 

2.3.Increase in Household Income 

 

1.1.1 Crop production (t’000) 

 

 

 

 

1.1.2 Crop yield (t/ha) 

 

 

 

1.1.3 %age value added for each crop 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2.1. No of youth in farming and agribusiness 

 

 

2.2 Average annual incremental income of 

farmers (MK) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

1.1.1 Maize (0.51); Beans (0.075); Rice 

(0.85); Tomato (0.135); Onion (0.2); /potato 

(0.125); Sugarcane (0) cassava (2.66). G/nuts 

(0.075), Banana (0). 

 

1.1.2 Maize (2.7); Beans (0.75); Rice (3.0); 

Tomato (9.0); potato (.10.0); Sugar cane (12) 

Cassava (24.5) & G/nuts (0.75). Onion 

(10.5), Banana (15) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (6); Beans (1.5); Rice (6); Tomato 

(0); Onion (0); S/potato (20) Sugar cane (0) 

Cassava (20), G/nuts (2) 

 

 

 

2.2.1 TBD(To be provided with baseline 

survey) 

 

 

2.3.1  MWK 791,349 

 

Project Area (Targets by 2021) 

1.1.1 Maize (4.192) Rice (9.981); Sugarcane 

(3.78); Tomato (2.9) Onion (0.775) G/nuts 

(0.32); Beans (0.18), Cassava (2660) & 

potatoes (0.705). Banana (256) 

 

1.1.2 Maize (6.0); Beans (1.8); Rice (6.0); 

Tomato (20); Onion (15.5); potato (18); Sugar 

Cane (3.78) Cassava (28), G/nuts (2.0), 

Banana(30) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (60); Rice (60) Beans (70); 

Tomato (20); Onion (20) S/potato (80); 

Groundnuts (90); Cassava (100); & Sugar 

cane (100), Banana (256) 

 

 

2.2.1 5000 (50% women) 

 

 

 

2.3.1   MWK 1,575,120 

 

 

 

 



 

vii 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

3. Component 1:   Irrigation Infrastructure  & 

Watershed Management 

3.1 New Irrigation schemes developed. 

3.2 Catchment Management 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Component 2:  Value Addition and Youth 

Entrepreneurship,   

4.1 Youth trained in agribusiness 

4.2 Agribusiness incubations established 

4.3.Youth Agribusiness Established 

4.4 4.4 Market linkages promoted. 
4.5 Agro-processing & value addition supported 

 

5. Component 3. Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for Employability   

5.1 Youth networking formed 

5.2 Cooperative societies developed and formed 

5.3  Total land put into use   

5.4 Total farmer trained 

5.5 Total Artisans trained 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Component 4: Institutional Strengthening 

and Capacity Building  

6.1 Public Sector staff supported 

6.2 M & E established 

6.3 Project Coordination 

 

 

3.1.1 Size of land developed (ha)  

 

3.2.1 No of farmers adopting agro-forestry 

initiative  

3.2.2 No of farmers adopting alternative 

livelihood technologies (% women and youth 

farmers) 

3.2.3 No. of rain water harvesting and soil and 

water conservation  structures  

3.2.4 Number of alternative livelihood 

activities for women 

 

 

4.1.1 No. of youth coordinators trained 

4.2.1 Youth Agripreneur trained 

4.3.1 Number of Agribusiness established 

4.4.1No of private sectors/value addition 

entities networked 

4.5.1No of agro-processing centres developed. 

 

 

5.1 Number of youth market networks  

5.2.1 Number of youth associations & 

cooperatives 

5.2.2 Number of farmer associations and 

cooperatives  

5.3.1 Rain fed crops (ha) 

5.3.2 Irrigated crops (ha) 

5.4.1 Number of staff trained 

5.4.2 Number of farmers trained 

5.5.1 number of local artisans trained 

 

 

6.1.1 No of staff and farmers trained 

6.1.2 Consulting firm recruited 

6.2 No. of M&E systems established and 

operational 

6.3 Tech. asst., vehicles $ equipment procured 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Target Yr 2021) 

3.1.1 (1945ha) 

 

3.2.1  200 (50% female) 

 

3.2.2  1500 (50% female) 

 

3.2.3 500 

 

3.2.4 3(Bee keeping, mushroom&livestock) 

 

 

4.1.1 Youth Coordinators (4 of which 50% 

female)  

4.2.1Youth Agripreneurs (500 of which 50% 

female) 

4.3.1 New Agribusiness established (175 of 

which 50% female beneficiries) 

4.4.1 Number of marketing networks (2) 

 

4.5.1 Centre (2) 

 

 

5.2 youth networks (2) 

5.3.1 Youth WUAs (20); Youth cooperatives 

(20) 

Farmer WUAs (2); Farmser Cooperatives (2) 

 

5.3.1 Area (1945) 

5.3.2 Area (1945) 

5.4.1 Farmers (4,000 with at least 50% being 

women); Youth (5,000 with at least 50% 

being women) 

5.5 Local artisans (50 with at least 50% being 

women) 

 

 

6.1.1 GOM staff (70), Health 

workers(10)Tech. Support(10) 

6.1.2 Consulting firm (4) – including auditor 

6.2 M&E system (1) 

6.3 Project staff appointed (6), Vehicles and 

Equipment (4), Office Equipment(TBD) 

 

QPR 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions Project    

         

 

 

Completion Report, 

Audited financial 

reports 

for the unavoidable increases will is 

provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, 

increased temperature, change in 

length of rainy season, increased 
incidences of drought and floods, 

due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding 
vulnerabilities, assisting the 

communities to select various 

adaptation measures; e.g. rainwater 
harvesting, rotational grazing, using 

drought tolerant varieties e.g. 

cassava, sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing 

counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions 
will largely be in kind in form of 

provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salaries and wages.   
   

 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

ACTIVITIES INPUTS 

Component 1 : Irrigation  Infrastructure and Watershed Management: 

 Sub-component: 

1.1 Irrigation Infrastructure,  

1.2 Watershed management   

 

Component 2: Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship,   

2.1 Youth entrepreneurship  

4.2 Agro-processing  

2.3 Market  linkages 

 

Component 3 : Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability  

3.1  Formation and support to youth farmer cooperatives    

3.2 On farm training and extension services  

3.3 Provision of matching grants for value addition equipment  

3.4 Market access and strengthening business network 

3.5 Training of artisans for maintenance of irrigation schemes 

3.6 crop production 

 

Component 4 

4.1Public Sector and smallholder farmers supported 

4.2 M & E  

4.3 Project management 

 

Component 1 –  UA 13.48  million 

Component 2 –  UA 2.34 million 

Component 3 –  UA 2.14  million 

Component 4 -  UA 1. 4   million 

 TOTAL   UA 19.36          



 

viii 

Project Time Frame  

Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
2021 

 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                          

Appraisal                          

Loan and Grant negotiations and  approval                          

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                         

Publication of  the General Procurement Notice                          

 Recruitment of project staff                         

Project Launching                         

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs / PCUs                         

Signature of agreements with partner entities                          

Irrigation Infraastructure Development and Watershed Management                         

Award of contracts for the project supervision                          

Studies RFPs and bidding documents (BDs) preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities on a number of issues, including on conflict management 

approaches 
            

 
   

 
   

    

Construction infrastructure/management committee                          

Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability Additions                          

RFPs and bidding documents (BDs)preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Construction of infrastructure /management committee                          

Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship                         

Selection of Consultants/Identification of Intern Service Centres                          

Selection of Candidates for Training                         

Commencement of training                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Departture of trainees                          

Monitoring of Youth Progress                          

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                         

Establishment of accounting system and preparation of procedures manual                          

Establishment of the baseline situation and the M&E system                         

Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                         

Capcity building interventions  including on institutions and resilience-building systems                         

Annual financial auditing                          

Mid-term review                         

Completion report                          



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AFDB GROUP TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI FOR AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT (AIYAP) 
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed ADF loan of UA16 

million to finance the Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project.  

 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

 

1.1 Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II. 2011-2016 has identified agriculture, 

irrigation and water development as some of the key priorities and drivers of economic growth and 

poverty alleviation. The Government formulated Agriculture Sector-Wide Approach (ASWAp 2011-

15) as the priority investment plan for the agriculture sector which focusses on (i) food security and risk 

management (ii) commercial agriculture, agro-processing and market development and (iii) sustainable 

land and water management and support services. The Government is implementing a Farm Inputs 

Subsidy Program (FISP) to address the food security problem and developed a National Export Strategy 

to promote crop diversification, value addition and export of agro-based commodities. The National 

Irrigation Policy which is currently at the draft level is aimed at enhancing farmers’ ownership through 

farmer managed irrigation and National Agriculture Policy, whose main objective is to commercialize 

the agriculture sector. In ASWAp, the Government also introduced a Green Belt Initiative (GBI) in 

order to promote irrigation and minimize reliance on rain-fed farming and achieve increased agricultural 

productivity for domestic and international markets. The Government is currently finalising a five year 

National Resilience Plan to break the cycle of food insecurity with irrigation as a key component. 

Regarding youth initiatives, the Government adopted the National Youth Policy in 2013 which 

recognises that the youth represent a vast human resource potential for promoting economic growth and 

if neglected it would be a lost opportunity.   AIYAP will address the twin problems of food insecurity 

and high rate of youth unemployment using irrigation infrastructure as an enabler, which will 

substantially contribute to the achievement of the objectives of these policies and strategies.  

 

1.1.2 The project is aligned with the Bank’s 2013-17 Country Strategy Papers (CSP) Pillars focusing 

on (i) addressing infrastructure bottlenecks to competitiveness and growth and (ii) supporting actions to 

expand private sector investments. While the former covers irrigation infrastructure development and 

agricultural market infrastructures the latter Pillar covers private sector investment and entrepreneurship 

in agro-processing, crop diversification and value chain development which are articulated in AIYAP. 

The country socio-economic indicators are presented in Appendix 2 and it is envisaged that AIYAP will 

contribute to improving these indicators and ultimately achievement of the Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs).  

 

1.1.3 Currently, only 26 percent (104,000 hectares) of the potential irrigable area (408,000 hectares) is 

under irrigation. In order to exploit this potential, Government has developed the National Irrigation 

Master Plan and Investment Framework (NIMPIF). The NIMPIF which was published in February 2015 

confirmed that the plan will be implemented in three phases: Phase I (2015-2020), phase II (2021-2025) 

and Phase III (2026-2035) comprising of approximately 20,000 hectares, 28,500 hectares and 67,500 

hectares of new irrigation schemes in Phases I, II and III respectively. The project is part of the Bank’s 

efforts to support the government of Malawi in the implementation of the Irrigation Master Plan given 

that the targeted sites are among the priority sites identified in the Master Plan which objectives are to: 

(1) accelerate economic growth, (2) reduce rural poverty, (3) improve food security, and (4) increase 

exports.  

 

 

 



 

2 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s involvement  

1.2.1 The Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) 2013-2022, identify agriculture related infrastructure 

development as a key enabler for increased production, productivity and effective utilization of land 

resources. It also identifies agriculture and food security as an area of special emphasis. The 2016 

Bank’s Agriculture strategy: Feed Africa: Strategy For Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-

2025 is targeted at executing the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme 

(CAADP) goals of contributing to elimination of extreme hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and increased 

prosperity, in partnership with alliances including farmers, agribusiness, and civil society, and 

exploiting regional comparative advantages and opportunities for trade and collaboration. The Bank’s 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018 calls for economic empowerment, knowledge and capacity building for 

women.  Furthermore, the Bank’s Fragility strategy “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 

Africa, 2014 – 2019” which aims at effectively assisting countries build resilience to move forward 

towards more stable political and economic development with Youth employment as a special focus, as 

jobs are alternatives to rents or participation in illicit activities associated with fragile situations and 

thus help prevent the outbreak of violence related to critical unemployment.  

 

1.2.2 This project addresses all of the above key Bank strategies and policies as part of broader 

development efforts to achieve sustainable growth and poverty reduction thus, (1)  streamlining of the 

crops along value chains (economic crops) and crops to address food security as well as linking the agri-

prenuers to the value chains, ensuring that sustainable incomes will be achieved for the beneficiaries in 

particular and the country at large, (2)  focusing on youth with special emphasis on targeting women (at 

least 50% of beneficiaries) social and economic empowerment, while protecting the environment 

through various catchment activities, and (3) addressing the objectives of inclusive growth and 

transition to green growth by addressing infrastructure development, private sector development, and 

skills and technology adoption through promotion of irrigation for agriculture intensification and 

diversification.  

 

1.2.3 The project also resonates with three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ by addressing Feed 

Africa, Industrialize Africa, and Improved quality of life for the people of Africa.  At country level, the 

project is aimed at contributing to increase in agricultural exports, import substitution, generation of the 

much needed foreign exchange and job creation especially for the youth.    

 

1.3 Donor coordination 

 
1.3.1 Malawi’s recent progress towards the aid effectiveness agenda under Busan is mixed.  Whilst 

donor alignment with national policies remains strong, the use of the national country system and aid 

on the budget has significantly reduced following suspension of budget support in 2013. 1  Development 

Partners (DPs) are instead channelling the resources earmarked for budget support or basket funding 

through other aid modalities and off budget.2  The GOM is working with DPs to improve aid 

effectiveness guided by the new Development Cooperation Strategy launched late 2014. Successful 

outcome of   on-going PFM reforms will be indispensable in encouraging DPs to increase the use of 

country systems.   The current platform is on the Donor Committee on Agriculture and Food Security 

(DCAFS) as the key form for donor coordination, monitoring of sectoral plans and strategies and 

harmonizing interventions. The Bank is currently chairing the Irrigation Technical Sub-Group.   With 

the provision of Euro 2.00 million EU funding for catchment management in the project, the Bank is 

leveraging on collaboration with other Development Partners in Malawi.   

 

                                                 
1 According to the 2014 Global Partnership Monitoring Surrey, Malawi’s score on the aid on budget aid indicator declined 

from 62 in 2010 to 49 whilst that of use of national country system dropped from 65 to 50. 
2  51 % of planned externally financed development expenditure for FY 2014/15 is off budget.     



 

3 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture 2015/2016 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labor Force   

  Agriculture 30 90 80   

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**   

  
Government 

 

Donors 

 

 

ADB 

WB 
 

6% 

25%   

UA m [UA 1000.3 m] [UA 31.1 m]   DFID 12%   

% 71 29   EU 17%   

      USAID  12%   

     Irish Aid    3%  

    WFP   1%  

  

                                                                                GIZ                                       2% 

                                                                               WFP                                      1% 

                                                                                IFAD                                     6% 

                                                                                JICA                                      2% 

                                                                               FICA                                     3% 

Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups [Y]   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** [M]****   

* as most appropriate ** Years [yy1 to yy2] *** for this sector or sub-sector   

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement    

 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project Objectives: The specific objective of the project is to alleviate poverty in the project area in 

particular and the country in general by contributing  to economic growth and food security through: 

(1) Deploying irrigation infrastructure to scale up improved crop production and productivity leading 

to improve net farm incomes of the project beneficiaries, (2) expansion of opportunities in agriculture 

and agribusiness among the  rural youth in Malawi as a means to advance and improve rural livelihoods 

and economic development, (3) enhancement of import substitution through improved value additions 

and processing, (4) introduction of revolving loan for agriculture purposes will grow and build the 

cluster youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and value chains, and (5) Using cooperative societies as a 

vehicle to transit the smallholders farmers to commercial farmers.  

2.1 Project Components: AIYAP has four main components mainly; (1) Irrigation Infrastructure 

(Dwambazi 945 hectares and Linga 1000 hectares irrigation schemes) and Watershed Management, (2) 
Youth entrepreneurship and Value Addition, (3) Agro-Cooperatives Development and Enhancement, and 

(4) Project Management and Institutions Strengthening.  Table 2.1 below provides a summary of the 

project components and related estimated cost, including contingencies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

4 

Table 2.1: summary of the project components and related estimated cost 

No Component Name Estimated 

Cost  

(UA) 

million 

Component/Sub-component and Activity Description 

 

1 Irrigation Infrastructure 

& Watershed 

Management  

13.48 Irrigation Development: (i) development of two (2) new 

gravity fed irrigation schemes: the works under this 

component will include construction of head works, main 

canal, secondary and tertiary canals, drainage system, and 

on farm roads as described in C.1.2 of the Technical 

Annex; Dwambazi (945 ha) and Linga (1000 ha), covering 

a total area of 1945ha;(ii) formation of two water Users’ 

Associations (WUAs) with 50% women and youth 

representation; (iii) provision of capacity development for 

farmers (men and women), extension agents (tapping on 

female extension to reach women famers), and relevant 

government officials. 

 Catchment Management: (Detail activities in Annex C1) 
(i) improved catchment conservation and development 

programme; (ii) alternative livelihood support; and (iii) 

capacity building and indigenous knowledge management 

systems. The hot spot areas in the catchment will be 

demarcated in consultation with the communities during 

implementation.     

2 Youth entrepreneurship 

and Value Addition and  
2.34  Youth Entrepreneurship, Storage Agro-processing and 

Value Addition  

 Youth Entrepreneurship (50% of female youth) 

 Market Linkages – trade facilitation, linking farmers with 
agro-processors, building bulk commodity network, 

eliminating middlemen, and exerting group effects on 

processors for better prices.  

 

3 Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for 

Employability 

2.14  Formation and support to farmer cooperatives and to 
strengthening the participation of female youth in these 

cooperatives)   

 On farm training and extension services  

 Agriculture Production, 

 Market access and strengthening business network 
linkages between the cooperatives and youth processors, 

and exchange programme with other similar organisations 

in the region and the rest of Africa  

4 Project Management and 

Institutional 

Strengthening  

1.4  Establish project implementation unit 

 Monitoring and Evaluation  

 Capacity building  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

5 

2.2 Technical Solution retained and alternatives explore  

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection or acceptance 

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection/Acceptance 

Alternative 1 

 

Invest in gravity fed irrigation 

system (technical solution 

retained) 

Gravity fed irrigation system have proved to be 

more sustainable in terms of operation and 

maintenance with locally available material, 

requiring minimal training which translates to 

sustainability and profitability of the enterprise. 

Alternative 2 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 3 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 4 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

 

2.3 Project type 

 
AIYAP is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of supporting 

irrigation infrastructure development (civil works) as an enabler of scaling up of high value crop 

production, value chain development, youth skill development in Agribusiness and capacity building 

activities largely funded by ADF 13 Loan and EU Grant resources. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 
2.4.1 The total project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is UA 19.36 million which 
will be financed by: (i) ADF loan (UA 16.00 million covering cost of infrastructure, purchase of 

vehicles, youth training and provision of seed capital, etc. ), EU Grant (UA 1.60 million to finance 

catchment management) and (iii) the GoM and Beneficiaries (UA 1.76 million), through provision of 

office space and salaries for the counterpart staff on the project on the part of Government and provision 

of labour for maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures on the part of beneficiaries. The resources 

from EU will be made available to the project through parallel financing, since the Department of 

Irrigation will be responsible for the management of the resources using the EU procedures.  

2.4.2  The ADF Loan will be used to finance both local costs and foreign costs. The project will 
finance local costs such as training, personnel and operating costs while most of the activities under 

infrastructure development will attract foreign costs as detailed in the summary tables below. The GoM 

does not have the capacity to finance most of the project activities and has therefore committed to 

contribute to the project in kind through staff and office space. The details are indicated in Tables 2.3, 

2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 below. 

  



 

6 

Table 2.3: Project Cost Estimates  

Component Name 
MWK ‘000 UA ‘000 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

Infrastructure development 
      

3,535,269  

          

8,019,617  

      

11,554,886  

      

3,643  

       

8,264  

      

11,907  

Market Linkages, Agro Processing and 

Value Addition 
      

1,458,553  

             

655,039  

        

2,113,592  

      

1,503  

          

675  

        

2,178  

Agro-Cooperatives Development for 

Employability  
      

1,737,066  

             

225,139  

        

1,961,235  

      

1,790  

          

232  

        

2,021  

Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 

Building 
      

1,190,715  

               

98,013  

        

1,289,699  

      

1,227  

          

101  

        

1,329  

Sub Total 
        7,921,604  

              

8,997,808  

        

16,919,412  

          

8,163  

          

9,272  

          

17,435  

Physical Contingency 

         

196,026  

             

844,272  

        

1,040,299  

         

202  

          

870  
         

1,072  

Price Contingency 

         

390,112  

             

437,663  

          

827,775  

         

402  

          

451  
            

853  

Sub Total 

         

586,139  

          

1,281,935  

        

1,868,074  

          

604  

        

1,321  

         

1,925  

Grand Total     8,507,742  

       

10,279,744  

    

18,787,486  

      

8,767  

     

10,593  

      

19,360  

 

Table 2.4: Sources of Finance 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (UA ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

UA % UA % UA % 

ADF 11,200 70 4800 30 16,000 83 

EU 319.2 20 1277 80 1,597 8 

GoM  0 0 1763 100 1,763 9 

Total 11,519   7840   19,360 100 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure  

ADF and EU Categories of Expenditures (UA ‘000) 

  ADF EU 

Categories of expenditures Foreign  Local Total Foreign Local Total 

Works 9,168 2,292 11,460 22.07 5.52 27.59 

Goods 688 0 688 98.72 26.23 124.95 

Services 762 1,778 2,540 0 1,369 1,369 

Operation 0 1,312 1,312 0 78 78 

Total 10,617 5,382 16,000 120.79 1,479.33 1,600.00 

 

  



 

7 

 Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule By Component and Year 

 Totals in UA '000 

Component PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total % 

Irrigation and watershed 

management 3001 5409 4719 174 174 13476 70 

Crop production, Value addition & 

Youth Entrepreneurship 251 1018 356 356 356 2336 12 

Youth Skills Development in 

Agriculture 1287 221 217 211 208 2144 11 

Project management & Institutional 

strengthening 366 259 261 259 261 1405 7 

Total 4905 6907 5552 999 999 19360   

 
2.5. Project’s target area and population: 

2.5.1 Demographic Aspects: According to 2016 data from the Department of Statistics, Malawi has 

an estimated population of nearly 17 million people with women constituting about 51% of the 

population3. The population is characterised as follows: (i) 0 – 10 years (33%); (ii) 10 – 20 years (22%); 

(iii) 20 – 40 years (29%); (iv) 40 – 60 years (10%) and (v) those above 60 years comprise (6%).  The 

districts of Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay have populations of 229,460 and 164,761 respectively with 

combine total land mass of 8330km² representing 9% of country total land mass of 94,080km² 

(excluding Lake Malawi which covers an area of 24,404km²). The targeted beneficiaries are 10,000 

households estimated at 6 person per household. In the two districts only 1 in 30 women and 1 in 10 

men complete secondary education. However, 1 out of 7 women and 1 out of 9 men are unemployed.  

2.5.2 Location: The project is located mostly in the Green Belt Zone covering a total of 2 Districts of 

Nkhota-kota (Dwambazi) and Nkhata-Bay (Linga) Districts in the Central Region. These Districts were 

selected because they were ranked among the Phase 1 projects in the Malawi National Irrigation Master 

Plan. 

2.5.3 Climate: The climate in Malawi ranges from semi-arid in the Lower Shire Valley, semi-arid to 

sub-humid on the plateaux and sub-humid in the highland areas in the northern parts of the country. 

Average rainfall ranges from 763 mm to 1,143 mm per annum (p.a.) with only a few areas receiving 

over 1500 mm of rain annually. Such areas include Mulanje, Nkhata Bay and the northern end of Lake 

Malawi. Rainfall (almost 90%) occurs between the months of December and March, with no rain at all 

between May to October over most of the country. Mean annual temperatures vary with altitude, ranging 

from 25o C in the Lower Shire Valley to 13o C in the highland areas. 

 

2.5.4 The project area like other parts of Malawi is largely a semi-arid country hence greatly 

threatened by droughts and other negative impacts of climate change. The semi-arid nature of the 

country makes it highly fragile and susceptible to environmental degradation hence sustainable 

management of natural resources is not an option but a priority. The area is also prone to flooding which 

has been accelerated by extensive deforestation and tree cutting in most parts of the country which was 

highly experienced in the 1970s and the 1980s during which time annual deforestation rate was 

estimated at 3.5% per annum. Deforestation was and is still caused by (i) expansion for agriculture; (ii) 

demand for fuelwood for both domestic and other uses including industrial production. Soil erosion 

constitutes one of the major types of land degradation in Nkhotakota and Nkhata-Bay area of Malawi. 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
3 Malawi is largely rural. Despite rapid urbanization, nearly 85 percent of the total population of Malawi lives in rural areas. 



 

8 

2.5.5 Water Resources: Water for the irrigation schemes is supplied from Dwambazi and Mazembe 

rivers. Dwambazi is a perennial river with a minimum monthly flow of 3,305 l/s indicating that the 

water available is more than sufficient for the development of Dwambazi irrigation scheme. Mazembe 

River with a minimum monthly flow of 224 l /s demonstrates the need for a water harvesting structure 

to harness the water required to irrigate the Linga scheme. 

2.6 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation  

2.6.1 The ESIA:  

2.6.1.1 During the project preparation, extensive public consultations were carried out to determine the 

environmental and social impacts of the project. The consultations were also aimed at identifying the 

key environmental challenges experienced in the project locations as well as project districts. Meetings 

were held with various departmental heads at the Ministry of Agricultural, Irrigation and Water 

Development, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Labour and Youth Development 

at the ministries’ Headquarters in Lilongwe. Consultative meetings were also held with various heads 

of department at Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay District Headquarters including with the District 

Commissioner of Nkhata Bay District. Further meetings were held with Dwangwa Cane Growers Trust, 

Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd and Senior Officers of Illovo Sugar Company Ltd. Other 

consultative meetings were held with various community leaders led by Senior Chiefs and their deputies 

together with community members, members and executives of Farmers Associations in Linga (Nkhata 

Bay District) and in Dwambazi (in Nkhotakota District). 

2.6.1.2 The reasons for consultative meetings were: (i) to generate a good understanding of the project 

by all stakeholders within the project area; (ii) to enhance ownership of the project by local leadership, 

the community and local farmers; (iii) to understand people’s and agency expectations about the project; 

(iv) to understand and characterise potential environmental, social and economic impacts of the project; 

(v) to acquire, but also advance local benefits that may accrue from the project; and (vi) to enable 

stakeholders involved in the project to provide views, hence participating in or refining project designs. 

In addition, site-specific investigations were also conducted to gain insight to the likely environmental, 

social, and economic impacts of the project. 

2.6.2 Community Participatory Processes: The community participatory processes were organised 

by the officers from the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development as well as the project 

team during the preparation and appraisal mission. Two town hall meetings at each project location 

were held where a range of issues including among others, project details, land issues, community 

development, choice of cropping, farmers associations –development, formations and operations, etc. 

were discussed and agreed upon. The team, also visited the projects sites and the existing farms on the 

land with a view for getting the understanding of the farmers, listen to their concerns – especially land 

distributions and beneficiaries of youth entrepreneurship, how to address them and incorporate them 

into the project design. Over half of the target population is youth and women who are already active in 

the agriculture sector. Most of the youth also own land that has been inherited or allocated by the 

traditional leaders in line with the customary land acquisition. Consultations also involved all relevant 

sector departments at the district and headquarter levels. The key players included the local 

administration structures spearheaded by the local chiefs headed by two Traditional Authorities, one of 

which is a woman and their assistants and included a significant proportion of the community members 

of which youth and women constituted more than 50%. The Mission met and held discussions with 

major private sector players among which are;  Crown Ministries, Illovo Sugar Company, Farmers 

Engineering Services, Public Private Partnership Commission in Blantyre, the Malawi Chamber of 

Commerce, Industry and Cooperative and Telekom Networks Malawi Limited (TNM) – a mobile 

company quoted on Malawi Stock Exchange. The project team held sessions with Civil Society 

Organisations, and Non-governmental Organisations as well as youth entrepreneurship training 

institutions in Malawi  

 

 



 

9 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design  

2.7.1 Experiences, challenges and lessons learnt in the implementation from the Bank’s past and 

current agricultural projects in Malawi have been taken into account in the design of the current project. 

These include the need for proper project orientation, emphasis on farmer group approach, strong M&E 

and capacity building for staff which AIYAP has incorporated by including project launching, regular 

training for implementing staff, emphasis on Cooperatives and Water Users Associations and support 

to M&E. To avoid future land disputes as noted from some of the projects due to inadequate 

consultations, adequate consultations were held with the beneficiaries and other relevant stakeholders 

during preparation and the Bank has received a letter of comfort from the Government confirming the 

support of the locals for the project. In addition, beneficiary farmers registered their names to confirm 

that their pieces of land will be made available for the project activities. Non availability of full studies 

and designs have always led to delays in disbursements and project implementation. To address this 

problems, AIYAP locations were selected based on readiness of the designs, drawings and feasibility 

studies already prepared under the National Irrigation Master Plan. In addition, the sites were also 

selected on the least cost based among the sites which are ready for development. The need for a full 

time Project Coordination Unit was noted from almost all the previous projects, therefore, provision has 

been made for the recruitment of technical experts to support the Project Coordination Team under 

ASWAp Secretariat to fully focus on the planned activities.   

2.7.2 Through the project team interaction with the DP and government officials it was noted that 

youth skill development program were bedevilled by; (1) Lack of transparency in the process of trainees 

selection, (2) In adequate or non-availability of financial support to raise start-up capital, and 

(3)Inadequate post training technical support, and (4) Uncoordinated monitoring processes. All these 

are taken into consideration in the design of AIYAP as a result, the selection processes of the trainees, 

the training as well as provision of seed capital will the carried out by an independent 

consultants/Financial Institutions. In addition the project has already confirmed with organised private 

sector – Ilovo, PressCane, etc. which have agreed to take the trainees as interns. 

2.7.3 The issues of sustainability of the irrigation facilities after project completion in Malawi have 

been highlighted in all the reports. Irrigation is capital intensive and demanding in terms of technical 

capacity. Some of the old irrigation schemes in Malawi have had to be rehabilitated.  By introducing 

value chains and agripreneur it is expected that the farmers will transit to commercial farmers who will 

be able to pay for the maintenance of infrastructure.  The project has built in resilience of the facilities 

to the effect of climate change by addressing the issues of catchment management which will be 

specifically addressed with Euros 2million mobilised from EU.   Furthermore, to enhance sustainability 

of other physical infrastructure, the facilities and resources to be provided for the youth after graduations 

will be on revolving loan basis.  To address the issue of week technical capacity to maintain the 

irrigation infrastructure, resources have been allocated to the training of technicians and artisans for 

maintenance of the infrastructure. More importantly, the project is designed to  enhance ownership of 

the infrastructures by the farmers through Farmers Associations, improving capacities for O&M, and 

importantly, using climate-smart designs (flood regulation, sediment control etc.) which objective is to 

prolong the lifespan of the infrastructures.  

2.7.4 Lessons from the Revised 2015 Country Portfolio Improvement Plan (CPIP) also highlighted 

the: (i) Weak Capacity in Financial Management , (ii)Weak Capacity of Project Implementation Units 

which are precipitated by the staffing configuration and modalities of assigning staff to project 

coordinating units,  (iii) Project Start-Up Delays, and (iv) Weak Procurement Capacity. In order to 

address these challenges, the project has embedded (i) the need to ensure adequate stakeholders 

consultations during project design to ensure ownership and compliance during implementations phase; 

(ii) Project designs and detailed feasibility studies are already in place;(iii) training on the Bank’s rules 

and procedures for consultants and contractors engaged in Bank’s funded projects will be carried out as 

part of the project launch and on regular basis thereafter (iv) baseline and annual targets data are 

established within the first year of a project where this is not available (v) reporting would be based on 

results framework including gender disaggregated data , (vi) supervision missions’ checklist to include 



 

10 

environmental and social management activities and projects’ quarterly reports and (vii) frontloading 

of procurement activities by adopting advance contracting which have been agreed with government.. 

While addressing catchment vulnerability through the catchment management program is valid, this 

doesn’t necessarily confront the challenge of weak technical capacities nor sustainability challenge of 

the irrigation infrastructure alluded to in this  

2.8. Key performance indicators  

2.8.1 The Project Results-Based Logical Framework contains key impact and outcome indicators for 

the monitoring of the performance of the Project. The main outcomes are expected are: (i) Increased 

crop production and productivity; (ii) Increase in number of youth engaging in farming and 

Agribusiness and (iii).Increase in Household Income. Progress towards achieving these outcomes will 

be monitored through the sector monitoring and evaluation system.  

2.8.2 The Project Implementation Unit will prepare quarterly and annual project progress reports 

presenting the progress on output indicators disaggregated by gender where appropriate. Outcome 

indicators will be monitored through PIU’s management system and national statistics. Indicators will 

be updated in the Implementation Progress Report (IPR) and necessary adjustments will be made as 

appropriate. A medium term report (MTR) and Project Completion Report (PCR) will be prepared. All 

of these reports are circulated widely within the Government, the Bank and to other development 

partners.   

 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and financial performance. 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: At full operation, each farmer household will be making an income of MK 
1,575,119.74 (US$2300) per year from the current average income of MK 791,349.11      (US$1150). 

The analysis at the project level has been carried out by comparing with and without project costs, on 

farm crop establishment and operational cost with the benefits. The analysis also covered the benefits 

and costs of processing some proportions of selected crops such as maize, rice, cassava and selected 

horticultural crops such as tomatoes, onions and bananas.  The discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis 

carried out on the net cash-flow gave a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 23%, and a Financial 

Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 3.8 million at an opportunity costs of 18%. The opportunity cost of 

18% takes into account the prevailing high interest rates on commercial loans in the country ranging 

between 42% and 47% with inflation rate of 23% and the bank interest rates on concessional loans. The 

high financial rates of returns are attributed to the benefits accruing to the project from the value chain 

development of three major crops namely rice, maize and sugarcane and other horticultural crops such 

as tomatoes, onion, bananas and chillies. In addition, there are other benefits such as employment 

generation along the value chains, spin off effects of the investments to boost local economy and other 

environmental benefits further justifies the project.  

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave an Economic 
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 26% and the economic Net Present Value is estimated at USD 7.2 

million at an opportunity cost of 12%. The economic values for the goods and services were arrived at 

using a standard conversion factor of 1.1for traded goods and services while the non-traded items were 

estimated using the market prices which were good estimates of the economic values under the 

liberalized market system in the country. The results show high economic internal rates of return due to 

the focus of the project on modernisation and commercialisation of farming in the project areas for the 

selected crops which include horticulture crops. The project will also attract the participation of more 

small medium scale enterprises mostly owned by the youth in the project. The project intervention will 

also enhance productivity through capacity building of the key stakeholders in the project. Sensitivity 

analysis on the effect of increasing investments costs by 10% and reducing crop prices by the same 

margin resulted into decrease of EIRR to 25 and 24 % respectively which means EIRR is more sensitive 

to crop produce price variation. See table 3.2 for details. 

 



 

11 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Figures 

 
FIRR (base case )  23 %,  NPV (base case) (16,5%, USD    USD 3.8 million 

EIRR (base case) : 26  %, NPV (base case) USD 7.2 million 

 

Table 3.2: Results of the Sensitivity Analysis on the EIRR 

Scenario EIRR NPV (USD million, 12%) 

10% increase in crop prices 29 9.7 

10% decrease in crop prices 24 4.7 

10% increase in investment costs 25 5.9 

10% decrease in investment costs 29 8.4 

 

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: 

3.2.1.1 In accordance with the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards Systems (ISS), the project has been 

validated as category 2 by ORQR. This implies that the anticipated negative impacts are minimal and 

can be readily managed in line with measures elaborated in the Environmental and Social Management 

Plan. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and social impacts. Positive 

impacts will include among others: (i) improved environmental and ecological conditions; (ii) increased 

agricultural activities and enhanced agricultural production and outputs; (iii) improved food security 

and nutrition; (iv) enhanced value of agricultural produce through value addition; (v) improved social 

and economic well-being of the beneficiaries through improved economic activities; (vi) enhanced 

agricultural production capacities and skills; (vii) enhanced entrepreneurial and agro-processing skills; 

(viii) improved better quality water flow downstream; (ix) increased employment opportunities; (x) 

improved infrastructure in designated project areas; (x) capacity building including institutional 

strengthening, environment and natural resources management. Negative impacts will include: (i) 

vegetation, habitat and biodiversity loss during the development and construction phase of the project; 

(ii)  generation of solid wastes as a result of excavations during construction works; (iii) compaction of 

soils and destabilization of the geological balance; (iv) chances of threats of increased incidences of 

water-borne diseases and accidental deaths at the water conservation reservoirs; (v) dust, air quality and 

noise pollution; (vi) threats of occupational health and safety; (vii) soil, rivers and wetlands pollution 

from chemical fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals during the operational phase of the project; 

(viii) threats of transmissions of HIV/AIDs and other communicable diseases. The project ESMP for 

the two sites have been developed and posted on the Bank’s website on 9 August 2016.  

 

3.2.1.2 Though the environmental and social assessments of the project based on the African 

Development Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) and the Environmental and Social Assessment 

Procedures, validated the project as Category 2, however according to Schedule A of the Malawi’s 

Environmental Impacts Assessment Guidelines of 1997, development of agricultural land of more than 

10 hectares requires implementation of a full EIA, thus qualifying such projects under Category 1 

Projects. However, this is annulled by Schedule B 2.1 and Schedule D (D.1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, 

D8.1, D8.2, D8.5, D8.6, D8.8 and D10, of the Guidelines because the proposed project has limited and 

reversible negative environmental and social impacts. 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project is classified Category 2 by the Bank’s Climate Change Screening 

System. The design review includes climate change risks and proposal of adaptation measures. Risk 

management and adaptation options are integrated through promotion of gravity irrigation water flows. 

Catchment management programme has been incorporated as part of the climate change resilience 

programme. The proposed project interventions are imbedded with adaptation measures in the irrigation 



 

12 

and land and water management sub-sectors to secure and improve agricultural productivity against 

climate change impacts through enhancement of water supply and basin-wide management. Irrigation 

schemes will help address the challenges due to low rainfall while irrigation systems have been designed 

to control the flooding menace in the target areas. These measures are consistent with Malawi’s National 

Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPAs) and these include: (i) improved early warning systems (ii) 

use of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) improved crop and livestock management 

practices, and diversification of agricultural activities within single farm units, e.g. introduction of agro-

forestry systems 

3.2.3. Gender Analysis: Malawi has a high gender disparity between men and women. The 2014 
female Human Development Index value for Malawi is 0.423 in contrast with 0.467 for males, resulting 

in a GDI value of 0.9074. Only 32% of individual holders of agricultural land in Malawi are women 

despite their significant contribution in the agriculture sector.5 Rural women in Malawi play an 

important role as subsistence farmers,6 and there is increasingly involvement of young female (91% of 

young males works and 96% of young female workers are employed in the agriculture activities).7 Yet 

their productive capacity is hindered by gender inequalities. The gender inequalities in the agriculture 

sector can be attributed to:  

(i)  Limited access to land ownership and land tenure. This has led to gender implications mainly hinge 

around women’s control over the land and agriculture inputs including improved technology, 

extension services, credit and finances. This has affected women’s decisions over the agriculture 

sectors. Sensitisation meetings have been done to promote women participation and ensuring that 

farmer participation will be based on head of household rather than on gender. However, adequate 

safeguard will be put in place to ensure that at least 30% of the women are reached.  

(ii) Low education rate and skills among women’s famers.  Illiteracy is high among rural women and 

gender inequalities persist in secondary education, 1 in 30 women compare to 1 in 10 men 

completed secondary school (reference to point 2.5 in the report). Furthermore, for example adult 

literacy rate in Nkhata Bay is 91% to 76.8 %, male to female respectively. The situation is a bit 

different for youth but still there is differential of 18 % (age of 25 – 34). Addressing female 

education and knowledge in the project would be very crucial for their effective participation. 

Sensitization, extension support and business support services will be provided by the Government 

district officers including the youth and gender officers in order to promote youth and women 

participation and development. In addition, the project include program in capacity development 

in areas of functional literacy, book keeping, business formation etc.   

(iii) Inequalities in rural employment; rural women´s participation in paid employment is hampered by 

a significant domestic work burden. Moreover, rural female workers face a greater burden 

combining domestic and probative workloads compares to their male counterparts, which further 

restrict their agriculture production capacity.  Women generally have limited control over money 

generated from sales of agriculture produce. Moreover, men, more often than not, have the overall 

say on the selection of crop types to be produced which eventually impacts household food security. 

This creates constraints regarding agricultural investments, since in real terms, women tenure 

insecurity is one decisive factor constraining agricultural production.   

(iv) Gender mobility patterns; women are more likely to move shorter distances and within districts.  

This resulted in limited access to markets. The project will promote women participation in agri-

business by providing business development services and also through collaboration with NGOs 

active in the area.  

                                                 
4
Female – male respective: Life expectancy at birth (63.7 - 61.7). Expected years of schooling (10.8 - 10.7), Mean years of schooling (3.4 - 5.20) GNI per 

capita (0.679 - 0,815) HDI values (0.423 0.467).  GDI value Malawi, 0.907. Major gap is realized in yeas if schooling, gross national income, and 

combine with low gender inequality index, which includes participation of women in decision-making. In 2014, the parentage of women in decision 

making position stands at i.e. women held 22.3% of seats in the national parliament. 
5 Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Malawi: An Overview, FAO, 2011.  
6 Ibid. 
7 Ibid.  



 

13 

3.2.4 Finally, the project will take into account these factors and support women famers in the decision 

making process. It is apparent that gender inequality is affecting the agricultural productivity in the 

targeted areas. Women farmers on average outnumber men farmers. However, women are not well 

represented in decision making positions in irrigation schemes in Malawi where women occupy as little 

as 25% of the decision making positions and are often deputies of men. For that reason the project will 

make a deliberate effort to ensure adequate participation of women (at least 40% of beneficiaries) in 

project implementation and will encourage committees and farmer-based groups to include a larger 

quota for women in management, training, community representation and decision-making, and other 

income generating activities. Women, will thus have the opportunity to participate in farm related 

income generating activities and contribute meaningfully to the socio-economic development of their 

communities. The gender perspectives have been integrated into project formulation in line with the 

Malawian Gender Equality Act, 2012 and the National Youth Policy, 2013, and also takes due 

cognizance of the Bank’s Gender Policy. 

3.2.5 Social  The outputs of this project as contained in the logframe will translate into multiple 

positive economic and social outcomes whose indicators include: (i) increased agricultural activities 

and agricultural outputs whose net impacts will include improved living standards, food security and 

improved nutrition; (ii) increased employment opportunities both directly and indirectly by people 

employed during the development works as well as those who will be employed in agro-processing, 

marketing, sale of farm inputs, etc.; (iii) improved agricultural production skills through training; (iv) 

enhanced environmental management skills; (v) improved rural as well as on-farm infrastructure to ease 

transportation; (vi) minimized post-harvest losses through the development of farm and off-farm storage 

facilities as well as processing facilities that will help improve socio-economic well-being of the 

beneficiaries. 

3.2.6 The youth profile in Malawi indicates that out of a population of 17 million people8, more 

than 40% are between 10 to 35 years old. Literacy rates within this age bracket is estimated at 81.8% 

with slightly more males (86.6%) than females (77%) being literate. Although youth constitute a 

significant proportion of the population, they lack basic opportunities that would enable them develop 

to their full potential. This has been compounded by the presence of a range of adverse conditions that 

impinge on the youth; the most perverse, being poverty. Discussions with youth groups indicated that 

lack of appropriate skills and training, limited access to land, lack of value addition equipment and lack 

of financial support are some of the major challenges facing the youth in Malawi. Therefore this project 

has built in activities that will help to address challenges being faced by the youth. The project will 

promote formation of youth farmer cooperatives to engage in agriculture as a business. The project will 

also provide training in entrepreneurship, promote entrepreneurship culture, enhance agro-processing 

and value addition and also improve access to finance through seed funds and credit schemes. 

3.2.7. Involuntary resettlement: There is no involuntary resettlement foreseen under this project. The 

project identified sites do not require land acquisition. The areas are already designated for agricultural 

production. Settlements are outside the scheme areas except in Linga where there are a few homes found 

within the scheme area. These do not pose major problems for the scheme development since the designs 

have already isolated those few homes to be affected which will benefit from the project through 

livelihood activities embedded in the Catchment Management.  

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 
4.1.1 The project will be under ASWAp within MoAIWD, and will be implemented through the 

existing GoM structures. The MoAIWD is currently implementing six Bank’s projects satisfactorily 

which did not have any problems in meeting the pre-condition for first disbursement. To fast tracked 

and kick start the preliminary key activities of the project, the Government had put in place an Interim 

Project Implementation Unit which comprised of - a Project Coordinator (a Chief Irrigation Engineer), 

                                                 
8 Population and Housing Census, 2008 



 

14 

a Procurement Specialists, a Project Accountant, a Monitoring and Evaluation Expert and a Desk Officer 

to support the project. However, in order to fast-track the implementation process, the Project 

Coordinator, Supervising Irrigation Engineer, Cooperative Officer and  Procurement Specialist as well 

as the FM officer will be recruited competitively locally to serve on full time basis. The externally 

recruited staff will sign performance based contract with the GoM. The project has also allocated 

resources to recruitment a lawyer to guide the farmers on legal issues. 

4.1.2 The Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources will implement the ENABLE 

YOUTH sub-component. A Technical Adviser which will serve for one year will be recruited 

competitively at the commencement of ENABLE YOUTH to support the university after which the 

university will take over full implementation of the component. The project will partner with a financial 

institution licensed by Reserved Bank of Malawi on risk sharing of the ENABLE YOUTH sub-

component of the project. The financial institution will be competitively recruited using Quality Based 

Method of Procurement.     

The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development will sign a memorandum of 

understanding with Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for 

selection, training and evaluation of business proposals and recommendation of seed funds for the 

Agripreneurs. The Bank will only release resources for the funding of Youth Agribusiness on the 

recommendation of the LUANAR. A criteria for the selection of the youth will be developed which will 

include the minimum qualification of the Malawi Schools Certificate of Education and targeting the 

youth from the project areas. The Agripreneurs will be provided with modern farming production 

technologies on loan such as tractors and agro-processing equipment for the crops being promoted in 

the area through a Microfinance Institutions upon completion of the training at LUANAR 

4.1.3 The PCT will ensure that project resources are properly accounted for and that all project targets 

are timely delivered. The PCT will be reporting to the Principal Secretary for the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a Technical Committee comprising of 

Directors of relevant Departments. The Technical Committee will report to the Project Steering 

Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work plans and budgets and guide the 

project on policy matters. At field level the PIU will work closely with the District Commissioners 

Office especially the District Agriculture Development Officers, Irrigation Officers and Youth 

Development Officers. Program Managers, Divisional Irrigation Services Officers from Salima and 

Mzuzu Agricultural Development/ISD will provide technical support to the project.  

4.1.4 Steering Committee: The existing ASWAp Executive Management Committee in conjunction 

with members from the Department of Youth, LUANAR and Financial Institution to be recruited as risk 

sharing partner will act as the Project Steering Committee and will have the overall decision making 

responsibility. The Principal Secretary, MoAIWD will chair the Steering Committee. 

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.5 Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 

2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would 

be carried out following: (1) Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and 

Procedures (PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as stipulated under 2003 Public 

Procurement Act (PPA) and 2004 Public Procurement Regulations (PPR using the national Standard 

Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for 

various group of transactions to be entailed under components 3 and 4 under the Project, and (2) Bank 

Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   

Solicitation Documents SDDs, mainly for components 1 and 2 for contracts that are either: (i) above 

the thresholds indicated in Annex B5, Para. B.5.3;2, or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for a specific 

transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case BPM have been found to be the best fit for purpose 



 

15 

for a specific transaction or group of transactions. In order to gain time and specifically to meet the 

requirements of PD2 of 2015, the Interim Project Implementation Unit put in place by the Government 

has commenced the preparation of the procurement documents. In addition, the Government has 

selected to use Advance Procurement.  

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 

the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The 

global rating of risk assessment was Substantial with possibility of reducing to moderate after the 

implementation of the mitigating measures. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. 5.3.8.  

Table 4.1 Procurement Table  

Project Categories  UA ‘000 

NCB OCB OTHERS LCB TOTAL 

     

Works 

 Infrastructure 

 Building  

     

 11050   11050 

 410   410 

Goods 

 Machinery & 
Equip 

 Vehicles 

 Office 
Equipment 

     

 585.03   585.03 

   129.83 129.83 

15.38    15.38 

Services 

 Non Consulting 

 Consulting 

 Financial & 
Procurement 

 LUANAR  

 TA 

 TA –Fin.Inst. 

 African Harvest 

     

1263    1263 

  989.35  989.35 

     

  124.49  124.49 

  364.57  364.57 

  335  335 

  350 

85.00 

 350 

85.00 

Operating Expenses   873.00  873.32 

Salaries and others   991.26  991.26 

 1278.38 12045.03 4112.26 129.83 17566.26 

      

 

4.1.7 Financial Management Arrangements:  

 

4.1.7.1 MOAIWD has prior experience in implementing projects financed by various development 

partners and currently manages a total of three projects funded by the Bank. The Bank-funded projects 

are mainstreamed within the Ministry but the financial management function is performed by 

Consultants working together with Government Accountants. The frequent rotation of Government 

Accountants has hampered the reinforcement of capacity within the Ministry thus necessitating the 

retention of Consultants to support the PIUs. The existing projects have had a number of financial 

management challenges related to the poor quality of quarterly reporting, delays in the preparation of 

annual financial statements, non-compliance with the Bank’s audit submission deadlines, late 

submission of expenditure justification documents and inadequate controls at the district level. 

 



 

16 

4.1.7.2 In order the mitigate the identified FM risks based on prior experience, the project will recruit a 

Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant on a contractual basis to work together with the 

two Accountants designated by the Accountant General. The Financial Management Specialist will have 

primary responsibility for the FM aspects and report to the Project Manager and to the Director of 

Finance at MoAIWD.  The contracted FM consultants will be subjected to annual performance 

evaluations to ensure that they support the borrower’s compliance with the Bank’s financial 

management requirements. 

 

4.1.7.3 The project’s FM will be centrally managed within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in 

MoAIWD. The PIU would coordinate all project FM-related issues. The overall conclusion of the 

assessment is that MoAIWD’s capacity to handle all the FM aspects of the project, satisfies Bank 

minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM guidelines subject to the recruitment on a 

contractual basis of a Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant . The overall FM risk for the 

project is assessed as Moderate (see Annex 1 – Risk Analysis summary).  

 

4.1.8 Financial Reporting and Auditing Arrangement:  

In accordance with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit requirements, the project will be required 

to prepare and submit a quarterly progress report to the Bank not later than forty-five (45) days after the 

end of each calendar quarter. The project will prepare and submit annual financial statements, audited 

by the National Audit Office or an independent private audit firm, together with the auditor’s opinion 

and management letter to the Bank not later than six (6) months after the end of the financial year. The 

detailed auditing arrangements are included in the Technical Annex B.4. 

4.1.9 Internal Audit:  

The Central Internal Audit Unit will be responsible for providing objective assurance and ensuring 

accountability in the utilization of public funds and assets. Various bank rules and guidelines (including 

procurement rules, FM guidelines and disbursement guidelines) would also provide additional guidance. 

The internal controls of the project will be spelt out in the project implementation manual which would 

include sections on accounting and administrative procedures and provide guidance on the day to day 

project FM issues. The internal control environment will be underpinned by the clear definition of roles 

and responsibilities allowing for segregation of duties. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements:  

The project would make use of the Bank’s various disbursement methods including (i) Direct Payment, 

(ii) Special Account (SA) and (iii) Reimbursement methods in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. The Bank will issue a Disbursement 

Letter of which the content will be discussed and agreed with the Government of Malawi (GoM) during 

negotiations.  

 

The government will open a special account which will be denominated in foreign currency, at a bank 

acceptable to the Bank for the Project’s use. A related local currency account will also be opened for 

eligible local currency operating costs.  

4.2 Monitoring  

 
4.2.1 The established ASWAp results framework will be used for M&E of the project performance. 

Support will be provided by the MoAIWD and Ministry Labour, Youth and Manpower Development 

(MLYMD) to undertake their roles in leading the M&E process. The M&E Units will generate gender 

disaggregated data and also assess socio-economic impacts on the target groups. The Environmental 

District Officers and Land Resources Conservation Officers will monitor the social and environmental 

impacts of the project. Project effect and impacts on the target groups will be monitored by constituting 

cross-section samples of beneficiaries. The component will facilitate stakeholder consultations, farmer 

organisation, nutrition and HIV/AIDS messages, promotion of women participation, field 

demonstrations including competitions and short-term consultancies.  

 



 

17 

4.2.2 Milestones 
 

Timeframe Milestone Monitoring process / feedback loop 

Year 0  Preparation of 

procurement packages  

 

Project Approval, 

launching, signature  

GOM, AFDB 

 

 

AFDB Board, GOM 

Year 1 – 5 Implementation  

Year 1 – 5 Oversight  Steering Committee () 

Year 1 – 5 Audit Reports   Annually by PCU 

Year 3 Mid-Term Review   Bank and PCU to monitor  

Year 5 Impact Study   PCU and Regions 

Year 5 Project Completion Report   ASWAP and PCU to monitor; Bank to participate 

 
4.3 Governance  

 

4.3.1 The Agricultural sector in Malawi is repositioning itself to institutionalize transparency and 

good governance as evidenced in earlier detection by the management and ordering of full investigation 

of suspected salary fraud in the ministry. It should be noted that the MAIWD was not involved in the 

Malawi Cashgate of 2013. However, the requisite fiduciary management framework still poise a lot of 

challenges which include lack of qualified and experienced project accounting staff due to high turnover 

or attrition of accounting staff, weak internal controls and non-compliance with key internal control 

procedures within line ministry.  

4.3.2 The 2015 report of Transparency International Corruption Perception Index showed that Malawi 

had slide from 37(88/176) to 31 (112/175) between 1912 and 2015. The overall score of 2015 was below 

Sub-Saharan average of 33 score. However, the overall average score for Malawi’s Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Governance component has been improving slowly between 2004-

2014 with intermittent slight decreases in 2010 (-0.1) and 2014 (-0.13). However, the theft of public 

funds amounting to about US Dollar 50 million in September, 2013 dubbed as Cash gate, exposed high 

level corruption and serious weaknesses in Malawi’s PFM system. The current administration has since 

coming into power shown strong resolve to address the root causes of Cash gate and reform the PFM 

system.  The Government is implementing the PFM Reform Action Plan to restore controls and integrity 

of the PFM system over the short term. The Government also is also implementing a broader Public 

Sector Reform Programme (PSRP) aimed at improving accountability and transparency in public 

service delivery.  Steady progress in reforms is being made as evidenced by recent improvement in 

financial reporting and completion of pay roll audit.  There are on-going efforts to strengthen the 

capacity of key governance institutions, such as the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Office of the Directorate 

of Public Procurement (ODPP) and the National Auditor General’s Office. 

4.4 Sustainability  

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations by 

the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUAs) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs are 

expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. Other 

sustainability of other components - Value Addition and Youth entrepreneurship and Agro-



 

18 

Cooperatives Development for Employability are hinged on making paradigm shift of agriculture from 

development to business/commercial activities.  

4.4.2 The project is financially sustainable. The analysis indicates 23% and 26% FIRR and EIRR 

respectively. It is evident that the farmers will be able to pay for the water usage (which is currently 

estimated at KWA50, 000 per annum) through the Water User Association given that farmers will be 

linked to processors who will be ready to buy their products. In order to strengthen the relationships 

between the two parties,   provisions have been made for legal services. The project also makes 

provision for the training of artisans and technicians for the maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure.  

In addition regarding the irrigation infrastructure, marketing of value added products, provision of 

institutional support and development of strong farmer groups will work in synergy to ensure 

sustainability. In particular it is expected that, under AIYAP, the farmers who will be organized in 

Farmer Associations/Cooperative Societies will operate as farming businesses. Cooperative and 

Extension Officers will be recruited to provide technical supports in farms management, operation and 

maintenance.  The analysis also indicates that the young entrepreneurs will be able to service their loans, 

as well as obtain handsome net profits for re-investments in running of their farms.    

4.5 Risk management  

 

4.5.1 One major risk is the unpredictability of agricultural markets due to trade restrictions and price 

controls on some items. The Government is being urged by DPs, for instance to deregulate agriculture 

markets including removal of bans and pegging the price on some strategic crops such as maize.   

Enactment of the Goods Control Act would help to improve market predictability.  However, there is 

already a guaranteed market for sugarcane production by linking the farmers with Dwangwa Cane 

Growers Trust and Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd.     

4.5.2  Volatility of the world commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys accessibility to SADC market and the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: Project cost overruns due to exchange rate fluctuations, uncertainties in 

economic situation of Malawi and SADC and the rise in the cost of materials. 

Mitigation: Project is costed in USD and efficient procurement timing to address the increases, as well 

as adequate price contingencies for the unavoidable increases will is provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, increased temperature, change in length of rainy season, increased 

incidences of drought and floods, due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding vulnerabilities, assisting the communities to select various adaptation 

measures; e.g. rainwater harvesting, rotational grazing, using drought tolerant varieties e.g. cassava, 

sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions will be largely be in kind in form of provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salary and wages, allowances (including per diem of staff), payment of all utility bills, office 

equipment and payment of hotel bills for staff seconded to the project.  

 
4.6 Knowledge building  
 

4.6.1 The knowledge gained and lessons learnt through the implementation of various agricultural 

projects in Malawi, government policies as well as studies carried out in the sector have been duly 

applied in designing this project. Similarly, the knowledge that will be generated through 

implementation of this Project will be synergised with other projects on ground such as SIVAP and 

AISP to achieve maximum result. The results from the various studies and other surveys, including the 

socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired knowledge into 

practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit flows. 

 



 

19 

4.6.2 At the project level, the project implementation review, quarterly progress reports, audit, sector 

M&E and completion reports will also provide information on various aspects of the project for further 

diagnosis. The knowledge obtained will be shared within the Bank and with other development partners 

as well as with RMCs. 

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal instrument  

The Project will be financed by an ADF loan.  

5.2 Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement: The entry into force of 

the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 

12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loans and Guarantee Agreements of the ADF. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan: The obligation of the Bank to make 

the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon entry into force of Loan Agreement in 

accordance with 5.2.1 above and the submission by the Borrower of evidence in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the opening of a special account in a bank acceptable to the Bank into which 

the proceeds of the Loan will be deposited.   

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to: (a) establish a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU) within six months of the entry into force of the Loan Agreement.. 

 

5.2.4 Undertaking: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to implement the project in 

compliance with national legislations and in accordance with the Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) and submit to the Bank on an annual basis an acceptable 

Environmental and Social Monitoring Report. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  

 
VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposed ADF loan of UA16 million 

to the Government of Malawi for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 



 











































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

PROJECT: TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

COUNTRY : TANZANIA 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:   United Republic of Tanzania  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank 

 

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source UA Million USD Million Instrument 

African Development Fund 67.27 93.51 Loan 

 

 

ADF Key financing information 

     

Interest Rate  None 

Service Charge 0.75%   

Commitment Fee 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Grace Period 10 years  

  

Timeframe - Main Milestones 

 

Project concept note clearance 05 September 2016 

Project approval 14 December 2016 

Signing of loan agreement 31 January 2017 

Last repayment December 2057 

 



 

iii 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The objective of the present project, which involves a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) to be on-lent to the Tanzania 

Agricultural Development Bank (TADB), is to contribute to the development of the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania. The agriculture sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of Tanzania and has a 

very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land and the availability of inland water 

resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic 

development and poverty reduction. Specifically, in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable 

Development Goals and the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow 

at over 10% per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% per 

annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates have recently 

declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. A major problem facing the agriculture 

sector is the unavailability of medium to long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural 

production, processing and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-

needed funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from the ADF 

to the URT will be passed on to the TADB as a loan thereby enabling this institution to assist Tanzania in 

achieving its development goals by extending much-needed funding to the agriculture sector. 

Project Beneficiaries: Tanzania is heavily dependent on agriculture which accounts for 26% of GDP and 
35% of foreign currency earnings. The country has a dual agricultural economy, the smallholder farmers and 

the commercial/large-scale farmers. The smallholder farmers dominate the agriculture sector and account for 

most of the food produced in Tanzania. These farmers are expected to be the main beneficiaries of the project. 

The project will also benefit women as they represent the majority of the smallholder farmers in Tanzania. 

Women will benefit from having a portion of the funding specifically dedicated to them as well as from the 

establishment of a mentoring program to build and enhance their skills. The project will thus have positive social 

and gender pay-offs. 

Project Rationale: The project is consistent with the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which 

emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring basic food security, ii) improving 

household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. The National Five-Year Development Plan 

(FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture 

sector policies and strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the Southern Agricultural 

Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative, all call for increased commercialization of agriculture. The 

latest national development initiative, the Big Results Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the 

agriculture sector which are maize, rice and sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. 

The project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and strategies including: i) the Bank’s Country 

Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020), ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), iii) the Bank’s High 

5s, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18). 

Bank Value Added: The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national development finance 

institutions (DFIs) in Africa. Through this operation, the Bank Group will not only provide the United 

Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand 

its operations and outreach, but will also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI 

through the proposed technical assistance program (TA Program) which will be funded with a portion of the 

funds that will be made available to the TADB. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has 

fed into the design of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. 

Institutional Development and Knowledge Building: The project will add to the body of knowledge 

already acquired within the Bank Group following numerous interventions to support agriculture as well 

as DFIs across Africa. The Bank Group will ensure that knowledge from the operation is captured through 

adequate monitoring and evaluation of its outputs and outcomes, supervision missions, mid-term review, 

stakeholder consultations and project completion reports at the end of the operation. 



 

iv 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced growth rate of the 
agriculture sector and increased 

contribution to GDP. 

Annual growth rate of the of 
agriculture sector. 

 

Contribution of the agriculture 

sector to GDP. 

3.2% (Q2 2016). 

 

 

26% (Q2 2016). 

10% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

33% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

IMF’s Article IV Consultation 
Staff Reports. 

IMF’s World and Regional 

Economic Outlook reports. 

National Bureau of Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

S
 

Outcome 1. Increased income of 

farmers. 

Mean per capita income of 

farmers in the beneficiary areas. 

USD 466 p.a. USD 600 p.a. by 2020. Household and Economic 

Survey Reports. 

 

National Bureau of Statistics 
and ASDP. 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries. 

 

Tanzania Revenue Authority. 

Risks  

 The proceeds of the ADF loan not deployed successfully thereby 
jeopardizing the financial success of the project and the achievement of 

its development outcomes. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to the successful implementation of the TA 
Program and enhancing the capacity of its clients. 

 The TADB is expected to finance viable borrowers as a result of its TA-
enhanced lending operations. 

Outcome 2. Increased agricultural 

production and productivity 

(yields) of the targeted agriculture 
value chains. 

 

Note that the basis of the 
estimates are the baseline 

numbers and targets outlined in 

Tanzania’s Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP). 

Average annual productivity of 

maize (Metric tons per hectare, 

MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.6 of MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 40% by 2020. 

Total annual production of maize 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

6,734,438 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual productivity of 

paddy (MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.8 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 50% by 2020. 

Total annual production of paddy 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

1,681,125 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual yield of 

sunflower (MT/ha) 

Yield of 1.6 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 25% by 2020. 

Outcome 3. Increased exports. Volume of exported maize in 

metric tons. 

1,056,559 metric tons in 

2014 

Increase of 15% by 2020. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1. Funding extended to 

the agriculture sector from the 
proceeds of the ADF loan. 

Total volume of funding 

disbursed to the agriculture sector 
including the proportion 

benefitting women. 

NA At least UA 67.27 million 

disbursed including 20% 
specifically to women in 

agriculture. 

The financial statements and 

operational reports of the 
TADB. 

 

Bank Group regular supervision 
and monitoring reports. 

Risks 

 Insufficient demand for funding from the agriculture sector. 

 Consultants not recruited and TA Program not implemented. 

 Mentoring program not established and lack of interest from TADB’s 
larger clients to mentor women. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to strengthening its own capacity with the 
disbursement of the second tranche of the ADF loan conditional on the 

implementation of 2 of the 3 components of the TA Program. 

 The TADB is committed to building the capacity of its clients including 
through the proposed mentoring program for women. 

 TADB’s larger clients will be incentivized to mentor women. 

Output 2. Implementation of the 

TA Program for building the 

capacity of the TADB. 

Number of components of the TA 

Program implemented by the 

TADB. 

NA Full implementation of the 

TA Program including 

training of at least 50 staff. 

Output 3. Implementation of the 

mentoring program for women. 

Number of women benefitting 

from the mentoring program. 

NA At least 880 women 

benefitting from the 
mentoring program. 



 

v 

Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Provision of funding from the African Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania to support the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank. 

 

 Technical assistance program (TA Program) to build and strengthen the capacity of the TADB. 

INPUT: 

Funding from the ADF for an amount of UA 67.27 million to be passed on by 

the United Republic of Tanzania to the TADB as a loan. The terms and 

conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in line with those 
of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which will 

be Tanzanian Shilling. 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF 

TANZANIA TO SUPPORT THE TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 

BANK 

Management submits the following report and recommendation for a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) which will be on-lent to 

the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank (TADB). The loan is for an amount of UA 67.27 

million. The present appraisal report1 focuses principally on assessing the TADB since the 

proceeds of the ADF loan are to be passed on by the URT to this national development finance 

institution (DFI) in the form of a loan. The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to 

the TADB will be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan 

currency which will be Tanzanian Shilling. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. The agricultural sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of 
Tanzania2 and has a very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land3 

and the availability of inland water resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if 

Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. Specifically, 

in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 

Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow at over 10% 

per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% 

per annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates 

have recently declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. 

1.2. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of medium to 
long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural production, processing 

and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-needed 

funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from 

the ADF to the URT will be used to support the TADB thereby enabling this institution to assist 

Tanzania in achieving its development goals and inclusive growth by extending much-needed 

funding to the agricultural sector. 

1.3. The present project is aligned with Tanzania’s key priorities. In highlighting the 
importance of the agriculture sector and to address the challenges facing it, the Tanzania 

Development Vision 2025 emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring 

basic food security, ii) improving household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. 

                                                 

1 The present report has been prepared based on information provided by the URT and the TADB before, during 

and after the AfDB’s appraisal mission to Tanzania from the 5th to 8th of September 2016. During the mission, a 

series of meetings were held with senior government officials at the Ministry of Finance and Planning, Ministry 

of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Office of Treasury Registrar, Agriculture Council of Tanzania and the 

Bank of Tanzania. Extensive discussions were also held with the senior management and technical staff of the 

TADB. Furthermore, the appraisal report is informed by the lessons learnt from supporting similar projects in 

other African countries. 

2 The ongoing portfolio in Tanzania, as of September 2016, comprises 24 operations with total net commitment 

of UA 1.36 billion. The portfolio consists of 20 public sector operations and 4 private sector operations. Public 

sector operations (mostly infrastructure: transport, power and water supply and sanitation) represent 86.45% of 

the portfolio while private sector operations make up the remaining 13.55%. The ongoing operations are financed 

through various instruments. ADF loans account for 52% while AfDB public sector loans represent 27% and 

private sector loans account for 14%. ADF grants and various AfDB administered trust funds account for the 

remaining 7% of the financing. See Appendix II for additional information on the portfolio. 

3 Agricultural Land in Tanzania was last measured at 396,500 sq.km in 2016 (44.8% of total land area) versus 

369,744 sq.km in 2008 representing an increase of 7% over the period. 



 

2 

The National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the 

agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture sector policies and 

strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the 

Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative all call for increased 

commercialization of agriculture. The latest national development initiative, the Big Results 

Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the agriculture sector which are maize, rice and 

sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. One of the three “big 

ideas” for agriculture under the BRN is delivery of 25 commercial and out-grower investments, 

16 for sugar and 9 for rice. 

1.4. The present project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and 
strategies. These include: i) the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020) 

which calls for unlocking the country’s productive capacity to promote various key sectors 

including agriculture, ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly its operational 

focus areas (private sector development), areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food 

security) and the promotion of inclusive growth by offering support to smallholder farmers, iii) 

the Bank’s High 5s especially Industrialize Africa, Feed Africa and Improve the quality of life 

for Africans, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality. 

2. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

The Economy 

2.1. Tanzania’s economy is one of the fastest growing among large Sub-Saharan 
African countries (Figure 1). Real GDP growth is expected to remain around 7% in 2016 and 

2017 (in line with 2015), according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), supported by 

continued investment in infrastructure, manufacturing and tourism. Better availability and 

reliability of power supply, a rapidly expanding services sector and an improvement in the 

country’s terms of trade due to lower oil prices are also factors that are stimulating growth. 

Furthermore, Tanzania holds significant growth potential in every major sector of the economy, 

including agriculture, manufacturing, services, tourism and mining. GDP growth is expected 

to be driven by the construction, transport, communications and financial services sectors. 

Recent offshore natural gas discoveries are projected to expand the country’s export base and 

help to further diversify the economy. 

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate Forecast 

 

Sources: IMF, Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Moody’s Investors Service. 

2.2. Tanzania has been able to weather recent risk aversion to emerging markets and 
financial market volatility, which led to a 24% depreciation in the local currency against 

the US Dollar in 2015, thanks to its diversified economy and net oil import position. As a 



 

3 

net oil importer, Tanzania is benefitting from the decline in global oil prices, its external 

position has improved and lower pump prices are supporting domestic consumption and 

growth. 

2.3. Relatively low wealth levels and widespread poverty are constraints on economic 
growth. However, while significant infrastructure bottlenecks hamper the country’s full 

growth potential. Tanzania is also less competitive, has lower productivity and provides a less 

favorable business environment than some of its regional peers such as Kenya and Rwanda. 

The Banking Sector 

2.4. With total assets approaching TZS 28.5 trillion at end of 2015 (USD 13.08 billion), 
Tanzania’s banking sector is the seventh largest in sub-Saharan Africa, behind South 

Africa, Nigeria, Angola, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana. Banking assets rose at an annual rate 

of 21% between 2005 and 2015, compared with average nominal GDP growth of 17% over the 

same period. The banking system, however, remains small in a global and regional context. 

Banking system assets are estimated at around 31.3% of GDP as of December 2015 (Figure 2) 

due to low per capita income, fairly low banking penetration and low transaction volumes. 

Figure 2. Banking System Assets as a Percentage of GDP 

 
Sources: Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Bank of Tanzania. 

2.5. Lending growth grew at an annual rate of 27% between 2005 and 2015, with 
particularly high loan growth prior to 2009 levelling off to 21% over the past five years 

(Figure 3). The expansion covered most economic sectors, but the agricultural, hunting, 

forestry and fishing sectors have slowed recently to a five-year annual growth rate of 11%. 

Rapid growth continues in trade (25%), building, construction, real estate and leasing (32%), 

education (48%), health (53%), and mining and quarrying (52%). Personal and other services 

grew less aggressively over the past five years (20% annual growth rate), but have recently 

picked up with 46% growth in 2015 alone. 

Figure 3. Lending Growth Rates 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 



 

4 

2.6. Loan books cover a wide range of sectors and segments (Figure 4), a reflection of 
the diversification of the Tanzanian economy. 

Figure 4. Sector Composition as of December 2015 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 

2.7. The banking sector plays a dominant role in the financial system with banks 
having around a 71.3% market share as of the end of March 2016. Pension funds accounted 

for 26.5%, insurance companies for 1.9% and collective investment schemes for 0.5%. Four 

banks account for around half of system assets. These are: CRDB Bank, National Microfinance 

Bank, National Bank of Commerce and Standard Chartered Bank Tanzania. A total of 36 

commercial banks and 12 community banks operate in the country ensuring some level of 

competition. Concentration remains high, however, as smaller banks and community banks 

generally lack extensive branch networks and are unable to compete with larger banks, often 

leading to weaker financial profiles. 

2.8. Non-performing loans (NPLs), defined as 90 days past due, have remained high 
over the past few years, ranging between 6.5% and 9.3% of gross loans since 2011. Despite 

robust growth in the economy since then, NPLs remain elevated and stood at 8.4% of total 

loans as of March 2016. Weaknesses in certain economic sectors are to blame, including the 

inherently volatile agricultural sector which accounts for the highest NPLs. The agricultural 

sector is a top priority for development by the Government of Tanzania but problem loans are 

rife. This is due to the inherent volatility of the sector given its dependence on commodity 

prices and vulnerability to droughts. This, combined with a tendency for the commercial banks 

to extend loans with short-term maturities and high interest rates, results in a higher propensity 

to default in the agriculture sector compared to other sectors. In fact, the little funding that is 

currently offered to the agriculture sector is not considered as suitable given its high interest 

rates and short-term maturities and does not necessarily contribute to the development of the 

sector either as it does not provide the flexibility to accommodate the inherently seasonal and 

cyclical nature of agriculture. 

The Agriculture Sector 

2.9. Agriculture in Tanzania is an important sector of the economy as it accounts for 
26% of the country’s GDP and employs 67% of its population. The sector is also an 

important source of export revenues. Despite its significance to livelihoods and to the overall 

economy, the agriculture sector remains hampered by widespread underinvestment. As a result 

it continues to operate largely at subsistence levels and its potential to bring commercialization 

to scale remains for the most part unrealized. 



 

5 

2.10. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of finance 
(particularly medium to long-term) to support agricultural production, processing and 

marketing. As of December 2015, a mere 8% of commercial banks’ lending went to the sector 

with most of which went to large companies operating in Tanzania. As a result of this 

underinvestment, production in the agriculture sector has not increased significantly over the 

past decades. 

2.11. In Tanzania, there is huge potential to produce both food and non-food crops for 
the domestic and export markets if access to term (medium to long-term) finance is 

improved. The availability of such finance will enable farmers to reduce their exposure to the 

cyclicality and seasonality of agriculture, to make investments in crops with long gestations 

periods and to acquire farm machinery and inputs, irrigation equipment, storage and processing 

facilities thereby transforming the sector and increasing its contribution towards economic 

growth. Access to term finance is critical for the growth of the agriculture sector and the shift 

from subsistence to commercial agricultural production. 

2.12. The commercial banks in Tanzania are reluctant to expand their lending to the 
agriculture sector which they view as risky. This deprives the sector of the much-needed 

funds to boost production, processing and marketing. The commercial banks tend to fund 

themselves with short-term deposits limiting their incentive to extend term finance to a sector 

that they consider as risky although it is not necessarily more risky than other sectors, it is just 

that these banks, having found their niches, have not done enough to adequately structure their 

lending to the sector taking into account risk factors such as seasonal variations which can be 

addressed through the provision of medium to long-term lending. It is against this background, 

and for sustainable economic growth in the country that, the Government of Tanzania has 

decided to establish the TADB so as to address the observed bottlenecks and enhance access 

to credit in the agriculture sector. The TADB has been established as a national DFI with a key 

role of being a catalyst for delivery of credit facilities for the development of agriculture in 

Tanzania. However, the TADB alone cannot satisfy the significant demand for credit of the 

entire sector and this is why it aims to focus on particular actors as well as on a set of high 

potential value chains in which investments can produce results within a short timeframe. The 

TADB will also take a holistic approach and finance the entire value chain namely production, 

processing and marketing. 

2.13. It is worth noting that in 2005, the Government of Tanzania implemented the 
recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) of the IMF 

which was undertaken in 2003. It was recognized that lack of long-term financing was among 

the stumbling blocks in the growth of the economy. Among the activities that were earmarked 

for implementation was the establishment of development finance institutions to provide long-

term financing to key economic sectors including agriculture. This led to the establishment of 

a number of credit schemes while the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) was transformed into a 

development finance institution with an agricultural financing window albeit not sufficient to 

address the needs of the agriculture sector hence the establishment of the TADB. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the needs of the agriculture sector in Tanzania provides a 

strong justification for Government intervention particularly through a dedicated DFI whose 

mandate is to specifically serve the agriculture sector. 

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

3.1. As previously stated, among the major problems facing the agriculture sector in 
Tanzania is the availability and cost of term finance to support agricultural production, 

processing and marketing. As of December 2015, credit to the agriculture sector accounted 

for only 8% of total lending by the commercial banks. Most of this lending was to large 

enterprises operating in the sector. In fact, despite rapid growth of the financial sector in 



 

6 

Tanzania, access to credit and other financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in 

the agriculture sector especially the smallholder farmers for whom funding from the banks is 

simply out of reach. This essentially underlines the rationale for public intervention as the 

financial system has not been able to adequately address gaps in the provision of finance to the 

agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

3.2. The Bank Group is to intervene to provide resources from the African 
Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania which will utilize the borrowed 

resources to extend a loan to the TADB which is a state-owned DFI established as part of 

the second pillar of the country’s Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009. The TADB, whose 

design has been informed by an in-depth review of global experiences relating to successful 

national DFIs, is meant to play a critical role in alleviating the financing constraints that hamper 

the growth of Tanzania’s agriculture sector. 

3.3. The TADB was officially launched and started operations in 2015. It is structured 
to deliver medium and long-term funding through wholesale and direct lending as well as 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments to address the financing gaps in the agriculture value 

chains. 

3.4. The TADB has been focusing on a set of high potential value chains within the 
national priorities. The fourteen value chains of focus fall under eight agriculture sub-sectors 

as follows: cereals (maize and rice), industrial commodities (sugarcane and cashew nuts), 

oilseeds (sunflower and sesame), horticulture (vegetables, fruits and spices), livestock (diary 

and beef), poultry, fisheries and forestry. Overtime, the TADB will support other value chains 

as more funds are made available to it including from the ADF. 

3.5. The TADB will predominantly target smallholder farmers who carry out essential 
agricultural-related economic activities within the value chains of focus (understanding 

that serving the smallholder farmers directly will be challenging, the TADB aims to reach 

them through their farmer organizations). These farmers will be targeted through funding 

as well as technical assistance which the TADB will implement by working closely with 

Business Development Services (BDS) providers across Tanzania. The ultimate objective in 

doing so is to enable these farmers to make the transition from subsistence to commercial 

farming in an effective and sustainable manner. That said, the TADB will also target other 

medium and large scale farmers as well as the agro-processors, among others. Furthermore, the 

TADB will finance infrastructure development for irrigation, storage/warehousing and 

transport. 

3.6. The pricing of TADB’s facilities will take into account its developmental mandate 
as well as the objective of maintaining sustainable operations. This national DFI will aim 

to extend funding with affordable interest rates for agriculture production, processing and value 

addition. As part of its mandate to develop agriculture, it will aim to maintain low interest rates 

for the smallholder farmers based on its cost of funds plus a sufficient margin to cover operating 

expenses and generate a profit to facilitate sustainability of operations. Given that smallholder 

farmers are potentially one of Tanzania’s most powerful sources of economic growth, the 

TADB will thus contribute to inclusive growth as well as sustained poverty alleviation. The 

provision of long-term funding in local currency to the smallholder farmers will also have a 

positive impact on affordability. Extending loan tenors will have a beneficial impact on the 

cash flows of the borrowers, thus allowing them to expand their borrowing capacity and 

businesses. For the larger clients, the TADB will extend financing on market confirming terms, 

nevertheless. This is important as sustainability is paramount and the viability of the products 

that the TADB provides will be crucial to its success. 

 

 



 

7 

3.7. The TADB is currently wholly-owned by the Government of Tanzania and is run 
by a board comprised mostly of independent non-executive directors appointed through 

a competitive process. The board has three committees namely the board business committee, 

the board human resource and administration committee and the board audit, risk and 

compliance committee. Each committee is assigned specific focus areas and specialized 

functions in the operations of the TADB. The managing director is in charge of the TADB’s 

day-to-day affairs supported by a senior management team. The TADB has begun operations 

with 45 staff and expects to continue recruiting staff based on the needs and expansion of 

business operations to reach a total of 150 by 2020. The TADB operates from its head office 

in Dar es Salaam and overtime expects to open a number of offices in relevant areas of the 

country for reaching out to potential customers. Finally, its structure is as follows: 

 

Figure 5. Organization Structure 

 

3.8. The TADB’s authorized share capital is Tanzania Shilling (TZS) 800 billion (USD 
367.16 million). In order to enable the TADB to start carrying out its functions, the 

Government of Tanzania has so far injected TZS 60 billion (USD 27.54 million) as its initial 

capital contribution. However, this limited funding base is hindering the TADB’s ability to 

fully achieve its objectives including extending medium to long-term loans to the agriculture 

sector especially the loans needed for infrastructure development. It is against this background 

that the URT is requesting a loan from the ADF in an amount of UA 67.27 million (USD 93.51 

million, TZS 204.38 billion) whose proceeds will be on-lent to the TADB thereby enabling it 

to expand its operations and outreach. 

 



 

8 

3.9. The borrowed funds are expected to be deployed by the TADB towards funding a 
technical assistance program (TA Program) and supporting complementary activities 

which are expected to have a positive impact on productivity in the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania: 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agricultural infrastructure 
development (e.g. warehousing facilities and irrigation schemes to provide reliable 

access to water to absorb shocks caused by climatic variability); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for access to agricultural inputs 
(financing access to quality seeds, fertilizers and pesticides); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding to agro-processing industries; 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agro-mechanization (e.g. 
tractors, harvesters and irrigation equipment); and 

 Building resilience and capacity to absorb costs by having a portion of the funds 
invested in low risk/high return instruments in order to absorb the high transaction costs 

associated with financing smallholder agriculture at low interest rates. 

3.10. The TADB has been established to promote the transformation of the agriculture 
sector from subsistence to commercial farming by offering loans to the sector at 

affordable interest rates. Affordable interest rates have been identified to be a key driver to 

unlock the potentials of smallholder farmers. The agricultural sector in Tanzania has been 

characterized with low returns and therefore low interest rates for loans are needed to assist in 

enabling start up projects to take off. Lending at low interest rates to the smallholder farmers 

can nevertheless restrict the ability of the TADB to generate profits and can also result into 

operating losses which can deplete capital and endanger the long-term sustainability of the 

institution. To address this issue, the TADB intends to deploy the following measures in order 

to preserve capital and ensure funding sustainability: 

 Adequate pricing of loans to ensure that the overall yields remain positive: The 
TADB intends to recover all costs of financial intermediation (including administrative 

expenses, borrowing costs and provisions against expected losses) and to earn an 

appropriate return on capital. In its pricing policy, the TADB will charge a margin over 

the base rate plus fees and commissions to recover the administrative and operating 

costs incurred in generating, implementing and monitoring a loan as well as the cost of 

capital employed. While the smallholder farmers will be charged low interest rates, the 

TADB expects to compensate for this by charging the larger clients interest rates that 

are essentially market confirming. This cross-subsidization will enable the TADB to 

assist the smallholder farmers while generating positive returns to ensure sustainability. 

In addition, the TADB will diversify its portfolio by placing a small portion of its funds 

in government securities that offer risk free returns. Such diversification will lower the 

risk profile of the TADB’s portfolio while at the same time enhance its return; and 

 Moderating and controlling the issuance of new loans and advances: Issuance of 
new loans and advances will be subject to the availability of funding and compliance 

with existing capital adequacy regulations which require banks not to increase their risk 

weighted assets above the regulatory thresholds in relation to the size of core capital. 

In order to ensure compliance, the TADB’s Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) 

will continually review its liquidity and capital adequacy and ascertain its ability to 

continue with the issuance of new loans. The TADB may temporarily withhold issuance 

of new loans and advances if liquidity and capital adequacy ratios are breached and if 

other circumstances are deemed necessary such as a deteriorating loan portfolio and 

high level of non-performing loans. 



 

9 

3.11. Furthermore, the TADB’s funding strategy has been developed in order to outline 
the potential sources of funding. While commercial banks mainly rely on short-term customer 

deposits as the key source of funding, the TADB’s funding will come from the main 

shareholder and from concessionary borrowings from international DFIs, at least in the first 

few years of operations. This will contribute to ensuring that the TADB’s funds are low-cost 

putting it in a position to extend affordable loans to its target beneficiaries particularly the 

smallholder farmers to whom funding must be affordable to pursue profitable agriculture 

activities to transform their lives into improved standards. 

Technical Assistance 

3.12. As agreed with the TADB and the Tanzanian authorities during the appraisal 
mission, a portion of the proposed funding of UA 1.0 million (equivalent to USD 1.39 

million) will be utilized to fund a TA Program to further enhance and strengthen the 

capacity of this institution. The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national 

development finance institutions in Africa. Through this present project, the Bank Group will 

not only provide the United Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to 

further support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand its operations and outreach, but will 

also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI through the proposed 

TA Program. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has fed into the design 

of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. The main 

components are provided below and are based on a preliminary assessment of the TADB. 

However, once the funds are disbursed, the TADB will be expected to implement the TA 

Program beginning with a thorough needs assessments to further fine-tune the list of areas that 

need to be enhanced and strengthened. That said, the below components will serve as a good 

guide for implementation: 

 Component 1: Process and System Improvements 

This will include support to the TADB in key areas such as asset and liability 

management, risk management, corporate and capital planning, credit underwriting, 

risk based pricing, product development and costing and the enhancement and/or 

development of relevant strategies, procedures, policies and guidelines (especially 

those that relate to internal control systems and audit, code of conduct, financial 

management and accounting and procurement); 

 Component 2: Information Technology (IT) 

This component will cover the IT needs of the TADB in terms of banking software and 

systems in order to enhance outputs and functionalities. It will also cover the TADB’s 

IT infrastructure and management information system (MIS) for portfolio management 

and monitoring including the tracking of the development outcomes of its lending 

activities; and 

 Component 3: Building staff capacity 

This component will entail training staff in key areas such as risk analysis, risk 

management, credit underwriting, asset and liability management, use of new IT/MIS 

and environmental and social risks management. Evidently, the needs assessment will 

provide a more comprehensive list of the needs of the staff of the TADB. Further, to 

ensure maximum impact for this component, the training that will be provided to the 

staff of the TADB will be done primarily on the premises of the TADB or on location 

in Dar es Salaam as to ensure that: i) most of the staff are trained and ii) that the 

resources of this component are not unnecessarily spent on travel. 

 



 

10 

3.13. The TA Program is designed to strengthen the capacity of the TADB. This is 
intended to contribute to building a sound banking business so that this national DFI is not only 

used as an intermediary to channel financing to the agriculture sector in Tanzania, but also to 

build institutional development of a DFI to enable sustainable lending and provide a strong 

demonstration effect. 

Gender Impact 

3.14. Tanzania’s constitution guarantees equality of men and women and supports 
women’s full participation in social, economic and political life. The Government of 

Tanzania has also taken steps to mainstream gender perspectives in sector policies, strategies 

and programs. In agriculture, even though the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative does not specifically 

address gender, pillar 8 of its implementation framework (Science, Technology and Human 

Resources for Kilimo Kwanza) calls for mainstreaming gender in Kilimo Kwanza and 

developing programs to strengthen the position of women in agriculture. 

3.15. Agriculture is a major source of livelihood for most rural populations in Tanzania. 
Women comprise a large proportion of the agricultural labor force yet women farmers are 

consistently found to be less productive than male farmers. There are several barriers that 

hinder their performance. These include limited access to finance as well as inadequate skills 

to run and manage operations and businesses. This project is therefore expected to contribute 

to narrowing the financing gap for women in the agriculture sector while also enhancing their 

skills and capacity. 

3.16. During the appraisal mission, the mission team emphasized the need for the TADB 
to continue targeting and supporting women as beneficiaries considering their critical 

role in the agriculture sector. More concretely, following discussions with the TADB, it has 

been agreed that the project will include the following key actions to support women in 

agriculture: 

 As the TADB scales up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania through the 
mobilized ADF funds, at least 20% of these resources will be specifically dedicated 

by it towards supporting women in agriculture. This is in addition to the already 

existing access by women to funding from the TADB (i.e. the remaining 80% will still 

go to both men and women); 

 The TADB will put in place a mentoring program for women in agriculture to 
enhance their technical, farming and managerial skills. The mentoring would 

consist of linking women with the TADB’s larger and more experienced clients from 

whom they can benefit and learn. That said, for the mentoring to work, it is critical to 

put in place an effective incentivization scheme for the mentors including, but not 

limited to, small reductions in their cost of borrowing; and 

 At the institutional level, while the TADB has designated a staff member as a 
gender champion, this action is not supported by an institutional policy or 

strategy. During the appraisal mission, it was established that the TADB’s credit policy 

does not explicitly mention women. To address these gaps, the TADB will develop a 

gender policy that will guide how it addresses gender issues internally and externally 

with its clients. Furthermore, the TADB will review its credit policy to reflect its 

commitment to advancing the empowerment of women. The Bank Group will support 

the TADB to develop a Gender Policy which will need to be in place prior to the 

disbursement of the funds. 

 

 



 

11 

Social Issues 

3.17. The funds to be provided to the TADB are expected to contribute towards 
economic empowerment of small scale farmers, entrepreneurship and employment 

creation. These funds are expected to contribute to growth of small businesses, income 

generation, household savings and a surge in value addition activities. The TADB maintains a 

tiered pricing framework whereby it provides funding at low interest rates to the smallholder 

farmers while it charges more to the larger and more established corporate entities in the 

agriculture sector. This cross-subsidization enables the TADB to provide affordable funding to 

the smaller farmers while generating sufficient income to sustain its business. Financial literacy 

among rural farmers and especially women has been identified as a major challenge and the 

TADB is in the process of setting up a technical assistance fund which will focus on capacity 

development for the small farmers. 

Environment Impact 

3.18. The project has been classified as Category FI-B in line with the Bank Group’s 
assessment procedures. The TADB’s portfolio and the proposed investments to be supported 

with financing from the ADF are considered medium risk with limited adverse environmental 

or social impacts that are largely reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures. 

3.19. At the request of the AfDB and with its guidance and input, the TADB has 
developed and approved an Environmental and Social (E&S) Policy and an 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which will provide the 

procedures and workflow that will be followed for each investment by the institution to 

manage all levels of environmental and social risks. The proposed investments will be 

screened, reviewed and evaluated against national laws and regulations, the Bank Group’s 

Exclusion List and Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) as well as other applicable performance 

standards or safeguard requirements (specifically those pertinent to the agriculture sector 

including land issues, water management, pollution and climate risks). 

Lessons Learned Reflected in Project Design 

3.20. The AfDB has learned numerous lessons from its work with national and regional 
DFIs from across Africa as well as in its experience providing technical assistance 

programs. These lessons, and the manner in which they have been taken into account in the 

current operation, are: 

Lesson How it will be addressed 

National DFIs across Africa face common 

challenges including: 

 Emphasis placed on loan approvals and 
disbursements over loan quality resulting in 

high non-performing loans 

 Weak administrative systems, procedures 
and reporting systems; and 

 Insufficient human resource capacity. 

The proposed technical assistance program is 

expected to contribute to achieving the 

following key objectives: 

 Enhanced credit underwriting processes 
and skills; 

 Improved IT and management information 
systems for portfolio reporting and 

monitoring; and 

 Skilled staff through relevant trainings. 

3.21. In addition to the above, during the appraisal mission, extensive discussions were 
held with the senior management of the TADB as well as with government officials on the 

need to ensure that the institution, which is newly established, is encouraged to operate 

based on internationally recognized good practice principles that are considered as key 

for success and long-term sustainability. These principles have been identified by the AfDB 

as well as sister institutions such as the World Bank and include: 



 

12 

 While the TADB is currently owned by the Government of Tanzania, it was 
favorably noted that the aim of the authorities, over the medium to long-term, is 

to attract reputable investors to be shareholders in the institution. This is important 

as the shareholding structures of DFIs are moving away from 100% state ownership 

towards mixed public-private capital structures. This will be expected to strengthen the 

governance of the TADB. It was also noted that the governance of the TADB has been 

designed with a board of directors that is predominately composed of independent 

directors selected based on a competitive process. Indeed, as per the TADB’s 

memorandum and articles of association (MEMARTS), the board is designed to consist 

of between 7 and 9 directors, the majority of whom meant to be non-executive and non-

government officials. As per the MEMARTS, the directors are also to be selected to be 

qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, expertise, integrity and 

stature. This is key as it contributes to enhancing performance and minimizing political 

interference. The governance of the TADB was thoroughly discussed, including with 

senior government officials, and it was agreed to ensure independence of both the 

management and the board with their recruitment based on merit only; 

 The need to ensure that the TADB is operationally and financially sustainable with 
overall pricing that reflects costs and credit risk. While the smallholder farmers will 

be provided with funding that is concessional, the TADB will make up for this by 

charging its larger borrowers interest rates that will be market-conforming as well as 

funding itself with low cost liabilities which will help in absorbing the high transaction 

costs associated with serving the smallholder farmers; 

 The importance of putting in place strong administrative systems, procedures, 
policies and guidelines and this is what the TA Program will address. The TA 

Program will also address staff capacity and skills; 

 The importance of avoiding credit misallocation and politically motivated lending 
and to this end, it was agreed that the funding to be provided to the TADB will not 

be utilized for onward lending to ineligible persons. Advancing loans to them will 

lead to automatic acceleration of the loan and cancellation of undisbursed amounts4; 

 During the appraisal mission, it was noted that the TADB is subject to prudential 
regulation and supervision by the Bank of Tanzania under its guidelines for 

development finance institutions. This was also viewed positively as independent 

regulation and supervision by the financial sector regulator rather than a line ministry 

with conflicts of interest enforces disciplined management; and 

 In addition, it was agreed that the TADB should aim as much as possible to operate 
as a wholesale lending institution as international experience has shown that 

wholesale-only development finance institutions that provide funding through 

                                                 
4 Ineligible Persons means the following persons who are ineligible to access funding extended with the proceeds of 

the ADF loan: 

a) Politically Exposed Persons defined as: head of state or head of government and their deputies, if any; cabinet 
minister of central or local government; member of a legislature of central or local government; deputy minister 

or equivalent rank; ambassador or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador; military officer with a rank of general 

or above; chief executive officer of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank; head of a government agency; 

judge; and senior official of a political party represented in a central state or local government legislature; 

b) Civil servants with the position of director, or its equivalent, and above employed by central, state or local 
government; 

c) Directors and senior management of the TADB; and 

d) Any related parties of the persons falling under clauses a) through c) above. 



 

13 

eligible financial institutions5 perform better than those that engage in retail 

operations. A wholesale approach is particularly appropriate with respect to financing 

underfunded segments. Retail development finance institutions are also perceived by 

their retail borrowers as entities that do not need to be repaid as they are owned by 

governments. While the TADB has been established to focus principally on wholesale 

lending activities, it is currently carrying out retail lending although it is expected to 

move towards wholesale lending as more funding is provided to it. The TADB is 

committed to this and will ensure that the funding from the ADF is extended through 

eligible financial institutions. It is worth noting that while extending funding through 

wholesale lending, the TADB will work with financial institutions which will be 

incentivized to enter the agriculture sector or expand service to it by augmenting their 

capacity and by providing them with long-term funding combined with technical 

assistance to increase the attractiveness of the agriculture sector and/or make 

commercial bank credit feasible. Thus, rather than replacing markets, the TADB will 

enhance them by providing term financing to financial institutions for on-lending 

(providing maturities that are otherwise unavailable to the financial institutions) and 

technical assistance to strengthen the financial institutions’ capacity to serve the 

agriculture sector. Furthermore, by working with such financial institutions, the 

TADB’s capital will essentially be protected as the capital of the financial institutions 

will stand between the TADB and any credit losses6.  

3.22. It is worth highlighting that the TADB has been incorporated as a public limited 
company under the Companies Act no. 2 of 2002 and not through an act of parliament. 
This is key for avoiding political interference since the key reporting relationship will be with 

the shareholders and not with the national assembly and the presidency as is the case when the 

establishment of a company is through an Act of Parliament. Furthermore, as stated earlier, 

while the Government of Tanzania is currently the sole shareholder, their intention is to bring 

in additional equity investors overtime so that the shareholding structure of the TADB moves 

away from 100% state ownership towards a mixed public-private capital structure. If this is 

achieved, the governance of the institution will be further strengthened. 

4. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 

Procurement Arrangements 

4.1. All procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance 
with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations and Methodology for 

its Implementation, dated October 2015. The various activities under the TA Program of the 

equivalent of UA 1 million involve the procurement of both goods and consultancy services. 

In the case of consultancy services, the procurement will be carried out on the basis of the 

                                                 
5 The following are minimum eligibility criteria for the financial institutions: i) must be duly licensed and at least 

two years in operation, ii) owners and board of directors should be “fit and proper”, iii) must have qualified and 

experienced management, adequate organization and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile, iv) must be 

in “good standing” with its supervisory authority and remain in compliance at all times, v) must have well defined 

policies and written procedures for management of all types of financial risks, vi) x) must have adequate internal 

audits and controls for its specific risk profile and vii) must have adequate management information systems. 

6 While extending funding through financial institutions, the TADB will need to ensure that the end beneficiaries 

(especially the smallholder farmers) are able to gain access to funding that is affordable in addition to having long 

tenors. To this end, the TADB will explore various mechanisms including auctioning credit to the financial 

institutions especially those serving the smallholder farmers. In order to put competitive pressure on the spreads 

offered by the financial institutions to the final borrowers, the TADB’s interest rates will be determined by an 

auction process under which the financial institutions will compete on the basis of the spreads they propose to 

offer to their borrowers. This innovative approach will ensure that the affordability of the funds being extended 

by the TADB. 



 

14 

Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) method. In particular, the TADB will be required to 

select and engage consultant(s) based on a transparent and competitive process, including well 

developed terms of reference, international advertising, short-listing and a robust evaluation 

process. An evaluation report prepared by the TADB will have to be accepted by the Bank 

Group within 14 calendar days, before recruiting the consultant(s). The procurement of goods, 

related to the IT upgrades component of the TA Program, will need to conform to established 

commercial practices acceptable to the Bank Group so that such procedures result in 

competitive market prices for the goods. The TADB will need to ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures which will be periodically reviewed for compliance. For 

the rest of the funding, the procurement of goods, works and services by the TADB’s target 

beneficiaries will need to conform to established commercial practices acceptable to the Bank 

Group so that such procedures result in competitive market prices for the goods, works and 

services and meet the needs of the TADB’s beneficiaries. The TADB will ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures and the Bank Group will periodically review the TADB’s 

compliance in ensuring that such procedures are followed by its target beneficiaries. 

Monitoring, Financial Management and Audit Arrangements 

4.2. The Bank Group conducted an assessment on the adequacy of the financial 
management systems of the TADB, the Executing Agency, based on the Bank’s 2014 

Financial Management Implementation Guidelines and concluded that the overall risk is 

Moderate. The TADB will be monitored, supervised and evaluated regularly by the Bank 

Group. It will prepare annual financial statements in accordance with International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS). The financial statements will include in the notes to the accounts 

the disbursement of the proceeds of the ADF loan by the URT to the TADB and will be audited 

by the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) or a private audit firm appointed by the CAG in 

accordance with the United Republic of Tanzania statutory requirements by applying 

International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions which are acceptable by the Bank. 

Within six months after the end of each financial year, the TADB will be required to submit a 

copy of its audited financial statements together with the management letter on the weaknesses 

identified by the auditors and the TADB’s management responses and implementation plan of 

the auditor’s recommendations. Furthermore, the TADB is licensed and supervised by the 

central bank and required to meet prudential requirements as regards to capital adequacy, loan 

provisioning and recognition of loan losses as well as other relevant regulations. These will be 

regularly verified by the Bank Group. Relevant to this, the URT should ensure that the TADB 

at all times maintains in full force and effect an operating license from the central bank and all 

such other consents, licenses, approvals, authorizations and exemptions required under the laws 

of Tanzania for the TADB to carry out its business and perform its obligations under this 

present project.  

Sustainability 

4.3. The TADB’s viability is viewed positively for a number of reasons including its 
sound corporate governance and prudent lending strategy. Also, as an institution that is 

expected to focus principally on wholesale lending, this will contribute to preserving the quality 

of its assets and capital. Further, the TADB will be subject to limited liquidity risk as it funds 

itself through long-term funding and not through short-term deposits. In addition, the TADB 

will be subject to prudential regulation and supervision by the central bank, which will enforce 

requirements similar to those applied to commercial banks. Furthermore, the proposed 

technical assistance program will play a key role in strengthening the capacity and enhancing 

the performance of the institution. 

 

 



 

15 

4.4. The long-term sustainability and success of the TADB hinge on its ability to 
mobilize additional capital from the Government7 and other investors as well as low-cost 

debt liabilities from international DFIs. To fund itself, the TADB will also explore the 

possibility of issuing bonds in the local capital market after building a track record of operations 

and thoroughly assessing the market conditions to establish the depth of liquidity as these will 

influence the success rates and costs of the bonds. The importance of mobilizing low cost 

funding is fully recognized by the TADB as articulated in its funding strategy. This, combined 

with its determination to generate positive returns from its lending activities, should ensure that 

any advantage that may accrue to the TADB in being able to fund itself with low cost liabilities 

be accrued by it as a contribution to its equity. 

Risk Management 

4.5. Potential risks are rated as mostly Medium and are expected to be mitigated as 
outlined below: 

 

Potential Risk Rating Mitigation Measures 

High operational costs 

associated with reaching 

out to smallholder 

farmers. 

Medium The TADB will implement measures to minimize costs including reaching smallholder 

farmers through wholesale lending by working with eligible financial institutions and 

developing innovative products and services such as mobile banking. 

Impact of lending at low 

interest rates on financial 

sustainability. 

Medium The TADB is fully aware of the importance of sustainability and while the smallholder 

farmers will be supported with affordable loans, the institution will aim to balance its 

portfolio by also targeting larger clients to whom the funds will be priced based on market 

confirming terms. Additionally, the TADB will invest a portion of its funds in low 

risk/high return government securities to further support the cross subsidization of the 

smallholder farmers. Finally, the TADB expects to continue funding itself through the 

mobilization of low-cost funds. 

The TADB unable to 

effectively intermediate 

the funds extended to it. 

Medium The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two equal tranches 

to ensure that it is able to absorb the resources made available to it and effectively 

intermediate them. 

The TA Program is not 

implemented properly by 

the TADB. 

Low to 

Medium 

The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two tranches and 

the disbursement of the second tranche will be conditional on the TADB having 

successfully implemented two of the three components of the TA Program. The TADB is 

also strongly committed to ensuring that the TA Program is successfully implemented. 

Funds extended to 

ineligible persons. 

Low to 

Medium 

The TADB will be required to ensure that the funds are not on-lent to ineligible persons. 

Lending to such persons will result in the accelerated repayment of the ADF loan. 

Political capture of the 

TADB.  

Medium 

to High 

This risk is primarily managed with an innovative governance structure. While the TADB 

will be majority government-owned, its MEMARTS provides that the majority of 

directors should be non-executive and non-government officials chosen based on a 

competitive and transparent process. Cognizant that governance failures contributed to 

thwarting the effectiveness of existing DFIs across Africa, the Tanzanian authorities are 

fully committed to a robust governance structure for the TADB. In addition to providing 

comfort as regards the strategic direction of the TADB, the MEMARTS requires that the 

directors should be qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, 

expertise, integrity and stature. The TADB will also be subject to regulation, licensing 

and supervision by the central bank, thus further strengthening the governance 

arrangements as well as due diligence as regards to its operational and financial capacity. 

Finally, the Bank Group will ensure continuous supervision of all key operational aspects 

to ensure good governance.  

                                                 
7 While the Government is committed to injecting additional equity into the TADB, it must scale up its efforts. 

The TADB’s MEMARTS provides that the initial paid-up capital of the institution is TZS 100 billion to be raised 

gradually to TZS 800 billion. The Government will need to significantly scale up its efforts to mobilize additional 

equity for the TADB to ensure that it complies with the MEMARTS. 



 

16 

Knowledge Building 

4.6. The present operation is expected to generate considerable knowledge and 
experience that will add value and build up lessons for the design and management of 

similar projects across Africa. The lessons learnt will be documented including those on 

supporting smallholder farmers especially women. Bank supervision missions, quarterly and 

annual progress reports, mid-term review, audit and completion reports will also provide an 

opportunity to capture knowledge on relevant aspects of this project. As a new institution, the 

TADB will benefit from working with the Bank Group to learn about its procedures and 

safeguards which it can incorporate to enhance itself. The Bank Group will share the lessons 

learnt from the experience of implementing this project in Tanzania. 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. The proceeds of the loan from the African Development Fund to be provided to 
the United Republic of Tanzania will be made available to the TADB by way of a loan in 

accordance with the Bank Group’s On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; 

ADF/BD/WP/90/38). The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will 

be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which 

will be Tanzanian Shilling. This structure is essentially innovative as it enables the Bank Group 

to support a national development finance institution without being exposed to the risks that 

would be associated with direct lending to such an institution. Plus, it is deploying a debt 

instrument to a country whose credit rating is much better than the rating that would be 

applicable to a direct loan to the beneficiary institution. 

5.2. The legal instrument to be used for this project is a loan agreement between the 
United Republic of Tanzania and the African Development Fund. This loan agreement will 

enter into force subject to fulfilment by the United Republic of Tanzania of the provisions of 

section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to the African Development Fund Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements. 

5.3. The ADF loan will be extended to the URT and its proceeds transferred by the 
URT to the TADB as a loan on the same terms and conditions (except for the loan 

currency). The URT will sign a loan agreement with the ADF while the URT and the TADB 

will sign an on-lending agreement. 

5.4. The proceeds of the ADF loan will be disbursed in two equal tranches upon 
fulfillment of agreed disbursement triggers. The obligation of the African Development Fund 

to make the disbursement of the first tranche will be conditional upon entry into force of the loan 

agreement and the submission by the URT and the TADB of evidence of the fulfillment of the 

following conditions, each in form and substance satisfactory to the African Development Fund: 

 The opening by the United Republic of Tanzania of a special United States Dollar 
denominated account at the central bank of Tanzania for the deposit of the proceeds of the 

ADF loan. The opening of the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank 

confirming that the said account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 The opening by the TADB of a special Tanzanian Shilling denominated account at the 
central bank of Tanzania for the deposit by the URT of the proceeds of its loan to the TADB 

(the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in local currency meaning that the URT will 

take on the foreign exchange risk to which the TADB will not be exposed). The opening of 

the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank confirming that the said 

account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 An on-lending agreement between the URT and the TADB, relating to the loan from 
the URT to the TADB whose amount is equal to the loan from the ADF to the URT, in 

form and substance acceptable to the ADF, has been duly executed by the parties thereto. 



 

17 

The execution of the on-lending agreement shall be supported by a legal opinion issued to 

the ADF by a legal counsel acceptable to the ADF confirming that the on-lending 

agreement between the TADB and the URT, has been duly authorized, ratified and 

executed on behalf of the URT and the TADB and constitutes legal, valid and binding 

obligation of such parties; and 

 The TADB has adopted a Gender Policy in form and substance acceptable to the 
African Development Fund. 

5.5. The obligation of the ADF to disburse the second tranche of the ADF loan will be 
conditional on the following conditions: 

 Submission by the TADB of evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the AfDB 
Group, that it has successfully implemented components 1 and 2 of the TA Program (noting 

that component 3 involves training staff which is a continuous activity). By linking the 

disbursement of the second tranche to the implementation of the TA Program, the Bank 

Group will be in a position to exercise due diligence as regards to progress; and 

 Supervision by the Bank Group of the utilization of the first tranche of the ADF loan 
and satisfaction that the funds were effectively deployed including towards supporting 

women through funding and the proposed mentoring program. 

5.6. In addition, for the disbursement of the two tranches of the ADF loan, the United 
Republic of Tanzania will be required to ensure that the funds are passed on to the TADB 

within a maximum of 14 calendar days of the URT receiving the funds from the ADF. 
Any delays will result in calls for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the ADF 

loan. Additional events that may call for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the 

ADF loan will include the following: i) violation of signed agreements or regulations affecting 

the ability of the TADB to fulfill its mandate or that affect its financial sustainability, ii) the 

TADB’s license has been withdrawn, revoked, amended or suspended, or its renewal has been 

withheld, so as to materially and adversely affect the ability of the TADB to carry out its 

functions and iii) extension of funding to ineligible persons. 

5.7. Finally, this present project complies with all the applicable AfDB Group policies 
including the On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; ADF/BD/WP/90/38) referred to 

earlier in paragraph 5.1. 

6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION 

6.1. The proposed loan from the ADF to the United Republic of Tanzania, to be utilized 
by the URT to support the TADB, will contribute to enabling this national DFI to scale 

up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania. This institution is expected to play a key 

role in facilitating attainment of sustainable food self-sufficiency and food security in Tanzania 

and in promoting and supporting the transformation of agriculture from subsistence to 

commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to inclusive economic 

growth and poverty reduction. 

6.2. The Government of Tanzania is fully committed to the success of the TADB and has 
demonstrated this through the capital that it has injected so far from its own budget and its 

current efforts to mobilize additional funding from new sources including the ADF. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the funding needs of the agriculture sector provides a strong 

justification for Government intervention through the proposed borrowing from the ADF. This 

outside funding will enable the Government of Tanzania to support the TADB while providing 

it with the fiscal space for more spending in sectors and projects critical to the country’s 

development (including infrastructure projects planned to facilitate trade and industrialization). 

6.3. In the light of the foregoing, Management recommends that, for the purposes stipulated 



 

18 

in this report, the Board of Directors of the African Development Fund approves the proposed 

ADF loan of UA 67.27 million (equivalent to USD 93.51 million) to the United Republic of 

Tanzania. 






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the
Fisheries Resources Management Programme


The State of Eritrea

Fisheries Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: The State of Eritrea

Executing agency: Ministry of Marine Resources

Total programme cost: US$32.12 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 10.75 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15 million)

Cofinanciers: Federal Republic of Germany

Global Environment Facility (GEF)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Amount of cofinancing: Germany: US$5.97 million

GEF: US$7.89 million

FAO: US$500,000

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of recipient: US$1.42 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.35 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries Resources Management Programme as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries
Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Strategic context. More than two decades after attaining its independence in

1993, Eritrea is still faced with many development challenges. The main economic
sectors have yet to fully recover, resulting in high unemployment, few
income-generation opportunities, an unsupportive business environment for
investment, and weak macroeconomic conditions. The country is prone to periodic
droughts and remains dependent on rainfed agriculture, which makes it highly
vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.

2. On the Human Development Index,1 Eritrea scored 0.391, ranking 186th out of
188 countries in 2014. The country also scored poorly on the Global Hunger Index2
with a score of 33.8 in 2014. Nonetheless, recent economic performance has been
positive, driven mainly by the mining sector. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was estimated at 2 per cent in 2014 and 2.1 per cent in 2015 – double that
of 2013. The current GDP composition is services (59.9 per cent),
non-manufacturing (17.3 per cent), agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and
fisheries (16.9 per cent), and industry (5.9 per cent). Exports increased in 2014
and 2015, but the current account balance is estimated to have deteriorated from
0.2 per cent of GDP in 2014 to -1.2 per cent in 2015, and is forecast to be
1.5 per cent of GDP in 2016. This is partly due to decreases in both remittances
and the "development and recovery" tax (a 2 per cent tax levied on the Eritrean
diaspora). Based on International Monetary Fund Article IV 2009,3 Eritrea was at
the pre-decision point for becoming a heavily indebted poor country (HIPC) and
therefore may be eligible for HIPC multilateral debt relief. Eritrea is classified as
"red" by the Debt Sustainability Framework and is therefore entitled to 100 per
cent grant financing.

3. Agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing are mainstays for most Eritreans, with
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the population relying on these subsectors
for their livelihoods; they also account for between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of
commodity exports. However, these subsectors are affected by highly variable
climatic conditions, inefficient rain-fed subsistence farming systems, limited
resource allocation and low profit margins. The fact that over 80 per cent of poor
people live in rural areas and depend on agriculture suggests that increasing
agricultural production and productivity would have a significant impact on poverty.
Eritrea has 26 per cent arable land, but only 4 per cent is under cultivation. Mining
is becoming important and is the main attraction for foreign investment. The

1 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report 2015 (http://hdr.undp.org/en/2015-report).
2 The Global Hunger Index, produced by the International Food Policy Research Institute, is an aggregated measure of:
overall undernourishment; child wasting; child stunting; and child mortality (http://www.ifpri.org/topic/global-hunger-index).
3

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/071813.pdf: Only information for 2009 is available from the IMF; since then,
there has been no agreement with Eritrea’s Government on mission dates or modalities for the next Article IV.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

growth outlook is promising if Eritrea exploits all its opportunities for trade and
opens its economy to foreign investment in sectors other than mining.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
country strategic opportunities programme

4. Eritrea has substantial and relatively underexploited marine and fisheries
resources, comprising nearly 1,000 fish species. These fisheries exist in an
unpolluted and undercapitalized marine environment; the fisheries sector
contributes only about 3 per cent of the country's GDP. The maximum sustainable
yield (MSY) of Eritrea’s Red Sea fisheries has been estimated by several sources at
80,000 tons per year (some fisheries experts provide a more conservative MSY
range of between 40,000 and 80,000 tons per year since there has been no recent
stock assessment). Small pelagic fisheries account for about half of this MSY and
are currently underutilized. Recorded total fish catches rarely exceed 10,000 tons
per year, of which fewer than 2,000 tons are caught by small-scale fishers.

5. This programme will support Eritrea’s Government in ensuring that the country’s
marine fishery resources are utilized in a sustainable manner to improve the
livelihoods of coastal communities. Specifically, the Fisheries Resources
Management Programme (FReMP) will: (i) support increased fish production while
ensuring that production levels do not exceed historical MSY estimates (for small
pelagic fish, it will be limited to 19,000 tons per year); (ii) support the Ministry of
Marine Resources in monitoring and enforcement; (iii) update MSY estimates and
adjust targets when needed; and (iv) invest in restoration and protection of the
ecosystem.

6. The projected total fish production represents an estimated gross first sales
value-at-landing of approximately US$50 million. This involves a huge investment
in fishing, processing and other support services like boat building, supply of
fishing gear, cold storage, production of ice and packaging material, and
opportunities in fish distribution and marketing. FReMP will mainly target fishers
who use traditional motorized wooden boats (along with a few using improved
motorized fiberglass boats). Other beneficiaries will include "foot fishers" who do
not own any fishing assets. The programme will address many limiting factors and
contribute to increased productivity, production and improved livelihoods of the
target beneficiaries. Eritrea’s mangrove forests also offer opportunities for
supplementing livelihoods with honey production, fodder for small livestock, and
fuelwood, ensuring the viability of fisheries over the long term.

7. Inland fisheries and aquaculture present another investment opportunity for
increased fish production, incomes and nutrition. The Government, with support
from other development partners, has established over 330 reservoirs, of which
70 are stocked with fish species including tilapia, carp and catfish. However, the
country’s inland fisheries resources are not widely exploited since many local
communities are: unaware of the nutritional benefits; they lack fishing skills and
equipment; and fishing is not part of their tradition. In addition, there are
opportunities for engaging in aquaculture using cages placed within water
reservoirs or in external ponds drawing water from the reservoirs. FReMP will
target 15 water reservoirs to demonstrate good practices and test successful
models that can be replicated and scaled up in the other reservoirs. The
programme will also assist in developing climate-resilient conservation plans for
the water reservoirs, which will lead to improved crop and livestock production,
and enhance rural populations’ nutrition and incomes.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. Programme Area. FReMP will be national in scope, targeting all six zobas

(regions) in Eritrea's coastal and inland areas. There will be a special focus on



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

marine fish landing sites, inland water reservoirs for aquaculture and fish markets.
On the Red Sea coast, it will target the Northern Red Sea and Southern Red Sea
zobas. In the inland zobas of Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka, and Maekel, the
programme will be site-specific, operating in selected water reservoirs with high
fishery production potential.

9. Target Group. The target group consists of: (i) small-scale fishers (men and
women small boat owners, crew members and foot fishers) who will participate
either as individuals or as cooperatives; and (ii) rural smallholder farmers involved
in subsistence agriculture and small livestock-keeping around inland water
reservoirs, and those involved in rehabilitating their catchment areas, who are
interested in economic activities along the inland fisheries supply chain; (iii) youth
entrepreneurs (fishers and non-fishers) interested in establishing business
enterprises or cooperatives that respond to market demand for fishery products
and services; (iv) women, especially women-headed households, who will account
for at least 30 per cent of the programme’s beneficiaries; and (v) demobilized
soldiers and internally displaced persons.

B. Programme development objective
10. Programme goal and development objective. FReMP will be implemented over

a seven-year period from 2017 to 2023. The programme’s goal is to contribute to
household food and nutrition security, and alleviate rural poverty. Its development
objective is to increase incomes and improve nutrition among targeted
beneficiaries, and promote the sustainable management of natural resources. In
pursuit of this objective, FReMP will support marine and inland small-scale fishers
to produce a surplus (within the MSY of the fisheries) for the market. To achieve
this, it will forge sustainable partnerships with various actors along the fish
production and marketing value chain. The aim will be to transform Eritrea’s
small-scale fisheries sector from subsistence to a sustainable commercial industry.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Develop sustainable fisheries systems. This component will

support the establishment of necessary infrastructure and technologies for
production and post-harvest operations, marketing, and consumption of both
marine and inland fisheries. It will be achieved through three sub-components:

(i) Development of marine fisheries production and post-harvest systems;

(ii) Development and sustainable utilization of inland fisheries; and

(iii) Market development and promotion of fish consumption.

12. Component 2: Fisheries enterprise support services. This component seeks
to: (i) promote the development and build capacity of cooperatives and other
enterprise groups; and (ii) strengthen input-provision services to ensure that
legally constituted cooperatives and enterprise groups have access to the inputs
required to undertake economically viable and sustainable fish-related businesses.
These objectives will be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Entrepreneurial capacity development; and

(ii) Strengthening of input supply services.

13. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and implementation support.
The objectives of this cross-cutting component are to: (i) ensure that the
institutions responsible for implementing and overseeing the programme’s various
implementation processes have the capacity to effectively carry out their duties;
and (ii) manage and facilitate the programme in an efficient and effective manner
by coordinating planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and sharing, progress reporting, and liaising with other stakeholders. These
objectives are to be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Marine Resources and other implementing
agencies for the development of the fisheries sector; and

(ii) Programme coordination and implementation support services.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

14. The programme’s overall approach is to strengthen production systems and market
linkages. FReMP will use communities as an entry point, engaging local institutions
in participatory planning for sustainable fisheries development. The programme will
be implemented through – and fully embedded in – the Government’s
decentralized system, and sustainability will be a central aspect of the programme
approach. The programme will support enterprises in engaging with markets in
order to increase returns on their investments and establish public and private
mechanisms to ensure continuity of benefits. Gender will be mainstreamed across
the programme by: (i) ensuring that gender issues are considered in policy
dialogue and staff training; (ii) establishing programme work plans that are gender
sensitive and identifying gender focal points at the national and zoba levels;
(iii) promoting women’s participation in programme activities, particularly those
focused on small pelagic fish production and market linkages; and (iv) closely
monitoring gender empowerment.

B. Organizational framework
15. The management, coordination and implementation of FReMP will involve various

government institutions and private-sector entities. The Ministry of Marine
Resources will be the lead executing agency and will be supported by: (i) a
programme steering committee chaired by the minister responsible for fisheries
and with representation from ministries with direct relevance to the programme
goal and development objective; and (ii) an adequately staffed national
programme coordination office (NPCO). At the zoba level, FReMP will be
implemented, managed and coordinated through the zoba administration systems.
Zoba programme coordination offices will be established in all the six zobas to
strengthen programme management and coordination.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning. Annual work plans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will be the key instruments

for implementation and operational control. AWP/Bs will be prepared for all
programme participants, starting with the primary stakeholders at the community
level. These plans will identify activities according to needs and priorities through a
participatory planning process.

17. The NPCO will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate the AWP/Bs from the six
zobas and all other programme areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Marine
Resources. The NPCO will submit the consolidated AWP/Bs to the programme’s
technical committee for review and endorsement before submitting them to the
programme steering committee for approval and to IFAD for review on a "no
objection" basis. In order to facilitate the proper preparation of AWP/Bs, training
will be provided at programme start-up.

18. Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E will be embedded in the institutional
strengthening and implementation support component, coordinated by the NPCO.
This system will reach all implementers at the national and zoba levels, and will be
supported by additional professional staff, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will feed into the Ministry of Marine Resources management
information system and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

19. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management
will be based on the programme’s M&E system, especially on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. The
national-level M&E team will liaise with zoba-level counterparts to develop a
learning and knowledge management system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The proposed financial management arrangements for

FReMP have been assessed as medium risk. Therefore it is recommended that the
Laccie accounting software be used instead of the Government’s financial
management system. The NPCO, which will be the accounting hub, has gained
experience through the Fisheries Development Programme (FDP) in the
implementation of IFAD-funded projects. In addition, the Laccie accounting
software was specifically designed for donor-funded projects and is able to
generate the required financial reports.

21. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened at the Central Bank of
Eritrea to receive the proceeds from the IFAD grant, and Germany and GEF
contributions. A programme operating account at a bank acceptable to IFAD will
be operated in accordance with Government regulations. To facilitate
traceability of funds, each zoba will have a dedicated operating account to
receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved AWP/Bs, which will be
accounted for prior to any request for subsequent advances.

22. Audits. The Government’s audit processes will be used for FReMP. As was the case
for FDP, Eritrea’s Auditor-General will have the discretion to undertake the audit or
to appoint an independent private audit firm acceptable to IFAD. Either way, the
auditor’s terms of reference will require IFAD's "no objection" review on an annual
basis. The Ministry of Marine Resources’ internal auditors will include FReMP in their
annual rolling internal audit plans and issue formal reports at least twice each year.

23. Procurement. All procurement funded by the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent that they are
consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. The country’s legal and
regulatory framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently
robust. There are checks and balances within the system to ensure that public
procurement is undertaken transparently and competitively. Lessons learned from
FDP indicate that a programme-specific procurement officer should be recruited to
strengthen: (i) records management; (ii) contract management; (iii) the
integration of procurement into budget formulation; and (iv) reporting.

24. Transparency, governance and anti-corruption. The Government will maintain
a governance and anti-corruption framework throughout the programme
implementation period to mitigate the risk of fraud and corruption, and promote
effective utilization of programme funds. Specific measures to mitigate identified
fiduciary risks will include: (i) use of the Laccie accounting system at the NPCO to
reduce the risk of human error; (ii) checks and balances in contracting and
administration; (iii) the integration of FReMP into internal audit plans within all
zobas; (iv) activity-tagged transfers to zobas instead of general cash releases;
(v) maintaining the current statement of expenditure ceiling used in other
IFAD-funded projects in Eritrea, given the inherent risk; (vi) adequate staffing
arrangements; and (vii) continued capacity building of the cooperative credit unit
to handle the asset financing.

E. Supervision
25. FReMP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and Eritrea’s Government. The frequency

and composition of missions will be determined by actual requirements through
collaboration with IFAD and the Government. Preferably, supervision missions will
take place every six months. Supervision will not be seen as a general inspection



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned,
and to jointly reflect on improving implementation and increasing the likelihood of
achieving the programme’s development objective.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. Programme costs. The total programme costs over seven years, including

contingencies, taxes and duties, are estimated to be US$32.12 million as detailed
in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Develop sustainable
fisheries systems 4 958 40.4 6 508 53.0 - - 26 0.2 286 2.3 504 4.1 12 284 38.2
2. Fisheries enterprise
support services 3 376 31.4 128 1.2 - - 5 940 55.3 445 4.1 846 7.9 10 735 33.4
3. Institutional
strengthening and
implementation
support 6 666 73.2 1 254 13.8 500 5.5 - - 686 7.5 - - 9 105 28.3

Total programme
costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

B. Programme financing
27. The total combined FReMP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$32.12 million
(ERN 481.8 million). The programme will be financed by the Government, the IFAD
grant, Germany, GEF, FAO and beneficiary contributions. IFAD has confirmed a
grant equivalent to US$15 million from the Tenth Replenishment of IFAD’s
Resources (IFAD10), which represents 46.7 per cent of the total programme cost.
Germany will contribute US$5.96 million (18.6 per cent of the total programme
cost); GEF has committed US$7.89 million (24.6 per cent); FAO will contribute
US$500,000 (1.6 per cent); and beneficiaries will contribute approximately
US$1.35 million (4.2 per cent of the total programme cost) through their
participation in construction, setting up fishery sites and purchasing inputs like
fishing gear. The Government will finance the taxes and duties (US$1.42 million,
representing 4.4 per cent of total costs). Details of the financing arrangements are
shown in table 2.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs
A. Works 3 367 32.8 6 155 59.9 - - 26 0.3 227 2.2 504 4.9 10 279 32.0

B. Vehicles 1 707 72.1 54 2.3 - - - - 605 25.6 - - 2 367 7.4

C. Equipment and materials 2 206 22.5 353 3.6 - - 5 929 60.4 487 5.0 845 8.6 9 820 30.6

D. Consultancies 562 38.3 356 24.3 500 34.1 - - 48 3.3 - - 1 466 4.6

E. Training 4 187 86.7 629 13.0 - - 10 0.2 1 - 1 - 4 829 15.0

Total
investment costs 12 029 41.8 7 548 26.2 500 1.7 5 966 20.7 1 368 4.8 1 351 4.7 28 761 89.5

II. Recurrent costs
A. Salaries and allowances 1 370 80.0 343 20.0 - - - - - - - - 1 713 5.3

B. Operating costs 1 601 97.0 - - - - - - 50 3.0 - - 1 650 5.1
Total recurrent costs 2 971 88.3 343 10.2 - - - - 50 1.5 - - 3 363 10.5
Total programme costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. Benefits and Beneficiaries. FReMP will target 17,500 households

(87,500 people) through 600 groups. The cost per beneficiary is US$361 (about
US$1,800 per household). The programme will provide direct support to inland
fishing cooperatives, small pelagic fishing enterprises, fish value-addition
enterprises (e.g. fish drying), fish mongers and traders, fish marketing, provision
of inputs through the cooperative support unit and the establishment of a
sustainable ice plant.

29. Expected benefits include: (i) increases in the production and quality of
marketable fish; (ii) higher prices for producers and traders as a result of the
aggregation of fish products and improved marketing processes; (iii) increased
community-level resource rental revenues; (iv) consumer benefits such as
enhanced availability and affordability of fish products by reducing inefficiencies
along the value chain; and (v) empowered government systems that have
benefited from capacity development.

30. Economic analysis. The programme has the potential to generate an economic
rate of return of 17 per cent over a ten-year period.

31. Impact indicators. FReMP is expected to facilitate the development of sustainable
production, processing and market linkages for marine and inland fisheries, and
deliver increased volumes of fish to consumers. This will: generate employment,
especially for youth and women; increase incomes of small-scale fishers in Eritrea’s
coastal and inland communities; increase the volume and quality of marketed fish
in coastal and inland areas; and enhance food and nutrition security in the target
communities.

D. Sustainability
32. Institutional sustainability. The participatory programme design process and

the bottom-up planning approach will ensure that programme implementation
modalities respond to the target communities’ concerns, sector-specific priorities,
national development policies and strategies, and the national institutional
framework. The approach creates ownership and builds the foundation for
sustainability after the programme ends. FReMP implementation will be fully
embedded within the Government’s institutional framework at all levels and the
Government has committed to continue this integration after programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

implementation. The institutional building-capacity approach encompasses
government institutions at various levels as well as cooperatives and enterprise
groups to ensure that skills continue to support programme-initiated activities after
completion.

33. Economic/income sustainability. The programme will build the capacity of
target groups in business plan development for their subprojects and prudent
financial management; enterprise groups will be linked to markets. The financial
analysis of the programme indicates that members of different enterprise groups
will improve their incomes and earn good returns on their investments. These
financial benefits on investments in the sector, coupled with improved access to
inputs, will promote sustainability and enhance replicability and scaling up. The
availability of a revolving fund through the cooperative credit unit will provide
opportunities for highly performing enterprise groups to expand their businesses in
the long run.

34. Environmental and climatic sustainability. The programme will promote
environmentally sustainable fishing practices by adopting a precautionary
approach, which involves promoting and enforcing good fisheries management
practices. FReMP’s interventions will support: adaptation to climate change through
investing in "climate buffers", which include watershed management; increasing
water and soil retention to reduce the impacts of drought and extreme rainfall; and
rehabilitation and planting of mangroves to safeguard their important role in the
coastal ecosystem. This approach also integrates expected climate change impacts
and utilizes these data in feasibility studies for infrastructure.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Several potential risks could undermine the programme’s success if they are not

mitigated. Delayed programme start-up, slow disbursements during the early years
of implementation and high staff turnover have been recurrent problems in the
portfolio. To mitigate these risks, FReMP will operate with similar institutional
arrangements as FDP and will be managed by the same experienced programme
management unit. Expansion of fishing activities, if not properly controlled, could
lead to overexploitation of fish resources beyond the MSY for both marine and
inland fisheries. Mitigation measures include: (i) setting conservative catch levels
below historical MSY estimates (19,000 tons per year for small pelagics);
(ii) supporting the Ministry of Fisheries Resources in monitoring, control and
surveillance capacity; (iii) updating MSY estimates and adjusting targets when
needed; and (iv) investing in restoration and protection of the ecosystem. For
inland fisheries, the programme will facilitate the establishment of fishing
cooperatives with standard codes of fishing and environmental practice. The
programme will also support a hatchery to restock water reservoirs as necessary.
In addition, extension agents from the Ministry of Marine Resources and fishing
cooperatives will receive training in stocking and sustainable harvesting.

36. Based on Eritrea's 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 18, the country’s inherent risk is high. The fiduciary risk has been
assessed as medium due to the introduction of mitigation measures highlighted
above.

37. Climate risks. The programme’s sensitivity to the impacts of climate change is
assessed as moderate. The greatest risk relates to the unknown impact of
increasing sea temperatures on marine fish resources. Through its monitoring
activities, the programme will be able to adjust to changes in fish stocks. At the
design stage, there were no data available to carry out an in-depth climate risk
assessment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The design of FReMP is compliant with: (i) IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025;
(ii) Reaching the Rural Poor: IFAD Policy on Targeting; and (iii) IFAD Policy on
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. In addition, the nutrition focus of the
programme is aligned with the Government’s strategy on food security and
nutrition, and IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and action
plans on mainstreaming nutrition. FReMP will be implemented in compliance with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy, and IFAD's Climate
Change Strategy. Climate change adaptation measures are integrated into
programme activities in order to address the inherent risks resulting from a
changing climate and the potential multiplication of these effects on ecosystems.
As an extra safeguard, IFAD has developed a complaints procedure on alleged
non-compliance with its social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects
of its social, environmental and climate assessment procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The programme is fully aligned with Government investment priorities as defined in

the Eritrea Food Security Strategy, the Eritrea Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper and the five year (2013-2017) strategic development plans for the country’s
agriculture and fisheries sectors. It will be fully embedded in the Government’s
decentralized institutional framework and delivery mechanisms. Links between the
steering and technical committees as well as among the management teams will
ensure coordination, collaboration, learning and scaling up of good practices.
Operational linkages between the Ministry of Marine Resources and other relevant
ministries, and other development partners in the fisheries sector are expected to
result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. Innovation. Eritrea’s small pelagic fisheries present opportunities for introducing

new techniques and innovative products and recipes. Novel techniques and fish
products to be piloted include solar-dried assortments, pickling, fish powder,
protein concentrates, salted-pressed sundried fish snacks, fermented products, fish
oil, fish sauces and different fish recipes. Successful products will be introduced to
fish processing and marketing enterprise groups for commercial uptake. The
programme will also pilot new technologies to boost fish production.

41. Scaling up. Experiences from FDP will be used to guide programme interventions,
especially the formation of cooperatives and enterprise groups, capacity
development and input financing. FDP established an asset-financing model, which
has become instrumental in sustaining the country’s small-scale fishing sector,
particularly for large fish along the coasts. FReMP will scale up this proven model
for sustainable access to fishing inputs and replicate it in small pelagic fish and
inland fisheries supply chains. Enterprise groups at different links in these chains
will be able to access the inputs they need to undertake economically viable and
sustainable fish-related businesses.

42. The programme will pilot mariculture – the cultivation of marine organisms for food
– and aquaculture development activities in marine and inland systems, with the
objective of demonstrating their technical and economic viability. The inland
fisheries intervention will target up to 15 water reservoirs to generate good
practices that are replicable in the remaining water reservoirs across the country.

Policy engagementD.
43. The programme presents an opportunity to: (i) test new approaches, models and

technologies within small pelagic inland fisheries and coastal areas; and (ii) support
the Government’s own efforts to analyse the effectiveness of its fisheries policies,



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

including those on sustainable production and management of fisheries resources.
Lessons learned through the programme will be used to inform Government-led
dialogue around national policies. The programme will maintain policy engagement
around fish product marketing systems and related legal and regulatory
frameworks, particularly regarding the role of the National Fisheries Corporation
and fisher cooperatives in the pricing of fish products.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the State of Eritrea and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as appendix I.

45. The State of Eritrea is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the State of Eritrea in an amount equivalent to ten million seven
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 10.75 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation
Development Programme – Phase II
(PASIDP II)

Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources

Total programme cost: US$145.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 72,950,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$102 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1,080,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$1.5 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund grant:

SDR 7,870,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$11 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$18.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$12.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.18

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Federal Democratic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II), as contained in
paragraph 43.

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. During the last decade, the Government of Ethiopia has achieved impressive results

in economic growth and poverty reduction. Broad-based gross domestic product
growth averaged 10.8 per cent each year between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, and
annual population growth was 3 per cent. This strong economic growth was driven
by significant public investment and expansion of services and agriculture. The
Government committed more than 60 per cent of its total expenditures to
poverty-oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water and road
construction. Ending extreme poverty in Ethiopia requires sustaining current efforts
and ensuring that economic growth is inclusive, especially in the rural areas. Many
non-poor households in Ethiopia are just above the poverty line and vulnerable to
falling into poverty in the case of a significant shock.

2. To sustain the country’s strong economic growth, it is critical to enhance the
productivity of agriculture, particularly farming systems such as small-scale irrigation
with high potential for productivity increases. The Government’s Growth and
Transformation Plan II for 2015/2016-2019/2020 emphasizes the important role of
agriculture as a driver of economic growth.

3. Ethiopia is endowed with a highly diverse agroecological environment spanning from
temperate and moist tropical highlands to hot and arid lowlands, matched by a
diverse sociocultural setting. As much as this heterogeneity has to offer in terms of
natural resources, a common characteristic is environmental fragility. Major
challenges include soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. Climate
change projections for Ethiopia indicate a significant increase in temperature and a
likely increase in droughts, heavy rains and floods, particularly in the lowlands.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD are moving towards a programmatic approach
with a longer-term vision for lending in the Ethiopian small-scale irrigation
subsector. The first phase of the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme (PASIDP), which was implemented between 2008 and 2015, contributed
to reducing the country’s vulnerability to adverse climate risks and drought as well
as rural poverty and food insecurity. The country programme evaluation by the
Independent Office of Evaluation of IFAD recommended financing a second phase of
PASIDP since small-scale irrigation offers great potential for reducing the impact of
climate change, enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty, which are all
aspirations of the Government. This second phase will complete and hone the
intervention model developed in the first phase, and will pilot the geographical



EB 2016/118/R.18

2

expansion that will mainly be undertaken in the third phase, with an ultimate final
vision of scaling up the programme nationwide.

5. PASIDP II is based on the assumption that poor farmers who are provided with
access to a secure irrigation production base and access to markets and services will
be able to produce and market greater volumes of crops in a profitable manner. The
investment will include watersheds contiguous with the irrigation schemes, which
exhibit varying levels of degradation, in order to stabilize them, improve their
productive capacity and enhance their resilience. This will improve farmers’
prosperity, food security and nutrition, enhancing their resilience against external
shocks – including those induced by adverse weather and climate change as
witnessed in 2015 as a result of the El Niño weather phenomenon.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. The programme area of PASIDP II will cover four regions in Ethiopia: (i) Amhara;

(ii) Oromia; (iii) Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region; and (iv) Tigray.
By the time of the midterm review, opportunities to expand the programme
interventions into other regions on a pilot basis will be explored.

7. PASIDP II will benefit 108,750 households, of which: (i) 46,250 utilize small-scale
irrigation schemes and some fields in the adjacent watersheds; (ii) 37,500
households live in and utilize the adjacent watersheds; and (iii) 10,000 benefited
from irrigation support under PASIDP I and will benefit from the agronomic and
market linkages support under PASIDP II. In addition, 15,000 employment
opportunities will be created as a result of the growing labour requirements on farms
and in marketing chains. Within the selected irrigation schemes and adjacent
watersheds, PASIDP II will use a self-targeting approach together with mechanisms
to promote the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups.

B. Programme development objective
8. The programme development objective is to improve income and food security for

rural households on a sustainable basis.

C. Components/outcomes
Component A: Investment in small-scale irrigation infrastructure

9. The expected outcome of component A is that farmers will have access to
sustainable irrigation schemes; the programme aims to develop at least 15,000
hectares (ha) of small-scale irrigation schemes. Subcomponent A.1 will support
(i) the selection of schemes; (ii) feasibility studies and detailed designs; (iii) the
establishment and strengthening of irrigation water users' associations (IWUAs); and
(iv) environmental and social impact studies and management plans. Subcomponent
A.2 will support the development of the selected irrigation schemes, including
multiple-user systems alongside irrigation.

Component B: Investment in capacity for sustainable agriculture
10. The expected outcome of component B is that farmers will have increased

market-oriented skills and capacity for sustainable agriculture. Component B will
support activities designed to ensure that beneficiaries operate in an environment
that is conducive to rural commercial development. Subcomponent B.1 will support
the strengthening of farmers’ cooperatives, the development of agribusiness linkages
and access to financial services. Subcomponent B.2 will: (i) support the
improvement of crop husbandry practices, mainly through farmers’ research groups
and extension support; (ii) facilitate access to improved seeds; (iii) include gender-
sensitive activities; and (iv) promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture. Subcomponent
B.3 will support improved watershed management and promote climate-smart
agriculture.



EB 2016/118/R.18

3

Component C: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and
knowledge management

11. Component C will focus on (i) learning and knowledge management; and
(ii) programme management, monitoring and evaluation.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

12. Programme implementation will be governed by four main principles: (i) alignment
with government systems and procedures, and integration of programme
implementation into decentralized government institutions; (ii) empowerment of
beneficiaries to lead programme implementation through their grass-roots
institutions; (iii) cooperation with private service providers and business entities;
and (iv) partnerships and collaboration with other development partners and
stakeholders in the sector.

B. Organizational framework
13. Programme governance. A national programme steering committee (NPSC) will

provide overall policy and strategic guidance on programme focus, priorities and
institutional strengthening. The NPSC will be chaired by the Minister of State for
Agriculture and Natural Resources, and shall be composed of ministers of state from
relevant sectors including the: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; Ministry
of Trade; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of Finance
and Economic Cooperation; and Ministry of Industry. It will also include executives of
the Federal Cooperative Agency, the Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute and
other institutions aligned with the programme’s strategic focus.

14. Programme management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources will
be the lead implementing agency. The Minister of State for Natural Resources will be
responsible for coordinating implementation with support from the Directorate of
Small-scale Irrigation. A federal programme coordination and management unit
(FPCMU) will ensure: (i) planning, monitoring and evaluation, (ii) stakeholder
coordination at the federal level; and (iii) quality control of investments and cost-
efficiency. The Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency will provide technical
and analytical support, and mobilize service providers for South-South Cooperation
to build capacity in areas of innovation, including support to market access alliances,
promotion of climate-smart innovations and agricultural finance.

15. Regional programme coordination and management units (RPCMUs) will coordinate
investment planning, procurement and coordination of design consultants, works
contractors and capacity-building service providers. At the district and
programme-site levels, implementation will be fully integrated into local government
structures. IWUAs will actively participate in the entire process of irrigation scheme
development, from identification to the final hand-over.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. The programme will be implemented on the basis of approved annual workplans and
budgets, which will be prepared jointly by the FPCMU, RPCMUs, district governments
and implementing partners. The FPCMU will consolidate the budget and present it to
the NPSC for approval pending IFAD’s prior review.

17. In line with the result-based management approach, progress towards programme
outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability will be regularly monitored. Baseline
and impact surveys will be conducted at start-up, midterm and programme
completion to assess the effectiveness of the investment. Feasibility studies for each
irrigation scheme and watershed will provide baseline data to assess performance
and results.



EB 2016/118/R.18

4

18. To improve performance and build local partners’ capacity, the programme will
promote participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. The FPCMU will
facilitate periodic structured discussions to share any issues encountered, solutions
and results. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s
M&E system, particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons
learned during implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. A senior finance manager will be appointed to ensure the use of a consistent,

comprehensive chart of accounts and accounting software at the federal and regional
levels. An accountant will be recruited at the FPMCU and in each region.

20. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. A designated account will be
opened at the National Bank of Ethiopia to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan,
the IFAD grant and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant. A programme operating account will be maintained by the FPCMU in
accordance with government regulations and a separate account will be opened for
the receipt of counterpart funding. The RPCMUs and implementing partners will also
open dedicated bank accounts in their regions to facilitate the transparency of funds.

21. Programme audits. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources internal
audit department will include the programme in its internal audit plans. The Office of
the Federal Auditor General will either directly perform the external audit, request
that the Audit Service Corporation perform it or hire an independent audit firm
acceptable to the Fund. The internal and external audit recommendations will be
reviewed by the NPSC.

22. Retroactive financing and start-up costs. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii)
of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible
expenditures during the preparatory period from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2016
up to the equivalent of US$2 million pre-financed by the Government will be
reimbursed from the IFAD loan after the financing agreement has entered into force
and the conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met. In addition to this
retroactive financing, withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures incurred between the date of entry into force of the Financing
Agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

23. Procurement. The country’s legislative and regulatory framework provides an
adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for
works. Lessons from the previous phase imply that a programme-specific
procurement officer should be recruited to strengthen: records management;
contract management; the integration of procurement into the budget formulation
process; and reporting. Annual procurement plans will be subject to prior review by
IFAD and will serve as tools for planning, implementing and monitoring all the
programme’s procurement activities.

E. Supervision
24. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. Features likely to require

implementation support include: (i) planning and preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes, including the early establishment of IWUAs and facilitating beneficiaries’
active participation; (ii) implementation of an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF); (iii) programme M&E; (iv) procurement; (v) access to finance,
inputs and markets; and (vi) targeting.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
25. Total programme costs over seven years, including contingencies, taxes and duties,

are estimated at US$145.3 million, as presented in the table below. Component A



EB 2016/118/R.18

5

represents 71.9 per cent of the costs, component B 20.5 per cent and component C
7.6 per cent.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Investment in
small-scale irrigation
Infrastructure 82 226 78.7 1 000 1.0 1 287 1.2 4 452 4.3 15 523 14.9 104 489
B. Investment in capacity
for sustainable agriculture 11 571 38.8 - - 8 516 28.6 7 621 25.6 2 108 7.1 29 815
C. Programme
management, M&E and
knowledge management 8 203 74.6 500 4.5 1 196 10.9 - - 1 091 9.9 10 990

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

B. Programme financing
26. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of US$102 million on highly

concessional terms and an IFAD grant of US$1.5 million. An additional grant of
US$11 million (7.6 per cent of the total programme cost) from the ASAP Trust Fund
will support the mainstreaming of climate-resilient interventions within the
programme. The Government will provide the equivalent of US$18.7 million,
representing 12.9 per cent of total programme costs, to cover all duties and taxes.
Public services at the national, regional and district levels will play a major role in
programme implementation. The beneficiary contribution is estimated at
US$12.1 million, and will be provided in labour and materials.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Training 4 142 33.4 - - 6 475 52.1 - - 1 801 14.5 12 417
Works 78 594 79.5 - - 1 000 15.0 4 452 4.5 14 831 15.0 98 876
Consultancies 3 954 47.0 1 500 17.8 1 988 23.6 - - 969 11.5 8 412
Goods, services and
inputs 9 348 50.5 - - 1 094 5.9 7 620 41.1 455 2.5 18 516
Salaries and allowances 3 572 84.1 - - 443 10.4 - - 233 5.5 4 247
Operating costs 2 390 84.6 - - - - - - 434 15.4 2 825

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The programme is expected to lead to: (i) a significant increase in farm productivity,

market output and incomes for 46,250 farm households cultivating 18,400 ha of
irrigated agriculture; (ii) higher yields in at least 60,000 ha of adjacent watersheds;
(iii) additional jobs for 15,000 young and landless people who are not members of
the households with irrigation schemes or watersheds; and (iv) improved market
access and higher yields for 10,000 farming households that received support under
PASIDP I.

28. With an economic rate of return of 28.8 per cent over 20 years and a net present
value of US$165 million per annum, the programme is an economically viable
investment. The sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to increases in



EB 2016/118/R.18

6

programme costs and reductions in output prices. The adoption rate and time lags of
benefits are the most sensitive factors.

D. Sustainability
29. The participatory process of irrigation scheme establishment creates ownership and

the necessary foundations and commitments for sustainability after programme
completion. Programme implementation will be fully embedded in the Government’s
institutional framework at all levels, which will continue after programme
implementation.

30. Mutually beneficial market linkages will ensure the sustainability of beneficiaries’
incomes. The financial analysis indicates that producers will substantially improve
their incomes with solid returns on their investments. These financial benefits from
investment in the sector will not only promote sustainability but enhance replicability
and opportunities for scaling up.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The design of PASIDP II has benefited from a risk assessment study recently

undertaken by the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management. Extreme risks with a
low or moderate frequency but high severity (such as extreme droughts or market
outbreaks) require the intervention of macro-level players.

32. The programme has been confirmed as Environmental and Social Category A since a
number of irrigation schemes may result in a loss of environmental services provided
by the natural ecosystem or have significant implications that affect a broader area
and are not easily remedied. An ESMF and a free prior and informed consent
implementation plan have been developed to guide the programme during
implementation, and environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) will be
conducted for those schemes classified as Category A, while environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for those in Category B. The
programme will endeavour to avoid schemes that may result in a high probability of
resettlement. If any scheme is selected that will trigger physical or economic
resettlement, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared and disclosed as a
precondition for financing the scheme. The RAP process should entail meaningful
consultation and negotiation with any people who will potentially be affected in
accordance with the free prior and informed consent implementation plan. In terms
of climate risk, PASIDP II is classified as "medium". The climate risks will be
mitigated by increasing the ability of affected communities to adapt to environmental
and economic variability, demographic shifts, shocks and long-term changes.

33. As a result of the uncertain implications of – and resources required for – managing
ESIAs for Category A schemes, priority will be given to schemes classified as
Category B. During early implementation, ESIAs will be prepared and IFAD will
organize an independent review to assess their implications and determine the
Borrower’s and IFAD’s capacity to manage and implement these schemes.

34. Based on Ethiopia’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 33 and public financial management assessments, the programme’s
fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D
of this report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

35. Programme design is aligned with IFAD’s Policies for Targeting; Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment; Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security; the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests; the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa; and IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The programme



EB 2016/118/R.18

7

is also aligned with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy
and Climate Change Strategy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
36. The programme is fully aligned with the investment priorities under the

Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II. Linkages between the steering
committees and technical committees, as well as between the management teams of
programmes such as the Sustainable Land Management Project and the Agricultural
Growth Programme will ensure coordination, collaboration, learning, and scaling up
of good practices. Operational linkages with the Ministry of Industry’s Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance Project and the Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
project are expected to result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The main innovations for scaling up outcomes include the: (i) mainstreaming of

participatory planning and selection of schemes; (ii) development of agribusiness
linkages and market access to mitigate marketing risk, especially for perishable
crops; (iii) integration of climate-adaptation strategies, including watershed
improvement and management, building on experiences with the Community-based
Integrated Natural Resource Management Project; (iv) promotion of improved crop
husbandry and access to improved inputs and financial services in order to achieve
the targeted yields and improve water productivity; (v) enhanced focus on women
and youth as priority target groups; (vi) mainstreaming of nutrition-sensitive
agriculture; and (vii) alignment with IFAD’s new SECAP and international
engagement with respect to climate change resilience.

Policy engagementD.
38. Productive use of water resources is a priority guiding Ethiopia’s agricultural

development agenda. Strengthening existing models for irrigation and enhanced
watershed management is a vital priority for policy engagement. The programme
presents an opportunity to: (i) test new implementation approaches, models and
technologies, identify successes and share relevant lessons; and (ii) support the
Government’s own efforts to assess the implementation and effectiveness of its
policies. The lessons learned in pursuing these approaches will be used to inform
Government-led dialogue around national policies.

39. Much of the policy engagement will take place within the framework established by
the Government for policy dialogue with its development partners and other national
stakeholders, including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector
Working Group, and its subcommittees.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A programme financing agreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of

Ethiopia and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included
in appendix I.

41. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2016/118/R.18

8

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to
seventy two million nine hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 72,950,000) (approximately US$102 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to one million and
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 1,080,000) (approximately
US$1.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to seven
million eight hundred and seventy thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 7,870,000) (approximately US$11 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the
Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$45.2 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

10.75 SDR million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.0 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund grant:

4.3 SDR million (equivalent to approximately US$6
million)

Contribution of Government: US$5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.2 million

Contribution of private sector: US$2 million

Financing gap: Approximately US$15 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the Inclusive Value Chain
Development Project, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for
the Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mauritania has about four million inhabitants, 50 per cent of whom derive their

livelihoods from crop and livestock farming and fishing (World Bank, 2013). The
annual demographic growth rate was 2.8 per cent in 2013. The country covers an
area of 1,030,700 km2, more than two thirds of which is desert.

2. During the period 2005-2010, the rural sector contributed an average of 25 per
cent of GDP, which breaks down by subsector as follows: 11 per cent plant
production, 9 per cent livestock and 5 per cent fishing (World Bank, 2016).1 During
the same period, annual average growth in GDP linked to the primary sector was
4.1 per cent, with significant discrepancies between years as a result of irregular
precipitation.

3. Mauritania is classified as a lower middle-income country.2 The human development
index (HDI) improved from 0.424 to 0.487 between 2004 and 2014 but remains
below the average for sub-Saharan Africa, which stands at 0.502. Although more
than half the population live in rural areas, the country is urbanizing very rapidly
and the population is very young: 44 per cent of Mauritanians are under 15 years of
age,3 60 per cent under 25 and just 5 per cent are over 60.

4. The incidence of rural poverty remains high, particularly in the country’s south. The
proportion of the population defined as poor fell from 51 per cent in 2000 to
47 per cent in 2004, 42 per cent in 2008 and 31 per cent in 2014.4,5 Despite the
progress made, this percentage remains high, particularly in rural areas where
74 per cent of poor people live, and in the country’s south where 44.4 per cent of
the rural population still live below the poverty line compared to 16.7 per cent in
urban areas.6

5. The food and nutritional situation of Mauritania’s population is cause for concern.
According to the last food security survey (FSMS, 2015) conducted by the Food
Security Commission with support from the World Food Programme (WFP),
23.8 per cent of Mauritania’s households are food-insecure, particularly in the
country’s southern agro-pastoral strip. Ongoing food insecurity leads to high rates
of chronic malnutrition among children under five, with national rates above
20 per cent,7 while acute malnutrition affects 14 per cent of children.8,9

6. Local value chains face competition from imports. Mauritania imports an average of
60 per cent of the staple foodstuffs consumed in the country. Only red meat and
fish are covered by domestic production, while two thirds of cereals are imported.
Imports of market garden products, mainly from Morocco and Europe, have been

1 World Development Indicators.
2 World Bank, October 2015.
3 WFP, Food Security Survey in Mauritania, July 2009.
4 These poverty rates are based on a poverty line estimated in real terms at MRO 169,445 at 2014 harmonized prices.
5 World Bank, October 2015.
6 MAED, National Poverty Profile in Mauritania. Draft version, June 2015.
7 Critical threshold according to WHO.
8 SMART national nutritional survey, Mauritania, Ministry of Health and UNICEF, June 2015.
9 IFPRI Global Nutrition Report 2015.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

2

rising since 2010. Despite substantial investments in developing rice growing areas,
the volume of rice imports remains high. Sugar and oil consumption are entirely
import-dependent. It is therefore essential to take demand into account before
undertaking any intervention in production to reduce the country’s food
dependence. This demand-driven approach is all the more important given the
experience of the Value Chains Development Programme for Poverty Reduction
(ProLPRAF), the previous project cofinanced by IFAD, which showed the local
markets can quickly become saturated.

7. Mauritania is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Based on the
environmental performance index for 2010, the country is in 161st place of
163 countries. Climate change amplifies natural risks such as periodic drought and
flooding, the resulting risks of network breakdown and human impacts. Climate
change also reduces productivity and biomass quality, which has a detrimental
impact on pastureland and non-timber forest products. High temperatures also
pose an obstacle for product conservation.

8. Mauritania’s financial sector is relatively modest in size and not well developed in
rural areas. With about 15,000 members, or 0.4 per cent of the population, and
US$1.7 million in financial savings,10 coverage by rural credit unions remains
limited. Low demographic density and low levels of capitalization among rural
people, hence their credit unions, place constraints on financial inclusion in value
chains.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

9. In a country context characterized by high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor
value chain competitiveness, heavy dependence on imports and climate phenomena
that accentuate impoverishment among the population, PRODEFI builds upon and
scales up IFAD’s experience in Mauritania and elsewhere in the subregion by
adopting a poverty reduction approach based on supporting inclusive value chains.
The PRODEFI approach is fully aligned with national policies and strategies – the
Rural Sector Development Strategy, the National Agricultural Development Plan,
the National Food Security Strategy, the National Programme of Action for
Adaptation to Climate Change – and IFAD’s country strategy note. It is also based
on the experience of technical and financial partners with a presence in Mauritania,
particularly the European Union, WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO).

10. ProLPRAF showed that market access is a determining factor in food security for
poor people. It identified pro-poor value chains with good nutritional potential in
which vulnerable people, women in particular, could position themselves through
partnerships with the private sector and benefit from the value added with project
support in production, processing, transportation and commercialization. Promoting
policy dialogue between the Government and the main value chain actors will help
install an enabling environment for promotion of local production.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. PRODEFI will be implemented in the wilayas (regions) in the country’s

south – Brakna, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech
Charghi. In these six wilayas, intervention will be localized and phased. During the
first phase, in each value chain, the project will intervene around markets where
ProLPRAF gains need to be reinforced. During the second phase, PRODEFI will
gradually expand its activities in all six wilayas.

B. Project development objective
12. The overall objective of PRODEFI is to improve the incomes and food and nutritional

10 Central Bank annual reports and interviews during formulation mission.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

3

security of poor rural people, particularly women and young people, in the project
area. The development objective is to include poor rural people, including women
and young people, in profitable and resilient value chains. PRODEFI will contribute
directly to achieving the objectives of the Rural Sector Development Strategy and
the National Agricultural Development Plan.

13. The project will target 42,600 direct beneficiaries and 243,000 indirect
beneficiaries, mainly farmers and other upstream and downstream value chain
actors. For the first phase, four value chains have been selected based on ProLPRAF
results and their poverty reduction potential: market gardening, poultry farming,
goat milk and non-timber forest products. For the second phase, plans call for
PRODEFI to operate in new value chains based on the results of the market studies
done during the first phase. A pilot operation in inland fishing will be conducted as
of project start-up around lake Foum Gleita.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will be structured around the following three components:

15. Component 1: Revitalization of value chains and development of pro-poor
public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps). The desired effect is for value
chain working groups (GTFs) and partnerships to support value chain development
and defend the interests of poor producers. To this end, the project will:
(i) reinforce and scale up GTF activities undertaken by ProLPRAF; (ii) promote a
better match between supply and demand and help set up higher performing and
more inclusive value chains by capitalizing producers, bringing actors into the
banking system, formalizing commercial transactions and facilitating partnerships
between actors, from simple contractual arrangements to 4P type partnerships; and
(iii) facilitate access to markets through structural improvements.

16. Component 2: Development and promotion of production models. The
intended effect is for the beneficiaries to adopt resilient, market-driven production
models that are sensitive to nutritional challenges. To this end, the project will
support: (i) competitive production models programmed to respond to market
demand, contracts and the 4Ps facilitated under component 1; and (ii) making
available training and advisory services associated with these production models,
i.e. nutritional education, agricultural advice, training for young people and
functional literacy.

17. Within the framework of these activities, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) financing granted will make it possible to take better account of
climate change by facilitating the use of solar energy – from production to storage
and processing – and promoting sustainable management techniques for natural
resources such as water, pastureland and plant resources, which are particularly
important in the non-timber forest products value chain.

18. Component 3: Coordination, M&E and knowledge management. Funding will
be provided for: (i) the project coordination and management unit based in
Nouakchott; (ii) the operations of two project operational management units, based
in Kaedi and Kiffa; (iii) the technical and financial assistance pool, based on cost
sharing with the Poverty Reduction Project in Aftout South and Karakoro – Phase II;
and (iv) strategic and technical steering activities as well as M&E, knowledge
management and communication.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

4

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project approach adopted by PRODEFI is to scale up the successes of ProLPRAF

while reinforcing and complementing them and integrating them with national
strategies through systematic, expanded policy dialogue. The project will adopt a
value chain approach driven by market demand. It will support actors involved the
value chains, both individually and collectively, as well as policy dialogue.Within the
framework of component 1, the actors will benefit from assistance in organization
and consultation to improve the matching of supply to demand. Project
interventions will consist of building the capacities of the actors in organization,
governance and leadership. The project will promote actor-to-actor contracting,
prioritizing producers and private promoters of innovative projects. Under
component 2, the project will, in developing market-driven production models as
defined in component 1, promote an increase in agricultural productivity and
processing by offering support to producers – underscoring financial viability,
improved nutrition and adaptation to climate change.

20. In addition, to gain efficiency, the project will adopt an outsourcing approach with
support from experienced national and international operators and consulting firms.
Operational partnerships will be promoted with other technical and financial
partners, civil society and the private sector to implement activities.

B. Organizational framework
21. Technical oversight of PRODEFI will be provided by the Policy, Planning, Statistics,

M&E and Cooperation Directorate (DPSSEC) of the Ministry of Agriculture, with
technical links to the departments in charge of the value chains targeted by the
project: livestock, fisheries and environment. The government contribution to the
project will be included in the budget of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
national steering committee will report to the Public Investment and Economic
Cooperation Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In addition, the
participation of GTF representatives will be crucial to facilitate policy dialogue
around value chain promotion. The same national steering committee could also
pilot other projects as part of IFAD’s programme in Mauritania.

22. With respect to programme coordination, a team in Nouakchott will be responsible
for operational and strategic project steering, with a mandate to, first, coordinate
and support work by branches and, second, facilitate policy dialogue on value chain
development at the national level.

23. Two operational management units, located in Kaédi and Kiffa and reporting
directly to the project coordinator, will be responsible for implementing the project.
Each unit will be administered by a branch head, based respectively within the
agriculture office in Kiffa and the livestock office in Kaédi. Both branches will be
supported by a deputy branch head and will benefit from the services of an M&E
assistant who will provide support for monitoring contracting, targeting, gender
equality, youth and nutrition, as well as a financial officer, secretariat and drivers.
Work premises will be shared with the regional offices.

24. With a view to gradually putting in place a programme approach to IFAD’s portfolio
in Mauritania, a shared pool of technical and financial assistance will provide
support to both projects in the portfolio. To this end, the PRODEFI PMU will be
housed in shared premises at the Nouakchott branch of PASK II.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
Planning

25. The PRODEFI activities will be presented each year in the form of an annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B) prepared on the basis of actors in the value chains
identified with GTF support and supported by annual action plans. Needs expressed
at the local level will be gathered on a participatory basis and consolidated by
wilayas with support from the operational management branches concerned. These



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

5

workplans will be subject to validation by technical steering committees, then
consolidated by the project coordination team in a national AWP/B and transmitted
for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture, then approved by the national steering
committee before being sent to IFAD for non objection.

M&E
26. The PRODEFI M&E system will be set up to provide information and analysis needed

to steer project implementation and plan sufficient human and financial resources
for implementation. It will measure progress in project implementation and its
effects and impact on the target groups. It will also report on a limited list of
indicators in connection with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS),
the effects of climate change (ASAP financing) and nutrition.

27. The system will be participatory, and the main M&E stakeholders will be GTFs,
implementation partners and service providers. Socio-economic baseline surveys
will be done by external service providers at project start-up and completion, and
will be strengthened with a study on the problematic issue of gender and poverty,
which will be conducted on the basis of the women’s empowerment in agriculture
index.

Learning and knowledge management
28. A knowledge management strategy will be developed under PRODEFI. The

approach will consist of creating a value chain between M&E, knowledge and
communication in order to collect, process, document, add value to and
disseminate on a large scale the data and information generated by activities in the
field, using multimedia and new technologies. The lessons learned will be
communicated via the PRODEFI website and at various national and international
workshops.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management

29. From start-up, PRODEFI will benefit from fiduciary support to encourage a forward
planning dynamic, which will be reviewed and supported during supervision
missions.

Flow of funds
30. To facilitate disbursements, the Recipient will open a designated project account

denominated in United States dollars at the Central Bank of Mauritania. The
National Pesticide Control Commission (CNCP) will open three current accounts
denominated in Mauritanian Ouguiya as the operating accounts in the two cities
where the PRODEFI branches will be located and in Nouakchott, where CNCP has its
headquarters. Start-up costs in amounts and categories to be defined during
negotiations with the Government are provided for upon the entry into
effectiveness of the PRODEFI financing agreement. Commitments and payments for
these expenses will be submitted by the Government of Mauritania to IFAD for non
objection on the basis of a detailed AWP/B.

Audit
31. The project will have an internal control function with activities based on an annual

plan drawn up by the internal controller. In addition, a full project audit conforming
to relevant international standards will be conducted each year by a firm drawn
from a shortlist with demonstrated experience in auditing the accounts of
IFAD-funded projects or programmes.

Procurement
32. Contracts for goods, works and services funded by IFAD will be awarded in

accordance with the regulations of the Recipient, provided they are compatible with
IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procedures governing contracts below the threshold
for sector commission jurisdiction will be set forth in the PRODEFI fiduciary manual.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

6

E. Supervision
33. Project supervision and administration of the financing will be done directly by

IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
34. The total cost of the project, which will be implemented over eight years, will be

US$45.2 million, of which US$4.2 million in respect of physical and financial
contingencies and US$41.0 million in base costs, which break down as follows:
US$18.3 million for component 1 (45 per cent), US$16.9 million for
component 2 (41 per cent) and US$5.8 million for component 3 (14 per cent).



7

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

4

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD

IFAD
ASAP

Other
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Value chain revitalization and 4P development
1.Professionalization of actors
and value chain steering 1.1 43.1 - - 1.1 43.1 - - - - 0.4 13.8 2.6 5.8
2.Contracting initiatives and
partnerships between value
chain actors 2.5 25.4 1.0 10.6 2.5 25.4 2.0 21.0 1.4 13.9 0.4 3.6 9.7 21.5
3.Structural improvements for
market access 3.3 41.5 - - 3.3 41.5 - - 0.4 4.6 1.0 12.5 7.9 17.5

Subtotal 6.9 34.0 1.0 5.1 6.9 34.0 2.0 10.1 1.7 8.5 1.7 8.4 20.2 44.7

B. Production models development and promotion
1.Production and processing
models 4.2 26.3 4.8 30.0 4.2 26.2 0.0 - 0.5 2.8 2.3 14.6 15.9 35.3
2.Advisory assistance and
supply of services 1.2 43.0 - - 1.2 43.0 - - - - 0.4 14.0 2.8 6.1

Subtotal 5.4 28.8 4.8 25.6 5.4 28.7 0.0 - 0.5 2.4 2.7 14.6 18.7 41.4

C. Coordination, M&E and knowledge management
1.Coordination and
management 2.3 46.2 - - 2.3 46.2 - - - - 0.4 7.6 4.9 10.8
2.M&E, knowledge
management and
communication 0.5 36.4 0.2 13.6 0.5 36.4 - - - - 0.2 13.7 1.4 3.1

Subtotal 2.8 44.0 0.2 3.0 2.8 44.0 - - - - 0.6 9.0 6.3 13.9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5.0 11.0 45.2 100.0



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

8

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

B. Project financing
35. PRODEFI, with a total cost of US$45.2 million, will be financed by: (i) IFAD, in the

amount of US$21 million (46.5 per cent of total cost), in the form of a grant for
US$15 million under the Debt Sustainability Framework for the 2016-2018 cycle of
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS), and a grant for US$6 million
under ASAP; (ii) private partners, in the amount of US$2 million (4.5 per cent);
(iii) the Government of Mauritania, in the amount of US$5 million (11 per cent);
and (iv) the beneficiaries, in the amount of US$2.2 million (4.8 per cent). The
financing deficit, in the amount of US$15 million, will be covered by other sources
of financing. Otherwise, it will be covered by a second tranche of IFAD financing
under the next PBAS cycle (2019-2021), subject to the availability of resources for
that cycle and subject to Executive Board approval.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure4

IFAD
PBAS

IFAD
ASAP

OTHER
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount    %
I. Investment expenses

A. Works 4.9 36.8 1.2 8.9 4.9 36.7 0.0 - 0.7 5.6 1.6 12 0 13 3 29.3
B. Vehicles 0.1 30.2 - - 0.1 28.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.3 0 1 40 0 0 3 0.7
C. Equipment and
supplies 0.3 19.1 0.3 21.9 0.3 18.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0 6 40 0 1 4 3.2
D. Training and
workshops 2.4 37.7 0.7 10.5 2.4 37.7 - - - - 0 9 14 0 6 4 14.1
E. Consultations 1.4 40.6 0.2 7.0 1.4 40.6 - - - - 0 4 11 9 3 5 7.7
F. Goods and services
and inputs 2.7 27.6 2.6 25.8 2.7 27.6 0.1 1.0 0.5 4.7 1 3 13 2 9 9 22.0
G. Grants and subsidies 1.5 21.4 1.0 15.0 1.5 21.4 1.9 28.3 1.0 13.9 0 0 - 6 9 15.2

Total investment
expenses 13.3 31.9 6.0 14.4 13.3 31.8 2.0 4.9 2.2 5.2 4 9 11 8 41 7 92 1

II. Operating expenses
A. Salaries and benefits 1.6 50.0 - - 1.6 50.0 - - - - - - 3 3 7.3
B. Operations 0.1 35.0 - - 0.1 35.0 - - - - 0 1 30 0 0 3 0.6

Total operating expenses 1.7 48.9 - - 1.7 48.9 - - - - 0 1 2 2 3 6 7 9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5 0 11 0 45 2 100 0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The financial analysis performed on the 4Ps and production models show that the

investments will be profitable, with internal rates of return (IRRs) higher than the
opportunity cost of capital and positive net present value (NPV). Based on the
assumptions included in the logical framework, the overall EIRR for the project is
20.5 per cent, generating NPV of US$19.6 million. The economic analysis takes into
account all of the aggregate benefits of the production models, 4Ps, environmental
co-benefits and the benefits deriving from tracks. The sensitivity analysis shows
robust results under all scenarios with different levels of risk.

D. Sustainability
37. The sustainability of PRODEFI results will be ensured by: (i) taking into account

market requirements and the profitability of investments in value chains;
(ii) strengthening and gradual participation of institutional actors such as GTFs,
government institutions and research centres, and economic actors such as
entrepreneurs and sponsoring companies, that are sustainably anchored in value
chain development; (iii) promoting a producer capitalization dynamic through
savings as a prerequisite for investments; and (iv) promoting production models
that are resilient to climate change and investments with positive environmental
externalities, as well as lower operating costs thanks to complementary ASAP
financing from IFAD.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

9

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The risk level presented by PRODEFI is considered moderate. The risks considered

most likely and most serious are systemic risks linked to the macro-economic
context, including competition from imports, as well as climate hazards, weak
domestic supply of services, and limited technical and management capacities for
implementation of the country programme. These risks will be mitigated through
greater involvement in policy dialogue to promote inclusive value chains, financing
for adaptation measures and use of outsourcing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
39. The project is in compliance with IFAD strategies, principles and tools in the areas

of rural finance and value chain financing, as well as gender equality. It is fully
consistent with IFAD's strategy on climate change (2010), particularly the objective
promoting innovative approaches to assist smallholder producers, both women and
men, to better adapt to climate change.

40. PRODEFI is classified in category B in that it is not expected to have any major
adverse environmental or social impact. Its climate vulnerability is deemed
moderate given the inclusion of adaptation considerations in all project activities.
The project also includes a set of technologies and approaches intended to prevent
greenhouse gas emissions and enable carbon storage.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the strategy on rural sector

development, which has as one of its five strategic directions the development of
value chains with growth potential, generating permanent employment and
motivating incomes, with support from structured mechanisms for consultation and
effective value chain management to the benefit of the organizations of value chain
actors. In addition, it is fully consistent with the National Agricultural Development
Plan, which calls for promoting the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. The
recent installation of the Value Chain Directorate at the new Ministry of Livestock
underscores the importance given to value chains within the Mauritanian
institutional landscape.

42. With respect to nutrition, an inter-sector action plan on nutrition has been drafted
under the initiative of the Renewed Efforts against Child Hunger and Undernutrition
(REACH) partnership with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO and WFP. A national
multi-sector strategy on nutrition (2016-2025) is also nearing completion. PRODEFI
will be part of the implementation of this strategic plan.

43. In the area of climate change, in 2015 Mauritania prepared an INDC in connection
with the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. PRODEFI will contribute to implementing national priorities
through its support for small-scale irrigation and regeneration of plant cover.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. A number of innovations and best practices introduced by ProLPRAF will be scaled

up under this project, e.g.:

(i) The market-driven value chain approach, through dialogue among the actors
within GTFs. The situational analysis done of GTFs at the time of project
design and the lessons learned from ProLPRAF allowed for a rigorous
identification of support on a larger scale for GTF governance, organization,
capacity for awareness-raising, leadership and youth representation;

(ii) The 4P initiatives undertaken during year one of ProLPRAF, which serve as a
model for developing 4P initiatives for PRODEF;

(iii) Capitalization of smallholder producers through savings, using the Centre for



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

10

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

International Studies and Cooperation (CECI) model piloted by Catholic Relief
Services in Mauritania, which showed promising results that warrant scaling
up the initiative; and

(iv) Support for community associations for joint management of natural
resources and non-timber forest products.

D. Policy engagement
45. PRODEFI will support GTF federations and inter-professions in engaging in policy

dialogue with the Government on improving the economic environment for value
chains. The exchanges will relate mainly to: (i) policies to promote inclusive value
chains; (ii) promoting local products; (iii) implementing legislation on cooperatives
and other professional organizations; and (iv) policy on trade and tariffs. This policy
dialogue process will result in concrete proposals on matters such as health and
quality standards for value chain products, improving national legislation and
enforcement, and market opportunities that could lead to improving food and
nutritional security for households. Within this framework, the project will work with
others operating in the area of institutional support and policy dialogue to ensure
good coordination among interventions.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
46. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

47. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount equivalent
to ten million seven hundred and fifty special drawing rights
(SDR 10,750,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) in an amount equivalent to four million three hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 4,300,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President













































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project

Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project


Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





