













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 
 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 2 of 21  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P160606 Afghanistan Strategic 
Grain Reserve ( SGR 
Project ) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 10-Apr-2017 13-Jun-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan - Ministry of 
Finance 

MAIL  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their needs following emergency situations and improve the efficiency of the grain storage 
management.” 
 
Components 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
Component B: Physical Infrastructure 
Component C: Project Management: 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   18.00  

Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund   11.45  

Total Project Cost   29.45  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Afghanistan is a landlocked country, surrounded by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan in the north, 
Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and southwest, and China in the northeast. The country is divided 
into thirty four provinces, each province consists of a number of districts. Within these districts, most 
families live in villages. Rural households make up around 80 percent of the population, which is estimated 
to be 32.5 million (World Bank, 2015), with one of the highest growth rates of population worldwide (3 
percent / year). The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Afghanistan is around $ 19.2 billion (World Bank, 
2015).  

 
Over the last several decades, the country went through wars, and internal conflicts, resulting in weak 
economy, and absence of some of the basic services in parts of the country. All economic activities, and the 
potential for economic growth in Afghanistan have been badly affected by the deteriorating security 
situation, and the uncertainty about its political future, with around 39 percent of the Afghans falling under 
the poverty line (World Bank, 2013). Recently, Statistics showed negative levels of consumers’ prices index 
reflecting the high unemployment rates, and the weak economic conditions. The security situation remains 
a serious challenge, it has even deteriorated recently in some areas of the country, with limited presence or 
control from the government. 
 
Agriculture is the main pillar of the Afghan economy, being the second contributor to the GDP, following 
the services sector, which primarily depends on the presence of the international community in 
Afghanistan. The agriculture sector employs around 40 percent of the working force of the country

1
, and 

provides support to approximately 80 percent of the population in their livelihood. Direct agriculture 
activities contribute 25 percent to the GDP of the country. The number would be much higher if other 
related activities such as food processing, logistic, and trade of food items, are included. Wheat and its 
related activities such as logistics, and milling represents around 6.5 percent of the national GDP on the 
country.  

 
Agriculture productivity per unit of land in Afghanistan is low compared to world standards and some of its 
neighboring countries for most of the crops. Arable land in Afghanistan is around 12 percent of its total 
area, with less than half of the cultivated land is irrigated, while the larger portion of crops is rain-fed. 
Along with the high annual growth rate of population, this makes the country import-dependent for a large 
number of major food products, including wheat.  
 
Malnutrition is another chronic challenge in Afghanistan. It is estimated that 33 percent of Afghans are 
food insecure. Access to basic food items is limited for many Afghans, with around 34.7 percent of rural 

                                                           
1
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 4 of 21  

 

households suffering from caloric deficiency in normal condition. This become even worse during times of 
shortages of supply. 
 
Given the fact that the agriculture sector in Afghanistan is not yet developed, in terms of adopting modern 
technologies, especially those related to climate resilient seeds, water management, and improved farming 
practices, this makes its agriculture production highly volatile, and vulnerable to sudden shocks, resulting 
from any unforeseen situation. 
 
Agricultural production in Afghanistan consists mainly of wheat, horticulture, nuts, and poppy

2
. Due to the 

very high level of consumption per capita, and being major part of the Afghan diet, wheat accounts for 
more than 60 percent of total areas cultivated, with a total area of around 2.4 million hectares

3
, almost 

equally split between irrigated and rain-fed cultivation, which creates high level of volatility in production 
every year. This has resulted in a fluctuating supply of wheat for households’ consumption on annual basis. 
This deficit of supply is mainly addressed by imports.  
 
Additionally, the political relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, affects to a large extent the flow 
of goods to the country, bearing in mind its position as a landlocked country, with limited access to 
international trade and supply routes.  
 
By nature, Afghanistan is also prone to other natural disasters such as earthquakes, which adds to the 
already weak situation in the country. When such incidents occur, supply of wheat through the regular 
channels become more challenging, and many Afghans especially the poor lack access to wheat for their 
daily diet.   
 
Altogether, these factors puts Afghanistan in a very fragile situation with regard to its ability to secure basic 
food requirements specially wheat, for the need of its citizens especially at times of shortages of supply due 
to unforeseen situations, and emphasizes the need to establish a strategic reserve of wheat to be utilized 
during possible deficits of supply.     

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Wheat is the largest crop grown in Afghanistan, covering nearly 60 percent of all cultivated lands. 

Production of wheat in Afghanistan comes mainly from the northern regions, which is mostly rain-fed 

cultivations, this increases the risk of volatility of production on annual basis. Over the last ten years (2005 

– 2015), annual production of wheat fluctuated between 2.1 million tons in 2008, to slightly above 5 million 

tons in 2014. There are several factors resulting in this large variability, mainly adverse climate conditions- 

specifically drought. Afghanistan is affected by global climate change, which is resulting in less rains, and 

increase in temperature, which accordingly have negative impact on its agricultural production in terms of 

areas cultivated and productivity per unit of land, bearing in mind that more than half of its cultivated lands 

are rain-fed. Additionally, the poor quality of seeds, and the limited adoption of modern farming practices 

adds to the situation.  

The recent significant shortages of local production were observed in 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2011, with 

                                                           
2
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

3
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 5 of 21  

 

the unfavorable weather conditions being
4
 the main reason.  During these years, supply of wheat for 

household consumption dropped sharply, it was also accompanied with ban on exports of wheat from 
some of the neighboring supplying countries facing the same unfavorable climate conditions. This 
resulted in limiting the access of many Afghans to wheat for their daily consumption.  
 
In Afghanistan, bread constitutes around 70 percent of the daily caloric intake

5
. Globally, the country 

has the highest annual rate of wheat consumption per capita (160kg)
6
. This makes the availability of the 

crop a significantly important factor for the social stability of Afghanistan. Each year large quantities of 

wheat are imported primarily by the private sector, which mainly serve the urban community, along 

with donations from other countries.  With the limited availability of data in Afghanistan, different 

sources have different estimates for the annual imports of wheat ranging between one to two million 

tons every year, which roughly represents 20 – 40 percent of the overall consumption of the country, 

depending on the size of domestic production. For the 2016 / 2017 crop season, MAIL estimates that 

import requirements will be around 1.25 million tons.  

Regularly, the government of Afghanistan receives grain donations from other countries (mainly India), 

over the period 2011 – 2014 the government received 250,000 tons from India, and in 2016 – 2017 

season only, India is planning to provide around 100,000 tons to Afghanistan. All these quantities are 

stored and distributed to the poorest in Afghanistan. Irregularly, the government purchases much 

smaller quantities from farmers for the same purpose, in 2015 MAIL purchased only 900 tons from 

Afghan farmers. 

 Imports of wheats by the private sector usually offsets the deficit of domestic production, however in 

some years, and due to various reasons including market forces, political issues, and the impact of 

climate conditions, the availability of wheat in neighboring exporting countries becomes quite limited. 

Coupled with the shortfalls of local production of wheat in the country, this results in strong shocks to 

the supply for Afghan households’ consumption, especially the poorest in the country. In 2008 with the 

global hike in price of commodities, along with the decline in production is many countries, Pakistan 

which is the main supplier of wheat and wheat flour to Afghanistan banned exports of wheat, although 

some quantities of wheat were illegally exported, Afghanistan witnessed a serious situation in this 

regard.  

In 2008, and as per the historical data from MAIL, price of one ton of wheat reached around $750 in 

Afghanistan, compared to around $250 in 2007, and around $350 in 2009, the situation was similar 

earlier in 2004, 2006, and then later again in 2011, however it was not as severe as it was in 2008. These 

hikes in wheat prices make it very hard for average households in Afghanistan to secure their needs of 

bread, considering the poverty rates in the country, and the high level of wheat consumption per capita. 

During all these circumstances the government of Afghanistan was not able to respond to these 

unforeseen situations, by providing support to its people, especially poor households, which were 

already struggling to earn their living. 

                                                           
4
 FAO, 2013  

5
 FAO, 2013 

6
Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 6 of 21  

 

Productivity levels per unit of land for both irrigated and rain-fed wheat in Afghanistan remains low, 

compared to neighboring countries. Additionally, the weak post-harvest practices, and value addition 

activities, such as threshing, handling, and milling, and also the poor condition of the storage facilities, 

results in losses in the harvested crop, and deterioration of quality.  

 The World Bank through other agriculture projects in Afghanistan, specifically the ARTF funded project; 

Afghanistan Agriculture Inputs Project (AAIP) is already providing support in areas of wheat productivity 

enhancement, through introducing high quality seeds, and providing support to farmers on the adoption 

of improved agricultural practices. The government of Afghanistan have an ambitious goal to be self-

sufficient of wheat by 2020 through increased productivity, and expansion of irrigated wheat 

cultivations. This represents a real challenge at least on the medium term, considering the limited 

resources of water, arable land, and the need to 

expand beyond the high growth rate of the 

population. However, the challenge is even 

higher with the supporting activities such as 

storage and handling, which are currently weak, 

and have large impact on the quality of wheat, 

and is a direct result for high post-harvest 

losses.  

 

The government owns five large silos located in 

the provinces of Kabul, Kandahar, Heart, 

Baghlan, and Balkh as spotted on the map of Afghanistan. These silos operate as State Owned 

Enterprises (SOEs), operating under supervision of MAIL, and they charge the government for the 

quanities of wheat stored. The five silos are concrete constructions, and were built during the Soviet 

presence in Afghanistan during the 1970’s. Combined together, the silos have a total theoretical storage 

capacity of 170,000 tons. There are a number of warehouses owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), adjacent to the silos with a total storage capacity of approximately 

65,000 tons, additionally, fifty two small scale warehouses are owned and operated by MAIL, and are 

distributed over 17 provinces, and all facilities are used for the storage and distribution of wheat. 

However, none of five large silos are operating at capacity, it is estimated that the utilization of the silos 

storage capacities is around 25 percent of its original capacity. This is mainly due to the lack of 

maintenance, human skills, and spare parts, accordingly the actual available storage capacity is much 

less. More importantly, the poor condition of these storage facilities, and its outdated operating 

procedures negatively affects the quality of the wheat stored. Generally, skills of the technical team 

operating these facilities are weak, and their knowledge on modern practices in managing grain stocks 

are quite limited. Although there is no specific assessment, some officials and donors estimates storage 

losses to be around 20 percent.  

Although, there is a directorate under MAIL responsible for the management of the grain reserve of the 

country. However, this directorate has limited capacities, and lacks the required set of skills to engage in 

managing such program, and due to the implementation of the standard governmental procedures and 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 7 of 21  

 

regulations, their ability to directly engage in the wheat market is limited. While operating in such a 

dynamic market requires certain level of flexibility, to make decisions and engage in the procurement 

process when there is a good market opportunity.  

 

These factors altogether, from the importance that wheat represents in the afghan diet, and the fact 

that the country is wheat import-dependency, along with the volatile ties with its main suppliers, make 

it significantly important to build up wheat reserve, that can be used in responding to any unforeseen 

situations that may occur similar to those which the country witnessed several times, over the last 

twelve years. This wheat reserve can also be utilized in addressing the malnutrition situation in 

Afghanistan, through including a fortification program to the wheat stored.  

However, building up such a reserve requires solid storage structures, by which wheat can be stored in 

compliance with international standards in storing, handling, and quality control of wheat. More 

importantly, there is a need to establish an entity to be responsible for managing this reserve, with the 

required highly skilled human capital. 

The government of Afghanistan represented by MAIL, have been prioritizing the establishment of a 

Strategic Grain Reserve, and have been engaged in discussion with the World Bank seeking support in 

this regard. Initially, the government was interested in developing the grain reserve to serve two 

purposes, firstly, responding to emergency situations, and secondly to be utilized in stabilizing the wheat 

market in Afghanistan for the benefit of the farmers, through setting up minimum guaranteed price. The 

Bank advice on this regard was that such a practice would result in crowding out the private sector from 

the market, and eventually harm the farmers themselves, as this would limit the market opportunities 

for them, especially that it would require the allocation of significantly large financial resources from the 

government side, which is not available. 

Recently, and following extensive discussions between the World Bank and the Government of 

Afghanistan (GoA), an agreement was reached that the objective of establishing a strategic grain reserve 

should only be to efficiently respond to emergency situations, enabling the government to be able to 

secure basic food supplies of wheat for at least two million people for one year.  

In preparation for the proposed engagement in building a grain reserve, the World Bank conducted an 
engineering assessment for the five silos and the warehouses adjacent to it. The findings of the 
assessment covered the condition of building, machinery, other equipment and supportive activities on 
site. All five facilities were found in need for extensive rehabilitation, with different level of work 
required according to the condition on each site, and accordingly different cost estimate for each 
location. The study also provided a brief cost estimate for establishing Greenfield silos using modern 
storage technologies. In parallel, MAIL, reached out to a number of international suppliers, and obtained 
tentative cost estimations for Greenfield silos.  

 

Also, during the preparation for this project, a vulnerability assessment was conducted to study the 
current status of the food security in Afghanistan, and access to basic food supplies, based on trends in 
wheat production and to identify the areas within the country that are highly vulnerable in case an 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 8 of 21  

 

emergency situation occurs, based on previous incidents, and the current storage capacities. The 
objective of the assessment was to advise on the suitability of the locations of the existing storage 
facilities, and provide recommendation on other locations (if any), to ensure efficient coverage, and 
ability to respond to sudden shocks.  

 

The vulnerability assessment reviewed a range of food insecurity assessments undertaken by the Bank, 
the government of Afghanistan, World Food Program, and others.  The assessment used to the most in 
depth degree was the 2013/14 Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS) as this data resource had the 
most in depth data set on food insecurity which could be effectively used to evaluate the spatial 
distribution of vulnerability in the country.   Two of the main findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were; a) food insecurity in the country is generally widely distributed around the country, and b) the 
existing placement of the silos infrastructure, in most cases, if improved can be relatively well placed to 
address problems of food insecurity for most of the population, with one exception for a specific region 
that showed a deficit on food security in relation to the available storage capacity. 
 
The table below uses data on populations of severely and moderately food insecure populations from 
the 2013/14 ALCS survey disaggregated by region to develop an estimate of potential grain storage 
needs to respond to problems of food insecurity.  The evaluation makes the assumption that severely 
food insecure populations would be provided a 100 percent ration of wheat though the three month 
winter lean season.  On a per capita consumption rate of 170kg/annum, this would be a ration of 42kg 
of wheat grain for the period per person.  For moderately food insecure populations, a ratio of 50 
percent of consumption would be provided for the same three month lean season.  This would be 
equivalent to 21kg of wheat grain per person

7
.   

The analysis revealed that those regions near already planned large storage facilities; Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, and Herat, do not have wheat requirements larger than the scale of the existing storage facilities 
if improved.  Similarly, a centralized facility in Kandahar would be able to serve the southwest of the 

                                                           
7
 Equivalent to 170kg/capita/annum x 0.25 years (3 months) x 50% 

Region 

Severe Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Moderate 
Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Total Est. 
Req. (MT) 

Service Point and Comments 

Central 27,058 18,920 45,977    Area effectively serviced from Kabul 

Central Region 12,168 17,950 30,118 
   Decentralized facility or met from Kabul or Herat  
(jointly) 

Eastern 4,191 4,757 8,948 Area could be serviced from Kabul 

North 17,488 21,736 39,224 Area effectively serviced from Mazar Sharif 

North-east 28,970 24,334 53,304 
Capacity in Mazar Sharif not sufficient for need.  
Would also need decentralized facility 

South-east 10,045 5,523 15,568 Serviced from Kandahar or from Kabul 

South-west 21,204 16,034 37,238 Kandahar or serviced from Heart 

West 21,490 16,046 37,536 Area effectively serviced from Herat 

     

National 142,613 125,301 267,914 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 9 of 21  

 

country, or feasibly this region could also potentially be served from Herat.  The ALCS data show 
relatively low rates of food insecurity in the east of the country (estimated food requirement in this 
region is less than 10,000MT), this region could very likely be served out of Kabul.  In the Southeast 
region total estimated food requirements are also relatively modest, estimated at roughly 15,000MT.  
This region might also be served out of Kabul or if need be, the facility in Kandahar could also contribute 
to address needs in this area.      
 
The areas that present the most substantial challenges are the Central region and the Northeast regions 
of the country.  The Northeast, according to this analysis, has a wheat requirement of 53,000MT.  At this 
requirement level it is not likely that it would be feasible to service this area from the facility in Mazar-e-
Sharif.  In addition, the facility in Pul-e-Khumri is potentially too distant to be able to effectively address 
needs in this area.  As such it seems that it would be a reasonable approach to develop smaller 
decentralized facilities in this region able to address food insecurity problems in this area.  Government 
data show that there is an estimated storage capacity of 6,000MT in Badakhshan province.  This 
infrastructure could be built on and further developed.  ALCS data by province show that in the 
northeast the large bulk of food insecure populations are in Badakhshan more so than Kunduz or 
Takhar.  As such, infrastructure would need to be developed to respond to the structure of current 
needs.   

 
The Central region are also an area where the quantity needed is relatively substantial (30,118 MT).  
According to government data, there are 5,000MT facilities in each of Central region provinces of 
Bamyan, Ghor, and Daykundi that were built in the last 10 years.  This total storage level of 15,000 MT 
for this region would be a very good start in terms of having available local storage capacity in these 
provinces.  For needs over and above this, it is likely that the balance of required foods could be 
supplied from Mazar-e Sharif and Herat.   

 

Ultimately, the assessment confirmed that the enhancement of the current storage facilities or the 

consideration of a greenfield silos at the same locations, along with the sufficient stock of wheat 

available, can help the Government of Afghanistan be in a good position to respond to emergency 

situations, and be able to supply Afghans with wheat as the basic and main food item consumed, of 

course with the presence of other factors such as solid logistics, and distribution mechanism. However, 

the study also revealed that a need exists for an additional large storage facility in the northeast region 

of the country, where productivity rates of wheat are very low since wheat cultivations in this area are 

mainly rain-fed, in addition to the absence of large storage facilities for wheat, and the fact that this 

region is generally prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, plus the difficulty in reaching out to 

some of the areas of the region especially during winter time. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 10 of 21  

 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of the grain storage management”.  

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following PDO results indicators:  
 
Increased availability of wheat stocks.  

Increased number of households whose wheat needs can be met immediately after the occurrence of 

an emergency situation affecting their access to wheat, and  

Reduced losses in wheat stored, as a result of the upgrade of the storage facilities, relative to pre-

project intervention.  

 
D. Project Description  
 

The project aims to support the Government of Afghanistan, in building up a reserve of wheat that can 

be utilized in responding to any emergency situation the country may face, which usually leads to 

shortages of supply of wheat, which is considered the most important food item for household 

consumption in the country.    

Emergency situations occurring in Afghanistan are generally due to unforeseen weather conditions such 

as severe drought resulting in share decline in the local wheat crop, natural disaster such as 

earthquakes, which is frequent in the country, and usually results in limiting people’s access to wheat.  

Declaration of an emergency situation is assigned to a ministerial committee. The entity that will be 

established by the project to manage the reserve will coordinate with this committee as part of its tasks 

in working closely with relevant stakeholders.  In this regard, the entity will be prepared to act on up the 

declaration of an emergency situation in the country, to do so, the new entity will have its own 

operational procedures for actions to be taken to respond accordingly.    

The objective of the project will be achieved through the establishment of an autonomous entity to 

manage the grain reserve. This entity will be responsible for obtaining and receiving wheat 

internationally and locally, from aid provided by other countries, and also the purchase of wheat from 

local and international markets, and managing the handling, storage, and distribution operations of 

wheat, while ensuring that quality is maintained through the adoption of global best practices in this 

regard. In order to enable the new entity in becoming well-positioned to help in responding to 

emergency situations, the project will work on building existing capacities under MAIL, and benefit from 

those have gained the required knowledge in the activities of the new entity, in addition to adding 

additional calibers as needed.  

The objective of the project will also be achieved through the improvement of the existing storage 

capacities through rehabilitation process, and also the establishment of Greenfield facilities. On this 

regard, the project will decide on the selection between different options of silos rehabilitation versus 

the establishment of Greenfield facilities. Currently, the proposed activities includes the rehabilitation of 

the two silos located in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, considering that both are in relatively good 

condition, while establishing three greenfield silos in Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat considering the level of 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 11 of 21  

 

work required for rehabilitation is significant, and also the fact that one of these silos (Kabul), is now 

being in the center of the city, which may have negative impact on the surroundings if rehabilitated.   

The objective of establishing the grain reserve will remain only to respond to emergency situations in 

the country. However, in order to maintain the quality of the wheat stored, and as a common practices 

in managing grain stocks, a portion of the wheat will be offered for sale annually on basis of stock 

replenishment. The sale of wheat will be at the prevailing market prices, and will be in a manner that 

has no impact on market dynamics, and will not engage in price setting.  

The project will utilize new technologies in developing a wheat crop estimation tool, which will provide 

accurate forecasts for the locally grown wheat in Afghanistan, to assess the needs for imports based on 

local supply, and annual consumptions rates.  

The project will also seek to partially address the malnutrition situation in Afghanistan through the 

introduction of a fortification program for the wheat / wheat flour distributed under the project.  The 

fortification of wheat flour will be achieved in collaboration with the World Food Program, which enjoys 

solid on ground presence in Afghanistan, and have already established large network with hundreds of 

local wheat millers to ensure implementation of the fortification program during wheat milling.  

Both activities of the development of the crop estimation, and the nutrition support, will be 

subcomponents under the first component, which covers the establishment of the grain reserve 

management entity, and the related intuitional infrastructure development.  

Implementation will of project activities will be carried out by a transit Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), until the entity that will be in charge of managing the grain reserve is established, then it will take 
over from the transit PIU.   

 
The project will be implemented over five years, and will consist of the following three main 

components: 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building: (US$ 3.9 million) 

This component will be focused on the establishment, and support the start-up activities of the 

proposed entity to be in charge of managing the grain reserve. Activities of the component will also 

include the development of the crop estimation system, and also include activities related to the 

nutrition, and wheat fortification.  

Component B: Physical Infrastructure: (US$ 23.1 million) 

The silos are located mostly in urban centers, except Kandahar. Kabul silo is located in a growing urban 

center, surrounded mostly by residential and commercial development. Pul-e-Khumri silo is also 

surrounded by residential areas on the north and south side of the facility and lies directly on the main 

road running through the town. Mazar Sharif silo is approximately 4 km from the city center, surrounded 

by residential and commercial development. Herat silo is also located in an urban area on a valuable 

land site. Kandahar silo is located on the outskirts of the city, but this silo is in a very poor condition.   



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 12 of 21  

 

This component will finance the required physical engineering work including the rehabilitation of the 

existing 2 silos, and also the establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos and a new warehouse facility in the 

northeast region of the country considering its high vulnerability.  Activities of the component are based 

on the outcome of the field assessment conducted during the project preparation process.  

Activities under this component will be implemented through a gradual work approach, so that the 

timeframe for the rehabilitation of the existing facilities, and the construction of new facilities allows the 

utilization of each of the storage facilities once completed, while maintaining sufficient storage capacity 

available at other facilities prior undergoing an upgrading process. The work schedule will be designed 

to ensure that by end of the fourth year of the project all five silos are fully operational, and the new 

warehouse facility in the north east region is fully functioning.  

Both the physical assessment of the silos which was undertaken recently as part of project preparation, 

and also the vulnerability assessment will guide the work under this component. From the results of the 

assessment and the cost effectiveness analysis, three new Greenfield silos will be constructed in Kabul, 

Kandahar and Herat as the cost of rehabilitating these facilities is more than new Greenfield 

construction.  The facilities on Mazar Sharif and Pul-e-Khumri will be rehabilitated as this is the most 

economical way to restore these facilities to full operational capacity, and considering that both are in 

relatively good condition.  For rehabilitation, substantial repairs will need to be made to the actual 

concrete silos as these have deteriorated over time.  In most cases the grounds around the facilities also 

need to be upgraded and rehabilitated to facilitate the movement of trucks into and around the facility.  

Truck weigh scales will also have to be replaced.  The mechanical equipment such as elevators, conveyor 

belts, cleaning and drying equipment, scales, and other machinery will need to be replaced in full as it 

has deteriorated from a long period of disuse.  In most instances, replacement of this mechanical 

equipment comprises roughly 50 percent or more of the total rehabilitation expenses.  In the cases of 

new Greenfield construction, new steel silos will be constructed on the grounds of the existing storage 

facilities.  The location of the existing facilities are sufficiently large that there should be more than 

sufficient room for this new construction.  .  Finally, a new laboratory along with testing equipment will 

be installed in all storage facilities.   

In addition, as recommended a new flat warehouse will be built in Badakhshan province to address food 

insecurity problems in this region of the country as was identified by the vulnerability assessment.  The 

activities of this subcomponent will commence by assessing different plots of land owned by MAIL in 

Badakhshan province, preferably close to the capital city of Faizabad. Criteria for land selection will 

include the topography of the land being flat, with no signs of elevation or slopes, with an area of 

around 5 - 6 hectares, and are connected to main roads for ease of access.  

Design and preparation work will be carried out to establish a modern warehouse, with steel 

construction, suitable for the storage of bagged and bulk wheat. The site should include a weight bridge 

scale, ventilation system, quality control laboratory, and pest and dust control systems. The site will 

include area for trucks’ movement and maneuvering.  

Component C: Project Management: (US$ 2.46 million) 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 13 of 21  

 

This component will finance activities related to the establishment and operations of a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), to be in charge of managing all project activities. The PIU will be located at 

MAIL in Kabul, and will be responsible for all implementation activities including the finalization and 

development of the required institutional structure which will eventually be responsible for managing 

the grain reserve.  

The PIU will be transitional, so that once the new entity in charge of managing the strategic grain 

reserve is established and fully functioning, the PIU will be handing over all of its assignments and 

activities to it. It is anticipated that this step will take place by the end of the third year of the lifetime of 

the project. However, prior to the establishment of the grain reserve managing entity, the PIU will be in 

charge, and will coordinate all its activities with the SGR directorate and other units under MAIL.   

The PIU will be responsible from the start of the project for the rehabilitation of the 2 silos, and 
establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos, in addition to construction of a warehouse in the north east region, 
and in hiring of consultants, advisors, and carrying our all related procurement work. The PIU will be also 
responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies, and carrying our all related 
procurement work. The PIU will be also responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies.  
The PIU will include managerial, technical, and fiduciary staff, and will be also responsible identifying the 

areas where it will require international expertise, and will carry out all their hiring process in line with 

the World Bank guidelines.    

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 14 of 21  

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The implementing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL). 
Implementation of all project activities will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will 
be established under MAIL, and will be located at the ministry’s premises in Kabul.    
 
The PIU will be responsible for the managerial, financial, operational, and technical aspects related to the 
implementation of all components, and will be reporting regularly on progress of project activities to MAIL and 
the World Bank in relation to all project activities. The PIU will develop the project procurement plans, identify 
requirements for international expertise, and obtain the required resources accordingly.  
 

The PIU will coordinate its activities with relevant partners, and stakeholders including donors, governmental 
agencies, consultants, and private sector.  
 

With the establishment of the proposed entity that will be dedicated to manage the grain reserve, this new 
entity will take over the full responsibility of activities, and will seek to coordinate the work with the relevant 
stakeholders. The entity will be overseen by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by MAIL.  
 
 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by H.E. Minister of MAIL (or his delegates), will oversee project 
activities, and the implementation process carried out by the PIU, the committee will provide guidance and 
support, and will facilitate the interaction with other stakeholders. 

 
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project is rehabilitating two silos in the cities of Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, in addition to the 
construction of three new Silos in the cities of Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat, and also constructing an 
additional Greenfield warehouse in the northeast region of the country. This may have minor potential 
environmental, health and safety issues/impacts during construction and operation on site. Therefore, the 
World Bank OP 4.01 is triggered and MAIL has prepared an ESMF to be applied during the whole project 
cycle. Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the current two sites of rehabilitation operation, similar site 
specific ESMPs will be prepared based on guidelines and check lists provided by the project ESMF. The site 
specific ESMPs will be properly implemented by the Ministry and the relevant contractors. An 
implementation level Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be prepared to for any environment health and 
safety issues that may raise from the fumigation process for preserving the quality of the wheat stored in 
the silos. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 15 of 21  

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Mohammad Arif Rasuli,Qais Agah 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The WB OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project 
will rehabilitate two silos, and construct three new 
silos, and also a new storage facility at the northeast 
region. The rehabilitation and operation of the old 
facilities as well as selection, construction and 
operation of three new storage facilities may have 
minor potential environmental, health and safety 
issues and impacts on the operators and the labors 
as well as on the local environment.  Therefore, in 
order to mitigate such potential impacts an ESMF 
was prepared by MAIL and found acceptable by the 
Bank. Based on the direction and guidelines as well 
as check lists of the ESMF, two site specific ESMPs 
were also prepared for the existing silos that will 
undergo rehabilitation and will be implemented to 
avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential impact. 
Once the location of the three new sites are 
identified, site specific ESMPs will also be prepared 
during implementation stage and will be applied on 
the new sites of the remaining three new silos. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The WB Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) is 
triggered as the silos will be using fumigation for 
maintaining the quality of wheat stored as a general 
practice in managing grain reserves. Use of 
fumigants should be according to the USEPA and 
WHO guidelines . Health and Safety measures should 
strictly be followed for Operation and Maintenance 
of silos to ensure the safety of the workers at the 
site of the silos . MAIL and the project with the help 
of WB safeguards team will prepare a Pest 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 16 of 21  

 

Management Plan during the project 
implementation much in advance before the 
facilities are used for storing wheat which is not 
expected to be before the second year of the 
project. The plan will consider the current practices 
and knowledge about the issue, e.g., what 
technology is used for preservation of wheat and 
availability of fumigants in the market. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP/BP 4.12 is applicable since the project will 
support the construction of new three Silos, which 
may require land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. 
Since the scope and other details of all proposed 
activities, including the exact locations of the new 
silos are not yet determined, an ESMF and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared by the client and the executive summary 
was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s 
external website prior to project appraisal on 
4/11/2017. 
The ESMF and RPF will guide preparation of the 
social safeguards studies, such as limited Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA), ESMPs and RAPs (where 
needed). The RPF includes the requisite Terms of 
Reference (TORs) for the RAP.  
ESMF and RPF consultations with stakeholders have 
been conducted and minutes from public 
consultation have been included. 
 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts and might only have minor reversible impacts as the 
civil works would only be either rehabilitation of two existing silos, and construction of three new silos. When the 
ESMF tools and the ESMPs for the two locations under rehabilitation are properly applied during the implementation, 
this potential impact will be mitigated. ESMPs will carefully chalk out the sanitation and drinking water needs and their 
interaction and will give specific mitigation measures, and will also provide directions in sites of labor camps if any, 
selection and rehabilitation of specific areas, transportation routes, and the occupational health and safety measures 
for the labors and the local relevant communities. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects will include rehabilitation of two silos in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri and construction of three 
new silos in Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar in addition to the establishment of a new warehouse facility in Badakhsan. 
The project ESMF, the subprojects site specific ESMPs have been prepared, and an outline for the  Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) is also included in the project ESMF, and during project implementation, a full PMP will be developed. With 
these instruments, the project will be positioned to reduce and mitigate any potential impact. However, due to the 
nature of the Project compoentnts there will be no indirect and /or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities 
The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, because the physical infrastructure activities under 
component B may  involve implications that could impact individuals and/or communities in different ways. Therefore, 
the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the preparation of any Social 
Impact Assessments (SIA) or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that may be needed. However, it is expected that all 
new constructions will be all on lands owned by MAIL, and free from any settlers.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project aimed to use government owned land and environmental friendly technologies for establishing and/or 
renovating the Silos, and also for the construction of the new warehouse in the northeast region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will address all safeguards related issues under a framework approach. A project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework(ESMF) has been developed by the borrower and a safeguards specialist will be hired 
by the project in order to implement the ESMF and to comply with the world bank safeguard policies. The borrower, 
the implementing agency, MAIL has experience with the WB safeguards implementation and will hopefully implement 
the relevant project safeguards at a satisfactory level.  
For each of the subprojects a site specific Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESMP) would be prepared 
based on the project ESMF. Already two ESMPs for the two locations that will undergo rehabilitation have been 
developed. The borrower will mainstream relevant clauses in the relevant contract documents and will follow the 
Occupational Health and Safety as well as sanitation issues in project sites as well as in the project labor camps. During 
the implementation stage a PMP would be prepared and the outline of the proposed PMP is included as an Annex to 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 18 of 21  

 

the project ESMF.  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are government agencies, local populations residing close to the silos facilities, donors, 
consultants, and private sector. Relevant citizen engagement tools  were used during preparation of the ESMF, and 
the ESMPs for the two already identified sites (the two silos which will be rehabilitated), once the other four locations 
have been identified during project implementation, site specific ESMPs will be developed. The ESMF and the site 
specific ESMPs as well as the PMP will all be disclosed on the Ministry Website as well as in the Bank Intranet system. 
Consultation and disclosure procedure is also illustrated in the ESMF. Already the executive summary of the ESMF 
have been translated to local language, and published. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
     



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 19 of 21  

 

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

No   

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

The executive summary of the ESMF & RPF, have been translated to local language and have been disclosed in the 
MAIL website on 4/11/2017. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No     

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 20 of 21  

 

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
Sr Agricultural Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 21 of 21  

 

 

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan - Ministry of Finance 

Moheb  Jabarkhail 

Aid Management Specialist 

moheb.jabarkhail@mof.gov.af 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

MAIL 

Abdul Qadir  Jawad 

Deputy Minister 

ajawad.mail@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Martien Van Nieuwkoop 24-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Stephen N. Ndegwa 25-Apr-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Mohamed Abdelgadir
Country Programme Manager
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2627
e-mail: m.abdelgadir@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb@ifad.org

Executive Board — 122nd Session
Rome, 11-12 December 2017

For: Approval

Document: EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

E
Agenda: 6(e)(v)

Date: 11 December 2017

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification
and Modernization Project



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-

COSOP 1
II. Project description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 2
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Project implementation 3
Approach 3A.

B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 4
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 6

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 7
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 8
D. Sustainability 8
E. Risk identification and mitigation 8

V. Corporate considerations 9
Compliance with IFAD policies 9A.
Alignment and harmonization 9B.
Innovations and scaling up 10C.
Policy engagement 10D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 10
VII. Recommendation 10

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ADB Asian Development Bank
M&E monitoring and evaluation
PFI participating financial institution
PMU project management unit
RRA Rural Restructuring Agency
UZS Uzbek sum
WCA water consumer association



E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

iii

M
a
p

 o
f th

e
 p

ro
je

ct a
re

a



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Republic of Uzbekistan

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Uzbekistan

Executing agency: Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA)

Total project cost: US$159.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$46.2 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$300,000

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years
starting from the date of approval by the Executive
Board, with a fixed interest rate equal to 1.25 per cent
per annum and a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Financing gap: US$47 million

Cofinanciers: Beneficiaries, Government and PFIs

Contribution of borrower: US$27.0 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$19.5 million

Contribution of participating financial
institutions (PFIs):

US$19.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification and
Modernization Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Uzbekistan
for the Agriculture Diversification and Modernization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Uzbekistan is a 447,400 km2 landlocked country in Central Asia bordering

Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. It had a
population of 31.8 million in 2016, of which approximately 60 per cent is rural.
With a per capita gross domestic product of US$2,130 in 2015, Uzbekistan is a
lower-middle-income country. Data suggest that its economic growth has been
broad based and inclusive.

2. Agriculture provides approximately 25 per cent of the country’s employment and
its share of the gross domestic product was estimated at 17.6 per cent in 2014.
Approximately 40 per cent of Uzbekistan’s rural population is directly engaged in
agriculture-related activities. Food imports meet the country’s growing demand and
the population’s enhanced purchasing capacity is increasingly applied to high-value
goods, particularly meat and dairy products. In 2015, Uzbekistan’s agricultural
imports totalled 11.5 per cent of the country’s total imports (US$1.3 billion)
according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.

3. Poverty declined from 27.5 per cent in 2001 to 14 per cent in 2015. This was
attributed to rapid economic growth, creation of new small businesses and
employment, public investments in education, health and infrastructure, increases
in public-sector salaries and increased remittances. In 2015, the poverty rate in
rural areas was 17 per cent compared with 11 per cent among the urban
population. The country’s low agricultural productivity, high tax burden among the
rural population, high dependency within households, regional disparities and lack
of formal rural labour markets are drivers of rural poverty. A lack of access to
productive assets, infrastructure, energy, land and water, technical and financial
services contribute to poverty and limited productivity, especially among rural
women and young people. Other vulnerable groups include families with many
children, people with disabilities, unemployed people and those with lower
education levels.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Diversification, modernization and import substitution of agricultural production is a
government policy priority as stipulated in Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, and the Welfare
Improvement Strategy (2013-2015). Diversification of products, particularly
horticultural crops, livestock and related sub-sectors is expected to enhance rural
families’ incomes and reduce the number of low-income households. IFAD’s
experience with the value chain approach in the region suggests that private-sector
actors are crucial for smallholder producers to participate in value chains. Traders,
buyers, aggregators, processors, exporters and other private players shape how



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

value chains perform. From the viewpoint of smallholder producers (Dekhan and
small private farmers), conducive partnerships with the private sector present a
major opportunity for sustained income generation. The project integrates
private-sector operators willing to invest time and resources to increase value
chain competitiveness in a way that enhances the benefits for smallholder
producers and supports their efforts to strengthen their businesses. This also
makes value chains more inclusive of smallholder producers.

5. The project will work with selected value chains, providing holistic and coordinated
support to all actors in order to improve their performance. Agribusinesses and
other qualified entities will be invited to take the role of leading entity, with a focus
on those willing to develop sound business models through productive partnerships
with their suppliers. Smallholder producers, who are the project’s primary target
group, will be targeted in each selected value chain in order to enhance their
inclusiveness and improve their returns from agriculture. The project’s targeting
strategy will therefore incorporate the principles of smallholder inclusiveness.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Geographical target. The project will be implemented in the Fergana Valley in the

regions of Andijan, Fergana and Namangan. The country strategic opportunities
programme highlights the challenges experienced in the Fergana Valley due to high
population density; Namangan registers the second lowest per capita gross
domestic product in the country. Women make up half the population, with
women-headed households comprising 18 per cent of the total. Approximately
20 per cent of youth are unemployed.

7. Target groups. The project’s main target groups are: (i) rural low-income
households on Dekhan farms, who are striving to increase income from agriculture
through active participation in project-supported value chains; (ii) small private
horticulture and livestock farmers with a farm size of up to 5 hectares; (iii)
agribusinesses with existing or potential linkages with groups (i) and (ii); and
(iv) rural youth. Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of
women-headed Dekhan and private farming households, and young women.

8. Beneficiaries. The project is expected to directly reach 75,000 households and
approximately 21,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 11,000 households
benefitting of loans and training, and approximately 54,000 incremental suppliers
of the leading entities benefitting from project loans. In addition, 10,000 full-time
jobs will be created by the leading entities’ incremental economic activities. In its
first phase, the project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000 households, and
about 10,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5,000, households benefitting
from loans and training, plus approximately 20,000 incremental suppliers of the
leading entities (LEs) benefitting from ADMP loans, and some 4,000 ful-time
equivalent incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

B. Project development objective
9. The project’s goal is to improve the incomes and livelihoods of rural people in the

target area. Its development objective is to increase the inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access
and improved natural resource management.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
10. The project will have three interrelated components; a fourth component will

support project management and implementation. The components are:
(i) inclusive value chain development; (ii) inclusive rural finance; (iii) climate-
resilient rural infrastructure; and (iv) project management.

11. Component 1: Inclusive value chain development. The outcome of this
component will be enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of
targeted stakeholders, and an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains, with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers.
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of farmers and other
stakeholders in targeted value chains. Three activities will be implemented to
create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses: (i) value chain
mapping exercises based on rapid market assessment results for small ruminants,
fisheries, sericulture and honey prepared during the design; (ii) rapid market
assessments of additional sub-sectors; and (iii) preparation of value chain
development plans, which will be roadmaps for LEs.

12. Component 2: Inclusive rural finance. The outcome of this component will be
increased productivity and efficiency among targeted smallholders, enabling value
chain actors to increase their investments in profitable value chains. The project
will support the State Fund for Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial
Activity in providing credit guarantees to smallholders and rural entrepreneurs who
lack acceptable collateral by offering partial coverage of lending risks. It will also
work with banks interested in lending to farmers in the target regions (and that
meet the project’s eligibility criteria) to facilitate farmers’ and agricultural
businesses’ access to financing. Finally, this component will establish a credit
window for youth who lack access to affordable and flexible lending products.
Banks will be free to set their own interest rates, allowing them to serve project
beneficiaries in a sustainable manner. These banks will be selected through a
competitive process to ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.
The outcome will be measured by the following indicator: PFIs’ portfolio risk is
below 5 per cent.

13. Component 3: Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. This component aims to
remove bottlenecks to a reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit Dekhans and
small farmers from enhancing the diversification and efficiency of agriculture in the
selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of the inter-
farm irrigation network operated by water consumer associations (WCAs). It will
enable targeted farmers’ groups to: (i) diversify agricultural production from low-
value to high-value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address the
challenges of drought due to climate change; and (iv) increase the capacity of
WCAs and the Basin Irrigation System Administration in efficient water resource
management and irrigation system operation and maintenance. The outcome of
this component will be improved farmland productivity resulting from modernized
irrigation infrastructure, as measured by the following indicator: at least 1,000
farmers report improved supply of irrigation water and increased productivity.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project will promote a demand-driven value chain approach. This approach will
focus on analysing each step of the value chain and investing in those needs that
have the potential to improve the productivity, profitability and competitiveness of
value chain players, especially Dekhan farmers.

15. The project will promote the upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various
points in the value chain to increase future productive capacity and



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

competitiveness. The leading entities with successful value chain development
plans prepared through component 1 will be considered for receiving loans from
PFIs through component 2. While loan applications will be assessed individually,
the project will provide support to their business operations through the provision
of technical assistance and training to farmer suppliers and other actors, and
access to improved infrastructure under component 3 to enhance value chains’
competitiveness and efficiency. The project will also promote coordination with
projects funded by other donors, especially those managed by the Rural
Restructuring Agency (RRA) – based on smooth information flow and open dialogue
– in order to ensure synergies and avoid duplication of efforts.

B. Organizational framework
16. The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources will have overall responsibility for

managing the project on behalf of the Government. Daily oversight will rest with a
project management unit (PMU) under the RRA, a state entity within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Water Resources. Overall management oversight will rest with an
inter-agency council for cooperation with international financial institutions, foreign
governments and donor countries implementing large-scale investment projects.
This council will provide guidance and direction to the project implementing
agency; the project manager will act as secretary to the council.

17. The PMU will be led by a project manager and be composed of: a chief accountant;
procurement officer; rural finance/youth officer; administrative
assistant/translator; and driver. The project will utilize legal staff from the Dairy
Value Chains Development Project. In addition, the project will rely on the services
of national and international specialists in various fields. A project implementation
team will be established in one of the project regions in year 1 (the region will be
determined by the Government, but will most likely be Namangan). The team will
comprise a: regional coordinator (value chain and business specialist); three rural
finance and youth officers; engineer; a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist
and a driver. Regional coordinators will be recruited to coordinate project activities
in the remaining regions. The project implementation team will be responsible for
daily implementation of all aspects of the project, except for financial
administration and procurement, which will be managed by the PMU within RRA.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. The project results framework will form the basis for the results-based M&E
system, including performance monitoring and impact assessment. The PMU/M&E
officer will be responsible for all internal M&E of the project. The PMU will submit
progress reports in English to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, the
Ministry of Finance and IFAD. A mid-term review will be carried out towards the
end of the project’s third year. During the final year of project implementation, as
part of the preparation of the project completion report and impact assessment
required by IFAD, the M&E data collected over the project implementation period
will be used in a thorough assessment of project achievements. This assessment
will focus on changes in beneficiaries’ livelihoods as a result of project activities,
and the sharing of lessons learned and experiences.

19. Learning and knowledge management. To ensure that the experiences gained
are captured, comprehensive provisions have been made for M&E. The project’s
knowledge management programme will be an essential tool for meeting project
objectives. Two approaches will be used: (i) a knowledge management programme
for supporting within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a broader
knowledge management programme aimed at informing government decision
makers and influencing policies. The project will also support efforts to broaden
information dissemination through: development of farmer networks (to share
knowledge on successful adaptation); farmer-to-farmer extension approaches



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

(to facilitate technology transfer); development of private technical services
(e.g. private veterinarians); and strengthening linkages among universities,
research and development institutions, and farmer networks to ensure the
relevance of the technology.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a financial management assessment was

undertaken. The inherent risk was assessed as high. In order to mitigate this risk,
a stand-alone PMU will be established within RRA with separate financial
management arrangements. This system is already in place for ongoing IFAD
projects and some World Bank projects, and the quality of financial management
has been largely assessed as satisfactory. As a result, the new project will be able
to draw on the capacities already established and working satisfactorily as part of
the ongoing IFAD projects. The ongoing IFAD project, the Horticultural Support
Project, has also shown strong disbursement rates with regards to credit lines.

21. Financial Management. The PMU, with support from the RRA finance unit, will be
responsible for the financial management of the project, including budgeting,
accounting, preparing withdrawal applications, monitoring implementing partners,
preparing consolidated financial reports and internal and external audit
arrangements.

22. Accounting and financial reporting arrangements. The accounting, financial
reporting and audit arrangements have already been established under the ongoing
IFAD projects. Accordingly, all project transactions will be recorded in customized
accounting and financial software on a cash basis in accordance with International
Public Sector Accounting Standards, and quarterly financial reports will be prepared
in formats agreed with IFAD. The project's consolidated financial statements will be
audited annually by an independent audit firm in accordance with internationally
accepted auditing standards and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

23. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified in the
programme implementation manual and letter to the borrower. Two separate
designated accounts denominated in United States dollars (US$) will be opened for
the IFAD loan and grant in a commercial bank, and will not be mingled with other
funds. From the designated accounts, the funds will flow to the project account
denominated in Uzbek sum (UZS) to finance eligible project expenditures. From the
designated loan account and the project loan account, funds (US$ or UZS) will be
transferred to incremental credit accounts (one account in US$ and one in UZS)
maintained by the PFIs in the form of credit to finance sub-projects undertaken by
beneficiaries. Transfers to the rural guarantee facility will be made using the direct-
payment method to a separate account maintained in US$ in a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds. Specific conditions for
disbursement will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper
safeguards are in place before transferring any funds to the PFIs and the
Guarantee Facility and remedies will be applied in case of non-compliance.

24. Procurement. As part of the detailed project design, IFAD assessed the public
procurement systems and institutions in Uzbekistan for the purpose of identifying
an entity to handle procurement. Despite recent efforts to modernize and
strengthen Uzbekistan’s public procurement system, there are critical gaps in
compatibility with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and procedures. However, the
capacity of RRA to conduct procurement was found to be in line with IFAD
procurement regulations and procedures.

25. Anti-corruption policy. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed through its loans and
grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy and whistleblowing procedures will be included
in the project implementation manual.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
26. Supervision and implementation support. A supervision plan covering the

period until the mid-term review will be agreed at project start-up. The project will
be supervised directly by IFAD. This will include annual risk-based financial
management supervision by a financial management specialist and operational
reviews covering a random sample of project activities, to be carried out in project
years 2 and 4 by independent auditors and under terms of reference acceptable to
IFAD. Details of financial management supervision are provided in appendix 7 of
the project design document. The timely completion of a baseline survey in line
with the project’s outcome and output indicators is fundamental to effective project
supervision.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs, estimated project

costs and financing plan are that: (i) project costs are based on September 2017
prices; (ii) the project will be financed over a six-year period; and (iii) the official
annual inflation rate of 5.7 per cent is taken as constant for the duration of the
project period (2018-2023). The international inflation rate is set at 2 per cent per
year in line with medium- to long-term projections of the Economist Intelligence
Unit and the World Bank Group (Commodity Market Outlook, January 2017) for the
United States dollars. Further to the devaluation of the UZS on 5 September 2017,
the base exchange rate for this analysis was set at UZS 8,092 to US$1 as the
official exchange rate prevailing at the end of the final design mission. Project costs
are presented in both UZS and US$; conversions from current US$ values into UZS
use constant purchasing power exchange rates. A 20 per cent value-added tax will
be levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services. For directly
recruited local staff, the project will cover the social insurance rate of 25 per cent.

28. Project costs. The total investment and incremental recurrent project costs,
including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at approximately
US$159.6 million (UZS 1,291 billion). Physical and price contingencies are 1 per
cent of the total project cost. This is largely due to the fact that investments
associated with rural finance (lump sum with no contingency) comprise
approximately 88 per cent of the total project costs. The foreign-exchange
component is estimated at US$112.4 million or 70 per cent of the total project
cost. This is due to the fact that most of the project financing is in the form of
credit lines which will be used by the beneficiaries to purchase assets for local
production and also for financing the export of their produce. The Government's
contribution, mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost,
or US$27.0 million. The project management cost is approximately 1.4 per cent of
the total project cost (US$2.2 million). Table 1 provides a summary of the project
financing plan by component.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Inclusive Value Chains
Development
1.1 Enabling business
environment for inclusive value
chains 52 14.8 82 23.3 159 45.2 59 16.7 - - - - 352 0.2
1.2 Capacity development for
value chain stakeholders 3 918 37.4 125 1.2 4 519 43.1 1 911 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 480 6.6
Subtotal 1. Inclusive value chain
development 3 970 36.7 207 1.9 4 678 43.2 1 969 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 831 0.1
2. Inclusive rural finance
2.1 Rural guarantee facility 1 000 10.1 - - 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 - - - - 9 935 6.2
2.2 Agriculture diversification and
modernization credit lines 33 712 28.3 93 0.1 26 538 22.3 19 869 16.7 19 543 16.4 19 466 16.3 119 214 74.7
2.3 Credit line for youth 5 000 41.7 - - 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 - - - - 12 000 7.5
Subtotal 2. Inclusive rural finance 39 712 28.1 93 0.1 38 473 27.3 23 869 16.9 19 543 13.8 19 466 13.8 141 149 88.5
3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure
3.1 Modernization of irrigation
systems 1 109 21.2 - - 3 260 62.2 874 16.7 - - - - 5 243 3.3
3.2 Increasing capacities of WCAs 37 37.3 - - 46 46.0 17 16.7 100 0.1
Subtotal 3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure 1 146 21.5 - - 3 305 61.9 890 16.7 - - - - 5 342 3.3
4. Project management
4.1 Project management unit 800 62.9 - - 275 21.6 198 15.5 1 273 0.8
4.2 Project implementation team 572 59.9 - - 269 28.2 114 11.9 955 0.6
Subtotal 4. Project management 1 372 61.6 - - 544 24.4 312 14.0 2 228 1.4

Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29.1 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 466 12.2 159 550 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed through multiple sources, including an IFAD loan, an

IFAD grant, the Government, beneficiaries and PFIs. The IFAD loan from the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) totalling US$46.2 million
will cover 29 per cent of project costs, contributing to: 37 per cent of the inclusive
value chains development component (component 1, totalling US$10.8 million);
28 per cent of the inclusive rural finance component (component 2,
US$141.8 million); 21 per cent of the climate-resilient rural infrastructure
component (component 3, US$5.3 million); and 62 per cent of the project
management component (component 4, US$ 2.2 million). In addition, IFAD will
provide a grant of US$300,000 to cover part of the international technical
assistance and training provided under component 1, and technical assistance to
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources under component 2. The Government
will waive all taxes related to project expenditures, including all those associated
with goods and services procured with the loans generated by the project’s funded
credit lines, and the social fund associated with personnel. The Government's
contribution,  mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost
or US$27.0 million. PFIs are expected to contribute US$19.5 million to match the
funds made available by the project. Beneficiaries will contribute at least
US$19.5 million. The financing gap of US$47 million may be sourced by
subsequent PBAS cycles (under financing terms to be determined and subject to
internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval), or by cofinancing
identified during implementation.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total

Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and goods 2 448 39.4 - - 2 718 43.8 1 035 16.7 - 7 0.1 6 208 3.9

2. Civil works 1 513 26.0 3 192 54.8 1 123 19.3 - - - 5 828 3.7

3. Vehicles 82 75.0 27 25.0 109 0.1

4. Technical assistance

International TA 494 43.0 46 4.0 418 36.4 192 16.7 - - 1 150 0.7

National TA 600 20.5 254 8.7 1 486 50.8 500 17.1 85 2.9 2 925 1.8
Subtotal Technical Assistance
and Studies 1 094 26.8 300 7.4 1 904 46.7 692 17.0 85 2.1 4 075 2.6

5. Training 251 36.8 317 46.5 114 16.7 682 0.4

6. Inclusive value chain financing

Guarantee Finance 1 000 10.1 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 9 935 6.2

Credit Line for AMD 33 712 28.4 26 444 22.2 19 815 16.7 19 458 16.4 19 458 16.4 118 888 74.5

Credit Line for Youth 5 000 41.7 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 12 000 7.5
Subtotal Inclusive Value Chain
Financing 39 712 28.2 38 379 27.3 23 815 16.9 19458 13.8 19458 13.8 140 823 88.3

Total Investment Costs 45 100 28.6 300 0.2 46 510 29.5 26 805 17.0 19 543 12.4 19458 12.3 157 725 98.9

7. Salaries 746 68.9 337 31.1 1 084 0.7

Operations & Maintenance 111 54.8 58 28.6 34 16.7 203 0.1

Operating Costs 243 45.0 95 17.6 202 37.4 539 0.3

Total Recurrent Costs 1 100 60.3 490 26.8 235 12.9 1825 1.1
Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 465 12.2 159 550 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farming

households, Dekhan farmers, commercial farmers, agri-firms and rural
entrepreneurs. These include: (i) at least 80 per cent of project beneficiaries
reporting at least a 20 per cent increase in income; (ii) at least 75,000 households
receiving services promoted or supported by the project; (iii) at least 10,000
full-time jobs (or equivalent) created; and (iv) at least 70 per cent of supported
smallholder producers, including Dekhans, reporting a 20 per cent increase in sales
along their value chains

31. Economic rate of return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the economic
analysis of the project indicates that the total investment gains are significant and
robust in economic terms. The analysis results in an internal economic rate of
return of 16.5 per cent and a net present value of US$33.7 million over 20 years
based on quantifiable benefits that relate directly to the activities undertaken by
the project.

D. Sustainability
32. The sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) the value chain-champion

business and technical capacity-building activities to be promoted; (ii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iii) the preparation of value chain
development plans as the basis for all investments, which should lead to inclusive
and more equitable and profitable value chains. The project’s sustainability is also
based on an exit strategy that comprises: (i) ensuring the ownership by
beneficiaries of the financed activities; (ii) the participatory development of
demand-driven technology; (iii) integration along value chains, including input



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

suppliers and service providers; and (iv) limited project operational, staff and
recurrent costs.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The major risks are: (i) a distortive policy environment; (ii) a lack of stakeholder

participation; (iii) market-related risks including potential exchange rate
fluctuations; (iv) a failure of communication; (v) deteriorating financial
performance of some PFIs; and (vi) the outbreak of transboundary animal disease,
(vii) complex flow of funds, as well as (viii) relatively large financing gap. Mitigation
measures include: regular supervision, and preparation of a detailed project
implementation manual; separate US$ accounts for IFAD financing and procedures
to manage foreign exchange risks, in-depth, participatory analysis of production
and business opportunities; intensive training for farmers on how to position their
products; establishment of proper contracts; training on business management;
regular project monitoring; annual assessment of banks against minimum eligibility
requirements; upgrading critical competencies in active disease surveillance and
reporting from the field; and ensuring that there are veterinary field staff capable
of sharing information and specimens with the Government’s veterinary disease
diagnostic laboratories. Moreover, specific conditions related to disbursement and
audit will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper safeguards
are in place with regards to funds being transferred to the PFIs and the guarantee
facility. The PFIs also will also be subject to strict monitoring measures, as well as
compliance based disbursement procedures. As the financing gap will mainly
finance credit lines, the project will still be able to function, even if the additional
financing does not materialize.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The project design is aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies,
including the: (i) Strategic Framework (2016-2025); (ii) Policy on Targeting;
(iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance
Policy; (v) Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy; and
(viii) Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. Given the nature
and extent of the likely environmental impacts, the project is classified as a
category B in line with IFAD’s environmental assessment procedures. The potential
negative environmental impacts are assessed to be within controllable limits.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. The project is closely aligned with and supports the Government’s priorities for

diversification and modernization of the agriculture sector, as expressed in the
Welfare Improvement Strategy (2013-2015) and Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, which stresses the
need to gradually shift from cotton and wheat to value-added commodities, and
introduce resource-saving technologies.

36. Seeking to avoid the duplication of efforts and foster complementarities while
taking advantage of business-related best practices and technological innovations,
the intervention strategy will be based on: (i) building partnerships with the
country’s private commercial sector, and related stakeholders; (ii) local research
institutions and industry associations, particularly for expanding technical
assistance services and market channels; (iii) harmonization with the initiatives of
development partners present in the country such as ADB, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Bank; and (iv) the
principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

10

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The project has two main innovative features. First, it will introduce a rural

guarantee facility that will leverage up to five times the value of the facility; the
US$9.9 million invested will help to attract US$49.5 million into Uzbekistan’s
agricultural sector. IFAD will be a pioneer among international financial institutions
by investing in the State Fund, and will document and disseminate its experiences
among other funders to attract more resources to the State Fund. In addition, the
adoption of the specialized automated Cash-flow Linked Agri-Risk Assessment tool
for loan analysis and management will build the capacity of participating banks to
lend to the agricultural sector and manage their agricultural loan portfolios more
efficiently.

Policy engagementD.
38. Successful policy engagement will depend on the capacity to generate analytical

evidence at the outcome and impact levels. To capture experience gained, two
approaches are envisaged: (i) a knowledge management programme within the
project to support within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a
broader programme of knowledge management aimed at informing government
decision-makers and influencing policy. Considering the relatively recent IFAD
experience in the country and collaboration with the ADB and the World Bank, IFAD
is transitioning to a more integrated, strategic, and programmatic dialogue to
identify barriers to a conducive business environment.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Uzbekistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

40. The Republic of Uzbekistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to of forty-six million two hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$46,200,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$300,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

(Negotiations concluded on 22 November 2017)

Loan Number: _______
Grant Number: _______

Project Title: Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project (“ADMP” or “the
Project”)

The Republic of Uzbekistan (the “Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

hereby agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2), and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a Loan and a Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is forty-six million and two hundred thousand United
States dollars (USD 46 200 000).

B. The amount of the Grant is three hundred thousand dollars (USD 300 000).

2. The Loan is granted on blend terms, and shall be subject to interest on the principal
amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent and in addition a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum payable semiannually in the Loan Service Payment Currency
and shall have a maturity period of twenty five (25) years, including a grace period of
five (5) years, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the United States dollar (USD).

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

5. Payments of principal, interest and service charge shall be payable on each 15 May
and 15 November.

6. There shall be two Designed Accounts in USD, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the IFAD grant for the benefit of the Project in a commercial bank. The IFAD funds shall
not be mingled with other funds. In addition, there shall be two project accounts in UZS
to receive the Financing from the respective Designated Accounts in a commercial bank.

7. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide as its contribution to the Project counterpart
financing in sufficient amount to cover taxes and custom duties associated with the
implementation of the Project.

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources
(MAWR).

2. The following are designated an additional Project Party: Rural Restructuring
Agency (RRA).

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

Section D

The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension of this
Agreement:

(a) The Project Implementation Manual ("PIM") referred to in Paragraph 19,
Section II of Schedule 1 hereto, or any provision thereof, has been waived,
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension,
termination, amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a
material adverse effect on the Project.

2. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) A Presidential Decree confirming the Rural Restructuring Agency as the
agency responsible for the management of the Project shall have been issued;

(b) Key Staff, including a Project Manager, a Chief Accountant and a Procurement
Officer with qualifications and experience acceptable to the Fund have been
duly appointed;

(c) A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) containing the Financial
Administration and Accounting procedures, has been cleared by the Fund;



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Batir Asadillaevich Khodjaev
Minister for Finance of the Republic of Uzbekistan
Ministry of Finance
5, Mustaqillik Square
10000-8 Tashkent

For the Fund:

The President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy

This Agreement, dated _______, has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

____________________
(Authorized Representative)
(Name and title)

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Project Area. The Project will be implemented in Fergana Valley, in the regions of
Andijan, Fergana and Namangan.

2. Target Population. The main target groups of the Project are: (i) rural households
of dehkan farms, who strive to increase income from agriculture through active
participation in the Project supported value chains; (ii) small farmers engaged/interested
in horticulture and livestock (with farm size of up to 5 ha); (iii) agribusinesses with
existing or potential linkages with (i) and (ii); and (iv) youth living in the Project regions.
Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of female-headed households
both in dehkan and small farmers, as well as to reach out female youth.

3. In its first phase, the Project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000
households, and about 10 000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5 000, households
benefitting from loans and training, plus approximately 20 000 incremental suppliers of
the Leading Entities (LEs) benefitting of ADMP loans, and some 4 000 full time equivalent
incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

4. Goal. The development goal of the Project to improve the incomes and livelihoods of
rural people in the Project area.

5. Objective. The Project’s Development Objective is to increase inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access and
improved natural resources.

6. Components. The Project will have three principal inter-related components as well
as another one to support Project management and implementation:

7. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chains Development: The outcome of this
component is enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of targeted
stakeholders and aimed to create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains (VC) with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers; and
to strengthen the capacities of the farmers and other stakeholders of those VCs. Three
activities will be implemented under this component: (i) Value Chain Mapping exercises
based on Rapid Market Assessment results for small ruminants, fisheries, sericulture and
honey prepared during the design; (ii) Rapid Market Assessments of additional
sub-sectors; and (iii) Preparation of VC development Roadmaps for LEs.

8. Component 2: Inclusive Rural Finance: The outcome of this component is
increased productivity and efficiency along targeted smallholder-inclusive value chains to
enable value chain actors to increase investment in profitable value chains through the
provision of credit and a guarantee facility. The Project will support (i) the State Fund for
the Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial Activity (SFSDEA) to render credit
guarantees to smallholders and other rural enterprises who lack acceptable collateral by
offering the partial coverage of lending risks; (ii) work with banks interested in lending to
agriculture in the target regions and meeting the Project’s eligibility criteria to facilitate
farmers and agricultural businesses’ access to finance; and (iii) establish credit window for
youth who are underserved by financial services with affordable lending products. Banks
will be free to set their own interest rates allowing serving the Project beneficiaries in a
sustainable manner; however the banks will be selected through a competitive process to
ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.

9. Component 3: Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure: This component aims at
removing bottlenecks for reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit increasing
participation for dehkans and small farmers in enhanced diversification and efficiency of



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

agriculture for the selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of
inter-farm irrigation network operated by Water Consumer Associations (WCAs) and will
provide conditions for targeted farmers’ group to: (i) diversify agricultural production from
low to high value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address challenges of drought
due to climate change; and (iv) increase capacity of WCAs and Basin Administration of
Irrigation System (BAIS) in efficient water resource management and irrigation system
operation and maintenance.

II. Implementation Arrangements

10. Approach. The Project will promote a demand driven value chain approach. The
value chain approach will focus on analyzing each step of the value chain and investment
on those needs which have the potential for improving productivity, profitability and
competitiveness of the value chain players, particularly focusing on dehkan farmers.

11. The Project will promote upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various points in
the value chain to increase future productive capacity and competitiveness. The LEs with
successful Value Chain Roadmaps prepared under Component 1 will be favourably
considered for receiving loans from PFIs under Component 2. While loan applications will
be assessed individually, the Project will provide complementary support to enhance their
business operations through provision of technical assistance and training to farmer
suppliers and other actors as well as access to improved infrastructure under Component
3 to enhance overall competitiveness and efficiency of the value chains. The ADMP will
promote close coordination with projects funded by other donors organizations especially
with those projects also under the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA).

12. Organizational framework. The MAWR will have the overall responsibility for
management of the Project on behalf of the Borrower/Recipient. Day-to-day oversight of
the ADMP’s management will rest with a Project Management Unit (PMU) under the RRA.
The overall management oversight of the Project will rest with an Inter-agency Council
(IC). The IC is an inter-governmental institutions agency for Cooperation with
International Financial Institutions, Foreign Government Agencies and Donor Countries in
Implementation of Large-scale and Strategically Important Investment Projects.

13. The PMU for the ADMP will be headed by a Project Manager and be composed of
(preliminary): a Chief Accountant; Procurement Officer; Rural Finance /Youth Officer;
Administrative Assistant; and a Driver. The ADMP will use Horticultural Support Project
/Dairy Value Chains Development Project legal staff. In addition, the Project will count on
the services of national and international specialists in various fields. A Project
Implementation Team (PIT, RRA regional representation) will be established in one of the
regions of the Project area in PY1. The PIT would comprise a: Regional Coordinator
(Value Chain and Business Specialist), three Rural Finance Officer/gender/youth,
Engineer, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E Specialist) and a driver. The PIT will be
responsible for day-to-day implementation in the field of all aspects of the Project, with
the exception of financial administration and procurement, which will be managed
entirely by the relevant personnel of the RRA/ADMP PMU at central level.

14. The PMU/PIT shall coordinate the work of consultants and participating financial
institutions (PFIs) that will interact with VC actors on planning and financial matters.

15. The MOF shall make the Subsidiary Loans available to the PFIs under Subsidiary
Loan Agreements (SLAs) to be entered into between the Borrower/Recipient, the RRA
and each PFI. The SLAs shall be under terms and conditions cleared by the Fund and in
adherence with the Investment Guidelines. Except as the Fund shall otherwise agree,
the MOF shall not assign, amend, abrogate or waive any SLA or any of its provisions. The
project monitoring and evaluation system and processes will be established and managed
in accordance with established IFAD procedures by the PMU with support from IFAD. The



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

Logical Framework provides indicators for implementation along with their corresponding
means of verification. These will form the basis on which the M&E system will be built.

16. At the start of the Project and no later than 90 days after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement, the PMU shall manage a comprehensive baseline survey which
will be updated on annual basis to track the different Project indicators over time,
including for the mid-term review. During the Project’s final year, a completion survey
will be conducted. Results will be compared against the baseline survey results to assess
project impact.

17. Supervision. The Project will be directly supervised by IFAD. The IFAD country
team shall provide continuous implementation support to the Project and shall undertake
supervision missions on an annual basis to assess overall management arrangements
and performance including financial and procurement aspects and monitoring and
evaluation. The supervision shall be carried out jointly with the Borrower  representatives
and IFAD.

18. Mid-Term Review. A mid-term review shall be carried out towards the end of third
Project year. The review shall be undertaken in accordance with IFAD-MTR guidelines in
consultation with the Borrower  representatives.

19. Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The RRA/PMU shall prepare a draft PIM
acceptable to the Fund and submit it to the Fund for no objection. The PIM may be
amended when necessary with the approval of the Fund in order to introduce clarification
in procedures, eliminating constraints for project implementation and for facilitating
access of producers to the project services.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Loan and Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories
of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the allocation of the
amounts of the Loan and the Grant to each Category and the percentages of expenditures
for items to be financed in each Category:

Category

Loan Amount
Allocated

(expressed in
USD)

Grant
Amount
Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

Percentage net of
Taxes, Government

contribution,
Co-financing and

beneficiary
contribution

I. Civil Works 1 490 000 100%

II. Equipment and Materials (including
Vehicles)

2 420 000
100%

III. Consultancies (including Technical
Assistance and training)

1 170 000 300 000 100%

IV. Credit and Guarantee Funds:

(a) Guarantee Finance 1 000 000 100%

(b) Credit line for AMD 33 710 000 100%

(c) Credit line for Youth 5 000 000 100%

V. Operating cost (Salaries and
recurrent cost) 1 040 000 100%

Unallocated (1%) 370 000

TOTAL 46 200 000 300 000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

Category II "Equipment and Materials" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Goods, Equipment and Materials as well as Vehicles.

Category III "Consultancies" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Consultancies, Technical Assistance, Trainings and Workshops.

Category V "Operating cost" means Eligible Expenditures related to Salaries
and Allowances, operating cost of the PMU/PIU and other recurrent cost.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

2. Start-up Costs. To facilitate a prompt start-up, a withdrawal up to USD 200 000
may be made to incur expenditures related to the Project start-up activities before the
satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal. The start-up activities may
include inter alia: (i) establishment of the PMU and salaries of key staff, (ii) Formulating
of the Project Implementation Manual; (iii) Preparation of the first AWPB and
procurement plan; (iv) Organization of a start-up workshop, (v) Prepare specifications for
the accounting software; (vi) Finalization of Investment Guidelines, Value Chain
Development Roadmaps, and templates for Subsidiary loan agreements.

3. Specific Conditions of withdrawal. In addition to the general conditions precedent to
withdrawal listed in Section E, the following specific conditions for first withdrawal will
apply.

I. No funds will be transferred to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs)
before the following conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The first three Value Chain Roadmaps have been prepared and received
the Fund's no-objection.

(b) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) for the use of PFI loan
proceeds, including the operating modalities including the eligibility
criteria for the PFIs and end-borrowers for each credit window
(agricultural diversification and modernization window or youth window)
has received the Fund's no-objection.

(c) The Subsidiary Loan agreements (SLA) for providing credit to PFI received
the Fund's no-objection

(d) The PFI has opened an account to receive IFAD loan funds and a revolving
account for credit reflows.

II. No funds will be transferred as part of the guarantee finance before the following
conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The SFSDEA has become operational and a due diligence assessment
including an assessment of its Financial Management capacity has been
conducted and shared with the Fund.

(b) An agreement, specifying all the necessary modalities for the guarantee
finance, between the RRA  (or other entity as agreed with the Fund) and
the SFSDEA has been duly formalized and received the Fund’s no-
objection.

(c) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) and operating modalities
including the eligibility criteria for issuing guarantee finance have received
IFAD's no-objection.

(d) A separate account for the IFAD loan funds in the SFSDEA has been duly
opened.

(e) The template for a sub agreement for providing guarantees to financial
institution/smallholder/rural business has received IFAD's no-objection.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

Schedule 3

Special Covenants

In accordance with Section 12.01(a)(xxiii) of the General Conditions, the Fund may
suspend, in whole or in part, the right of the Borrower/Recipient to request withdrawals
from the Loan Account and the Grant Account if the Borrower/Recipient has defaulted in
the performance of any covenant set forth below, and the Fund has determined that such
default has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the Project:

1. Guarantee Financing. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that funds transferred for
the guarantee financing are deposited in a separate bank account and will not be mingled
with other funds. At all times the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the funds are used
for the intended purpose and made available in a timely manner in order not to adversely
affect the development impact of the activity. In addition the Borrower/Recipient shall
ensure that the SFSDEA (i) keeps records of all the transactions related to the Project in
accordance with international accounting standards, and (ii) issues timely periodic
financial reports on the use of the Project funds to the PMU to satisfy their reporting
requirements.

2. Audit arrangements. The Borrower/Recipient, through the RRA, will appoint
independent auditors acceptable to IFAD, under the terms of reference cleared by IFAD,
and in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Project Audits. An audited annual financial
statement for the entire Project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six (6) months of
the fiscal year end. Moreover, the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the IFAD funds
transferred to the SFSDEA are part of the audit and that the auditors are granted full
access to all documentation as may be required.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
0

Logical framework

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term
End

Target Source Frequency
Responsibi

lity

Goal

Improved incomes and
livelihoods of rural people in the
Project area

Percentage of project beneficiaries
reporting at least 20% increase in
income1

Impact2 0% 30%
80% (30%

women) Baseline, mid-term and impactsurveys
Specialized (qualitative /
quantitative) thematic studies
Household income surveys

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
Annually

PMU M&E
unit

Overall political
and economic
situation remains
stable
Stability of prices
in agricultural
commodities

Number of HHs receiving services
promoted or supported by the project

Outreach 0 15,000
75,000
(30%

women)

Project development objective

Increased inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value
chains through enhanced
productivity and market access
and improved natural resources

Number of full-time job (or equivalent)
created3 2.2.1 0 2,000

10,000
(30%

women)

Baseline, mid-term and impact
surveys
Annual outcome surveys
Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report
Uzagroexport,4 plus reports from
participating agri-firms
(processor/aggregator) on access
to foreign markets

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion

PMU M&E
unit

Macro-economic
conditions remains
stablePercentage of supported smallholder

producers including dekhans reporting
20% increase in sales along the value
chains

2.2.5 0 30% 70% (30%
women)

Component 1. Inclusive Value Chains Development

Outcome 1: Enhanced capacity
for sustainable and efficient
performance of targeted
stakeholder

Percentage of supported
smallholder/dekhan farmers engaged
in partnerships/ commercial
agreements5 with LEs

0% 30%
70%
(30%

women)

Annual surveys

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report

Percentage of smallholder producers
reporting adoption of new / improved
technologies or practices6

1.2.2 0% 30%
80%
(30%

women)

Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 1.1

Enabled business environment
for inclusive value chains

Number of LEs supported in the
preparation of a Value Chain
Development Plan

0 800
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 1.2
Strengthened value chains
stakeholders

Number of value chain stakeholders
receiving training on better agronomic, 0 6,500

10,000
(30% Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

1
This indicator is inspired by the RIMS Impact-level indicator “Number of people experiencing economic mobility”, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2, but taking into account the specific aspect of income, where ADMP is expected to generate an impact. These

project’s direct beneficiaries are estimated around 75,000 households. These include stakeholders benefitting of credit lines supported by the ADMP, as well as of trainings/other supports provided by the project and by the project’s supported LEs, or from FFS
curricula and guided exposure to technological demonstration plots.
2 RIMS impact level indicator, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2.
3 The target corresponding to some 80% of the number of full-time equivalent jobs created through ADMP interventions (see Appendix 10, Economic and Financial Analysis).
4 Uzagroexport is a state enterprise that monitors the export. There is a branch in each region of Fergana Valley.
5 Including, but not limited to, formal contracts with traders / aggregators / processors. LEs will specify those linkages in their Strategic Plans / Roadmaps, developed by LEs within sub-comp. 1.1.
6

The outreach is mostly determined by sub-component 1.2’s interventions. Beneficiaries include 1,200 LE representatives (also benefitting of support under sub-component 1.1 for their roadmap; about 5,000 LE suppliers,
benefitting from inclusive workshops/ trainings; about 600 Mahalla leaders (community mobilization and TOT); about 1,000 additional Mahalla members; 3,200 producers benefitting of demo plots (10 farmers at least for each demo
plot established); 2,250 FFS members. Adoption rate is about 80%.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
1

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term End
Target

Source Frequency Responsibi
lity

livestock and business practices7 women)
Component 2. Inclusive Rural Finance

Outcome 2: Productivity and
efficiency along targeted
smallholder-inclusive value
chains increased

Number of incremental suppliers
generated by investment along the
selected value chains

0 10,000
50,000
(40%

women)

Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report;

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Micro-economic
conditions are
supportive for
doing business

Participating Financial Institutions
and Central Bank
Project M&E records and report

Output 2.1
Operational Rural Guarantee
Facility

Value of loans guaranteed by the Rural
Guarantee Facility8

0 15.0 m US$ 49.5 m
US$

Project records Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.2

Increased access to credits by
rural residents

Number of value chain stakeholders
(Leading Entities) in the project areas
accessing financial services9

1.1.5 0 500
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records Continuousl

y
PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.3

Increased access to credits by
youth

Number of youth involved in the
selected value chains accessing to the
financial services10

0 250
1,000
(50%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Component 3. Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure

Outcome 3: Improved farmland
productivity resulting from
modernized irrigation
infrastructure

Number of HHs reporting increase in
production as a result of the adoption
of modern irrigation techniques11

1.2.4 0 200
1,000
(30%

women)

Annual outcome surveys

Annually PMU M&Eunit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report
Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 3.1
Enhanced access by smallholder
farmers to modernized irrigation
systems

Number of hectares under upgraded
irrigation 0 2,000 3,500 Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 3.2

Strengthened WCAs Number of WCA representativestrained 0 20 30 Project records
Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

7 Adapted from the RIMS CI 1.1.4: “Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies”.
8 The Rural Guarantee Facility (US$ 9.9m) would allow mobilizing a five-fold amount of loans. With an average loan size of US$ 20,000 (assumed also for other credit lines within ADMP’s scope, this implies some 2,475 loans.
9 ADMP’s funded credit lines (US$ 54.8m) would generate some 1,200 loans with average size of US$ 45,000. The target is expected to be achieved faster than the Rural Guarantee Facility as the credit lines are expected to be
immediately operational.
10 Under the assumption that youth would borrow an average of U$$ 10,000, the Youth Fund (US$ 10.0m) would be able to generate some 1,000 loans, one fourth by mid-term.
11 The modernization of the tertiary irrigation would benefit some 3,500 ha in the three regions, with 3.5 ha average land size / farm it implies some 1,000 households.



