























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Samoa Agriculture & Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) (P165873) 

 
 

  
Feb 18, 2018 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24085 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Samoa P165873  Samoa Agriculture & 
Fisheries Productivity 
and Marketing Project 
(SAFPROM) (P165873) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Dec 10, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture & 
Fisheriers 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries. 

 
 Financing (in USD Million) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 21.00 

Total Financing 21.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 21.00 

     World Bank Lending 21.00 
   

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 



INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
A. Country Context 
The Independent State of Samoa (Samoa) is a small remote Pacific Island Country (PIC) with a population of 
approximately 197,000 people1. Samoa consists of two large islands (Upolu and Savai’i), and several smaller islands, it 
has a total land area of approximately 2,830 km2 and an exclusive economic zone of 131,000km2. Samoa is a stable 
democracy with steady growth supported by the tourism and agriculture sectors.  

 
Like many PIC’s, Samoa faces unique challenges to its economic growth, due to its small size, remoteness, high 
exposure to shocks and environmental fragility. Economic growth has picked up in recent years, and in FY2016 real GDP 
expanded by around 7 percent, much faster than originally forecast and a significant acceleration from growth of 
between 1 and 2 percent in the previous two years. Growth in FY16 was driven by tourism arrivals, lower fuel prices, 
and new fish processing facilities, as well as two major sporting events. Over the medium term, real GDP is expected to 
increase at an annual rate of around 2 percent2. However, it’s important to note that frequent natural disasters can 
distort this picture. Samoa was hit by Tropical Cyclone Evan in late 2012 and, according to the Damage and Loss 
Assessment3 caused an estimated US$210 million (30% of annual GDP) in damages and losses, including a loss of 49 
percent in crop and livestock GDP, and 5 percent in fisheries GDP. While Samoa has largely recovered from the effects 
of TC Evan, Category 5 Cyclones have been a 1 in 10-year event for Samoa.  
 
Samoa’s growth is also constrained by the high instances of obesity and noncommunicable diseases. Fifty-four percent 
of Samoa’s population is obese and 25 percent of people smoke and it is predicted that the economic burden of NCDs 
will reach as high as 8.5 percent of GDP by 20404. 
 
Samoa faces persistent challenges in securing prosperity for all and the incidence of hardship remains high. While 
extreme poverty is low, at 0.6 percent, basic needs poverty or ‘hardship’, is at 26.9 percent. Eighty-one percent of 
Samoa’s population live in rural areas and most households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity. While 
strong traditional family and community based safety nets are still effective in preventing extreme hardship, these 
traditional networks cannot manage local or country-wide shocks that affect most of their members, such as natural 
disasters. 

 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Sectoral context: In Samoa, and across the Pacific, agriculture and coastal fisheries play an important role in meeting 
subsistence needs. The most commonly produced crops are taro, banana and yam, and many households have small-
scale subsistence livestock production. In February 2017, ‘food and live animal’ imports were the top category of 
imports, accounting for 27.5 percent of total imports5, and in 2015, approximately 67 percent of all retail beef and 95 
percent of chicken meat was imported. Low cost and low quality food imports often crowd out domestic production 
and contribute (together with irrelevant food behaviors) significantly to the non-communicable disease crisis 
experienced in the region. On the other hand, fresh fish, particularly tuna, still constitutes one of the largest export 
commodities, accounting for 39 percent of exports in 20166, however in terms of contribution to GDP, fishing 
accounted for only 3.2 percent of nominal GDP in the July to September 2017 quarter. 

 
1 Samoa Bureau of Statistics.  
2 Samoa First Resilience DPO, The World Bank (2017) 
3 “Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, Cyclone Evan 2012”, Government of Samoa, March 2013.  
4 Pacific Possible, The World Bank (2017) 
5 Samoa Bureau of Statistics (http://www.sbs.gov.ws/index.php/new-document-library?view=download&fileId=1990) 
6 Central Bank of Samoa 


According to the 2015 Samoa Agriculture Survey, 97 percent of households grow some crops or raise some livestock. 
For most of these households, agriculture is a secondary activity, growing crops for subsistence purposes only. Despite 
this, agriculture in Samoa is becoming more market-oriented; between 2009 and 2015, there was a 5.2 percent 
increase in agriculture households selling ‘some produce’ and a 4.4 percent increase in major crop households 
producing mainly for sale7.  
 
Based on the same survey, 21 percent of all households are engaged in fisheries activities, with the highest rate (37 
percent) in Savaii. Home consumption is the main purpose, representing 70 percent of those households in 2015. As a 
result of destructive fishing practices, near shore fish and fishery products had a steep decline in the early 1990’s, 
however conservation and management plans were put in place and anecdotal evidence suggests the sector is 
gradually recovering.  
 
Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline fishery, particularly 
albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, recent years have 
seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 2013.  
Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 34 
such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, 
a joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
Currently only 1 percent of Samoan’s are formally employed in the agriculture and fisheries sector, one third of these 
are women8. While female labor force participation overall increased between 2011 and 2015, paid farm work for 
women is still low, at its lowest comprising only 12 percent in Savai’i9. However, in line with the rest of Samoa, women 
engaged in farm work tend to have higher levels of education than men; in 2015 the percentage of women in farm 
households with tertiary qualifications was double that of men. It is also more likely that an educated farm labor force 
will be open to modern farming techniques and tools10. 

 
Agriculture in Samoa is very vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate change is predicted to 
manifest itself in more frequent and extreme rainfall events, longer dryer spells and drought events, rising sea levels, 
extreme winds, and high air and water temperatures. According the World Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening 
Tool, this project is likely to face (i) a high level of exposure to climate and disaster hazards, (ii) high impact on physical 
infrastructure and assets as a result of those hazards and (iii) a high level of risk to the outcomes and service delivery of 
the project. More on the results of the Climate and Disaster Risk Screening tool can be found under the ‘Overall Risk’ 
section. 
 
The limited access to: (i) extension and veterinary services for farmers, (ii) markets, and (iii) financing services 
constitute the key bottlenecks to unlocking the agriculture potential in Samoa. Currently only one state Veterinarian 
services the entire country’s livestock needs and there is limited knowledge and available training for farmers wanting 
to try new or innovative practices. New regulations around food labelling and health and safety standards coming into 

 
7 A major crop household is defined as an agricultural household with more than 625 square yards of land under garden crops; or more than 20 
coconut trees; or more than 20 banana plants; or more than 20 other tree crops. 

effect will also create additional requirements for market access. However, if well accompanied, smallholders farmers 
could also benefit substantially from these. 

 
Institutional context: The Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020 provides the framework to guide 
coherent programs and actions from all key stakeholders to achieve the goal of increased food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. Under this plan, additional attention is being paid to build the institutional capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) to manage the sector-wide program. A lack of data was identified as a challenge to 
planning and monitoring in the agriculture sector, so the MAF is working closely with the Samoa Bureau of Statistics to 
strengthen data collection systems, analysis and reporting. 
 
A key outcome in the Plan is to increase the supply and consumption of competitively priced, domestically produced 
food. Fish and Taro are the top two agriculture exports (accounting for 38 and 9 percent of exports respectively in July-
September 2017 quarter). Chicken legs, followed by sugar and mutton were the biggest food imports in 2017 – poultry 
and sheep production therefore present substantial potential for import substitution. Building on the achievements of 
SACEP, the Plan looks to extend and scale up adoption of new technologies, strengthen farm business management 
skills and producer linkages to sustainable and profitable markets. Improving access to productive resources, financial 
services and business skills particularly for women is also key, noting that global experience has shown where women 
have increased access to income generating opportunities and social decision-making empowerment at community 
level, household nutrition improves. 

 
C. Relationship to CPF 
The Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for FY17 to FY21, which was approved in February 2017, covers nine small 
Pacific Island countries (PIC9), including Samoa. The RPF identifies four areas of focus: (i) fully exploiting the available 
economic opportunities; (ii) enhancing access to employment opportunities; (iii) protecting incomes and livelihoods; 
and (iv) strengthening the enablers of growth and opportunities (macro-economic management, infrastructure and 
addressing knowledge gaps). Alongside this, the Pacific Eight Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), found very 
important solution areas for Samoa include increasing incomes from agriculture and coastal fishing, preventing 
noncommunicable diseases and strengthening disaster risk preparedness.  
 
The proposed Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) generally supports both 
the RPF focus areas and the Samoa-specific solution areas in the SCD. More commercially-viable farming practices and 
better access to markets will make use of economic opportunities available to most Samoans, and increase incomes for 
those involved; providing more climate-resilient crops, education and farming infrastructure will protect incomes and 
livelihoods in the face of natural disasters and a changing climate, and; promoting locally produced food will support a 
healthy diet and less dependence on food imports.  
 
The FY2017 to FY2020 Strategy for the Development of Samoa highlights increased agricultural production as a priority 
area for Samoa, which the Samoa Agriculture and Marketing Project will also contribute to. The project is also aligned 
to the Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020, aimed at increasing the food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. 
 
The SAFPROM will also allow Samoa to join the Pacific Islands Regional Oceanoscape Program (PROP). The PROP 
Program was developed as a Series of Projects (SOP) to be implemented in three phases, each six years’ in duration. 
Phase 1 began in 2014 and is being implemented with four countries (Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of 
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu) and one regional institution, the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency 
(FFA). The Phase I country projects all share the same Regional Program PDO and Results Framework. They also reflect 

the same component design drawing on a pre-set menu of investment activities. By allowing Samoa to join the PROP, 
this project meets key criteria for utilizing the regional International Development Association (IDA) funds. The program 
(i) involves three or more countries; (ii) has benefits, economic, social and environmental, that spill over country 
boundaries (tuna / pelagic fishes’ stocks and fisheries management); (iii) requires coordination with regional bodies 
(SPC and FFA) and with other countries in the region; and (iv) provides a platform for a high level of policy 
harmonization among countries. 
 
As the PROP Program expands into Phase II with Tonga and Samoa operations, it has been decided that the regional 
project with FFA will not incorporate these new countries in Phases II and III, as it was found that the regional 
implementation approach is not the optimal model with which to secure regional support and coordination of the 
national projects.  Rather, a soft technical assistance model bilaterally to each of the four main regional fisheries 
agencies11 will be employed during Phase II of PROP to ensure that each of these agencies pro-actively engage in 
supporting the national projects to strengthen their commitment and collaboration toward shared management of 
their oceanic and coastal fisheries resources.  
 
 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries.  
 
B. Key Results 
 
Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 

(a) Increased yields in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(b) Increased value of sale in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(c) Number of fisheries management plans implemented 

(d) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
Direct beneficiaries are expected to be semi-commercial and commercial farming households and farmers, as well as 
small and medium enterprises (small agribusiness involved in collecting, processing, packaging and marketing activities, 
but also inputs suppliers). MAF will also directly benefit from capacity building activities. 
 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation.  
 

 

11 Pacific Islands Fisheries Forum Agency (FFA), Pacific Community (SPC), Parties of the Nauru Agreement Office (PNAO), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) 



PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 
The Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P115351) is currently in its last year, closing 31 
December 2018, and has achieved significant accomplishments for Samoan farmers, as well as relevant government 
departments. Based on SACEP’s successes, the government of Samoa would like to build on these achievements and 
take advantage of the opportunities presented.  
Through its objectives of increasing crops and livestock productivity and access to market increase as well as improving 
the management of targeted fisheries, this project may contribute to: (i) import substitution and increase the supply 
and consumption of domestically produced food; (ii) boost exports of some commodities, and (iii) strengthen resilience 
of farming households to climate change and climate-induced disasters (cyclones, heavy rains, prolonged dry seasons).  
 
It is proposed that SAFPROM will have four components.  
Component 1: Creating an enabling environment for increased productivity and access to markets for target farming 
and fishing households. This will include: 

a. Institutional capacity building activities in the MAF as well as current and potential cooperatives and 

associations. Activities will be based on a needs assessment and a capacity building action plan. The project 

will also support the establishment of an Agriculture Sector Coordination Division within the MAF for 

project management. This component will also help reviewing the regulatory and policy framework and 

update it if needed. A special focus will be looked at national standards that affect the capacity of Samoan 

agriculture products to reach specific high value markets. 

b. Development and improvement of infrastructure and equipment of public good nature. On the model of 

SACEP (with the Static and Mobile Slaughtering Units and the Tissue Culture Laboratory), this sub-

component will support the development of feasibility studies, work and equipment of key collective 

infrastructures that have been identified as bottlenecks for the development of the sector. For instance, in 

Savai’I island, a small veterinary laboratory and a fruits and vegetable Packhouse would help farmers to 

address their animal diseases and packaging concerns. 

 
Component 2: Support to farming and fishing households through a matching grant program (MGP). The design of 
which will be informed through a review of the MGP under SACEP. As per the GoS Concept Note, this financing 
mechanism should expand, not only to increase the number of farmers benefiting, but also to allow farmers’ groups to 
work together in post-harvest handling and agro-processing. It will help establishing alliances between the farmers, 
fishers, their groups and cooperatives and services providers or buyers. This MGP will give priority to sub-projects that 
promote innovative technologies aimed at improving productivity and quality for products for which there is a market 
demand. It will also support climate change mitigation activities through for instance intensification of livestock 
production, pasture management, improved feeding rations and practices using local products; and adaptation by 
promoting inter alia poly-tunnels to protect crops against heavy rains, water collection and small-scale irrigation to 
cope with prolonged dry seasons, etc. – therefore contributing to strengthened resilience to climate-related events. 
 
Regarding coastal fisheries, this component, through the MGP, will provide the opportunity to strengthen the 
community based fisheries management program (CBFMP) that has been implemented since 1995. This could upgrade 
the CBFMP to assess potential development support for participating communities or look at income generating 
activities for local communities. Over 100 villages have joined the program. Other coastal fisheries areas may include 

effective management regimes for the sea cucumber fishery (hatchery production, grow out and possibly processing).  
Post-harvest and value adding for low value fish are key components as community undertakings. 
 
Component 3: Aims to help GoS strengthen management of the region’s long-line tuna fisheries while identifying 
opportunities for sustainably increasing domestic revenues from this shared resource. This component will allow 
Samoa to join the PROP and is proposed to be financed through the following IDA grant resources: US$ 3 million in 
national IDA and US$ 6 million in regional IDA. 
  
Towards this objective, the component will support GoS’ regional and national activities to:  

a. Strengthen its capacity to engage effectively in the Tokelau Arrangement, the Western and Central Pacific 

Fisheries Management Commission (WCPFC) and other regional forums;  

b. Strengthen capacity and establishment of a national observer program 

c. Invest in and implement robust Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS), stock monitoring and fisheries 

management mechanisms and schemes. This includes upgrading Samoa’s Fisheries Information 

Management Systems and skills on MCS, carrying out joint regional patrol operations, boarding inspections, 

data collection, analysis and application; and combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing 

d. Develop and implement strategies to enhance the competitiveness of the domestic longline fleet and the 

oversight and value of oceanic fishing activities within their EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 

related services.     

 
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0): Following an eligible crisis or 
emergency, the government of Samoa may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency 
response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources under the project 
from other project components to cover emergency response. These activities would be carried out, as needed to 
ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be used in the event that 
an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project would be implemented over a period of five years on Upolu and Savaii islands. Samoa is made up of nine 

islands with four main inhabited islands (Upolu,Savaii, Manono and Apolima) and has a total land area is 2,830 km2. The 
islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. The area is generally mountainous. 
  
Samoa has a population of approximately 197,000 people, of which 97% are Polynesian. The majority of people live on 

Upolu and Savaii. Settlements and agricultural activity on these islands are concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling 
slopes. 
 
Approximately 60,000 ha or 21% of the total land area is under crops or grazing regimes. Forest cover is approximately 

60%. Samoa’s 12 terrestrial national parks, reserves and community conservation areas are located on Upolu and Savaii. 


The country’s reef area is approximately 10,000 km2 and its exclusive economic zone is approximately 131000 km2. The 
main fishery landing sites in Samoa include Apia (Upolu), Salelologa (Savaii) and Apolima-uta (Upolu) with local 
subsistence landings scattered in coastal villages around inhabited islands . Samoa has three (3) protected marine areas 
(inshore). 
 
As for offshore fishery, Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline 

fishery, particularly albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, 
recent years have seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 
2013.  Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 
34 such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, a 
joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The current World Bank financed Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP) has addressed 

safeguards' capacity constraints within MAF through a Coordination group (PCG) which includes an environmental and 
social (E&S) officer. For SAFPROM, E&S capacity within MAF is expected to be further strengthened with the 
establishment of a dedicated Agriculture Sector Coordination Division (ASCD) including a senior E&S specialist, to 
effectively coordinate and management agriculture sector activities, including environmental and social safeguards. This 
unit will be supported by a Centralized Technical Services and Support Unit (CTSSU) within the MOF which will also 
include an E&S Advisor. Her/his role will be to build capacity of E&S specialists within the line ministries, including the 
ASCD, and advise these teams on complex issues on an ad hoc basis. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project would finance a number of small-scale, 
household-based farming (i.e. livestock development 
and crop development) and community fisheries 
production/marketing subprojects through a small 
grants scheme. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project would support the development and 
improvement of collective infrastructure and/or 
equipment (i.e. small veterinary laboratory, 
renovation of a local fish market or a fruits and 
vegetable pack-house). These small to medium-scale 
investments have the potential to cause some minor 
adverse environmental and social impacts however 
these are readily managed through standard 
mitigation measures. 
 
The project would finance the development and 
implementation of strategies to enhance the 
competitiveness of the domestic longline tuna fleet 
and the value of oceanic fishing activities within the 
Samoa’s EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 
related services.  
  
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the grant 
process. The ESMF will incorporate the requirements 
of the World Group’s Environmental, Health and 
Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) and industry specific 
guidelines for agribusiness, food production and 
pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emerency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including ascreening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

For agriculture and livestock, the project will not 
finance any activities that significantly convert or 
degrade any protected areas or natural habitats as the 
screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude all 
subprojects with these impacts. 
The project will support enhanced management of 
coastal and ocean fisheries/ecosystems. While 
proposed activities are expected to enhance positive 
and sustainable returns to these important habitats, 
the ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impact on natural habitats, including critical natural 
habitats, as well as measures to enhance positive 
environmental impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

For agriculture (crops and livestock), the policy will not 
finance activities that impact on the health and quality 
of forests. 
For fisheries, the project may support marine 
ecosystem conservation activities (i.e. mangroves 
conservation). 
The ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impacts of these activities, as well as measures to 
enhance positive environmental impacts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The client will review and update the current SACEP 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) following the 
standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09 and 
the World Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness and food 
production. The project will include measures to 
strengthen the institutional capacity for implementing 
IPM in project areas. This will include a stronger focus 
on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources; screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The ethnic structure in Samoa is predominantly ethnic 
Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and 
biracial European/Polynesian. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
In fishery, certain activities may involve the restriction 
of access to natural resources and/or marine 
protected areas which local people may depend upon 
for their livelihood. A Process Framework will be 
developed in compliance with OP4.12 requirements to 
address these potential issues.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
As soon as the GoS will access the Project preparation Facility, the recruitment of an E&S specialist and a consultant to 

develop both the ESMF and the PMP. It is therefore expected that the safeguards documents will be ready by mid-August 
to inform the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24937 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Papua New Guinea P166222  PNG Agriculture 
Commercialization and 
Diversification Project 
(P166222) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Jan 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of National 
Planning and 
Monitoring,Independant 
State of Papua New Guinea 

Department of Agriculture 
and Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 40.00 

Total Financing 40.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 

          IDA Credit 40.00 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
 
 
A. Country Context 
 

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea (PNG) is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world with over 
800 languages and 1,000 ethnic groups1. It has a total land area of approximately 460,000km2 comprised of 600 islands 
of various sizes, and hosts a remarkably varied number of species and ecosystems. The country is separated into four 
regions – Highlands, Islands, Momase and Southern – and 21 provinces. In 2017, its population was estimated at close to 
8 million2. Of this, over 80 percent live in rural areas and the rest in small urban centers with populations of under 
30,000.    
 
PNG is a relatively stable democracy and had an average GDP growth of 6.85 percent between 2005 and 2010, however 
like other resource-dependent countries, it is feeling the impacts of the fall in global commodity prices, with GDP growth 
estimated at 2.4 percent in 2016 and projected for 2.1 percent in 20173 and real GDP per capita growth in 2016 was 0.3 
percent, down from 10.1 percent in 2014. The country is dominated by two main sectors: the formal, capital-intensive 
mining and energy sector which relies heavily on the country’s rich natural resources and accounts for most of the 
export earnings, and the agriculture sector which, while largely informal, employs an estimated 80 percent of the 
population and accounts for approximately 27 percent of GDP3.  
 
Despite considerable natural wealth and reasonable economic performance over the past decade, PNG’s rural 
population continues to face significant challenges. The disparity between rural and urban living conditions is 
exacerbated by the country’s difficult terrain which increases hardship, poverty, and isolation in rural areas, and limits 
access to basic services, infrastructure and economic markets. Less than 20 percent of rural households have access to 
electricity, 60 percent lack access to safe drinking water, and an estimated 80 percent lack access to improved 
sanitation2.    
 
The 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) noted that in 2009, approximately 38 percent of the 
population lived below the extreme poverty line of US $1.90 per day, about the same proportion as in 1996.  PNG’s 
Human Development Index (HDI) ranking was 155 in 2010 and improved by one place to 154 in 2015, the second lowest 
in the Pacific2. It has the fourth highest child stunting rate in the world. An estimated 28 percent of children are 
underweight and 5-15 percent are wasted. The highlands region has the highest rates of stunting at 61.5 percent, and 

the island region has the highest wasting and underweight rates at 19 percent and 29.2 percent respectively. The 
economic cost of undernutrition is high, in 2015-2016, it was estimated to have cost the economy 2.81 percent of 
annual GDP (equivalent to US$ 508 million)4.   
 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in PNG, and the country ranks 158 out of 188 countries in the 2014 Gender 
Inequality Index3. GBV severely affects women’s ability to contribute to the economy, participate in business activities, 
and support family livelihoods. Violence and crime are high along the country’s transport corridors where much of the 
rural population are engaged in agriculture, trade, and the transportation of goods. 
 
PNG’s road network is highly fragmented and poorly maintained with only about 35 percent of national roads sealed2 
and no roads connecting most provinces and ports. PNG’s vulnerability to climate risks and hazards due to climate 
variability and complex geography further exacerbate problems with the transport network resulting in an estimated 75 
percent or more of the road network – national, provincial and district – becoming impassable at some point during the 
year2. The country is subject to both El Niño and La Niña events and both can have significant impacts such as severe 
droughts, landslides and flooding from increased rainfall5. The World Risk Report 2016 ranks PNG 10th, with a risk index 
of 16.43%, due to the country’s high exposure to natural disasters and its high social and economic vulnerability to these 
events6. The February 2018 magnitude 7.5 earthquake and aftershocks affected 544,368 people across five provinces of 
Hela, Southern, Enga, Western and Gulf provinces. In the Southern Highlands and Hela provinces alone, it is estimated to 
have killed over 100 people, displaced 18,200 and left 270,442 people in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. It 
has also left 32% of health facilities closed and, of those that are open, only a third are undamaged7. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Sectoral context:  
PNG is characterized by its diverse agro-ecological environments (highlands, lowlands, islands), favorable climate and 
fertile soils allowing the farming of many different agricultural products, including both cultivation of cash and staple 
crops, as well as livestock production. While PNG’s export economy is presently dominated by minerals (gold and 
copper) and oil, the contribution of agricultural exports in the renewable resources sector is significant, at around 
23.1%. The main agricultural exports of the country include cocoa, coffee, copra, palm oil, rubber, and tea. The 
predominant mode of farming is in smallholder farms of less than 5 ha. Village agriculture, which supports over 80 
percent of the population, remains dominated by subsistence food production. It generates little cash income and is 
characterized by low productivity. Despite good intentions, governments, commodity boards and agencies have 
provided village farmers with little help to raise their productivity in order to improve food and nutrition security, and to 
enable them to participate more effectively in commercial activities. Translation of new knowledge to business and 
commercial opportunities has been lacking for many years. Major crops, except palm oil, have historically been 
marketed by statutory marketing boards. These arrangements as well as measures in the past such as stabilization funds 
for selected commodities (coffee, cocoa, and coconuts) have not been efficient, with over regulation of major 
commodities perhaps impeding agricultural development. In the past, labor-intensive plantation estates of some 50-150 
hectares have grown tree products for export, especially palm oil, coffee, cocoa, coconut, tea, and rubber, but except 
for palm oil, their production share is decreasing to the benefit of smallholder farmers. 
 
Coffee and cocoa are key cash crops. Papua New Guinea is considered a small coffee producer in the international 
market, but the high quality of its coffee and cocoa is recognized and sought after. Nearly 30 and 20 percent of the total 

       
     

labor force in the country is engaged in the production of coffee and cocoa, respectively. The majority of coffee is under 
the production of smallholder farmers with low productivity, and diseconomies of scale, and the main constraint is the 
limited capacity of the country to reliably meet market demand in quantity and quality. The development of coffee and 
cocoa production as an agribusiness for smallholder farmers is limited due to several constraints. These include: high 
transaction costs due to diseconomies of scale, limited market access, lack of access to information and technologies 
due to poor extensions services, poor rural infrastructure, and lack of access to rural finance. 
 
A robust internal fresh food and livestock products market exists. However, value chains are not well developed. 
Livestock production, except for pigs and poultry, remains static or on the decline since the 1970s. Meat consumption in 
PNG on the other hand, has increased steadily over the last two decades, and is predicted to increase at a conservative 
rate of 5% per annum. Increased demand for meat is met by meat imports, and is influenced by population growth rate, 
urbanization, changes in disposable income of citizens, and changes in people’s eating habits. 
 
Agriculture has under-performed. This is due primarily to low productivity, largely reflecting inadequate research and 
development, poor application of technological improvements and lack of scale economies inherent in smallholder 
farming. Other major constraints include inadequate transport and marketing infrastructure facilities, unreliable and 
expensive utilities, poor extension and veterinary services, prevalent crime and lawlessness, and insecurity of land 
ownership and tenure. However, some reasons for hope exist. For instance, the World Bank funded Productive 
Partnerships in Agriculture project (PPAP – P110959) is demonstrating in the coffee and cocoa sectors that the 
productive partnership model can help overcome some of the bottlenecks and facilitate the integration of smallholder 
farmers into effective supply/value-chains and link them to markets, which remains a priority for the Government of 
PNG (GoPNG). In the PPAP model, farmers join a partnership coordinated by a “Lead Partner (LP)” (the private sector in 
70 percent of cases, although sometimes an NGO or academic institution) through paying a small fee (contribution to 
the planned activities). The LP access a grant from the project to purchase tools and seedlings (including innovative 
cocoa clones) to be distributed to farmers, renovate processing facilities or organize training on a broad range of topics; 
technical (coffee or cocoa on-farm good practice), gender, HIV-AIDS, nutrition, etc. This increased proximity between LPs 
and the smallholder farmers has greatly contributed to: (i) increasing their on-farm productivity (over two-fold as of the 
time of writing), and (ii) link them to a potential buyer and therefore the markets.  
 
In December 2014, the World Bank completed a piece of analytical work studying the role of women in the agriculture 
sector in PNG8, notably related to coffee, cocoa and fresh produce. The main finding was that women provide 
substantial labor in both coffee and cocoa cultivation, and they dominate in the fresh produce sectors. More important 
than the amount of labor women provide, analysis of these supply chains indicated that the specific tasks women 
undertake have a direct bearing on the quality of the final product. However, different labor dynamics, gender-specific 
barriers to access key services (extension and financial) and insecurity (violence limiting women’s ability to serve in the 
field as researchers and extension agents) affect this potential outcome. In early 2018, a more specific gender time-use 
study among PPAP farmers9 highlighted that there is an imbalance between men and women’s time-use with possible 
discrimination against women which negatively impacts crop productivity and household welfare. Beside household 
awareness-raising and training on gender dynamics, reducing the domestic work burden for women before they can 
engage in more value-added agricultural activities should be a priority. 
 
Institutional context:  


The GoPNG’s Vision 2050 details the long-term development strategy for PNG.  Launched in 2009, the document sets 
out a vision for transforming the country by 2050 towards a top 50 ranking in the HDI10. It leverages seven strategic 
pillars – human development, wealth creation, environment and climate change, planning, systems and institutions, 
security and international relations, and partnerships with churches – to build this vision and realign the country’s 
economic focus away from the mining and energy sectors which currently dominate development, to new growth 
bases in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, manufacturing and eco-tourism.   
 
Vision 2050 acknowledges both the importance of subsistence agriculture to the rural economy and the cultural lives of 
many, as well as the significant challenges faced by the sector including limited markets, poor infrastructure, ineffective 
extension services, and security and safety concerns.  
 
The previous GoPNG’s National Agriculture Development Plan (NADP) 2007-2016 (currently being updated) recognized 

the importance of the agricultural sector in developing the economic potential of the country, sustaining the basic 

livelihoods of its population, increasing social wellbeing, and providing food security for all. However, its 

implementation has faced several challenges relating to the limited capacity of the Department of Agriculture and 

Livestock (DAL) to enhance implementation performance and monitor progress of outcomes in the sector. 

 
The GoPNG’s Alotau Accord II operationalizes the National Strategy for Responsible and Sustainable Development 
through the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) III reflecting the principles of the PNG Vision 2050 and the PNG 
Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030. High on the list of priorities is the adoption of a national population policy 
aimed at accelerating economic growth by using economic stimulus packages in the non-minerals sector (agriculture, 
tourism, fisheries and forestry) to keep pace with a population currently increasing at a growth rate of about 3 percent 
annually.  
 
The government has placed greater emphasis on growing the agriculture sector by giving it greater prominence in its 
2018 budget allocation. To emphasize this commitment, the government held the first ever National Agriculture 
Summit in November 2017 to exchange experiences on successful models. The key priorities from the summit are to: (i) 
grow the economy; (ii) promote import substitution; (iii) promote more accessible and affordable credit; and (iv) place 
greater focus on institutional strengthening. 
 
C. Relationship to CPF 
 

The 2017 PNG Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is under preparation and is scheduled for Board approval in early 
May 2018. The SCD recognizes the World Bank Group’s long-standing history of support to the agriculture sector in PNG, 
currently led by the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP). Since 2011, the PPAP has been providing 
support to smallholder coffee and cocoa farmers with the aim of improving their livelihoods. Important lessons have 
emerged from the implementation of the PPAP which could assist the SCD to identify opportunities for inclusive growth 
in the agriculture sector in PNG, and support the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. The third Pillar of the draft SCD (Enabling private sector development for inclusive job creation and 
growth) recognizes the central role played by agriculture in providing opportunities for inclusive growth and bolstering 
food security. The SCD recommends an “extension of PPAP-type programs to more districts and regions and more crop-
types” – which is exactly what the PACD intends to do. 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

    

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors.  

 
B. Key Results 
 

Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 
 

(a) Increased farm yields of crops and livestock in target value-chains 

(b) Increased volume of sale of selected value-chains at both farm gate and processing SMEs levels 

(c) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation. Specific gender and citizen engagement indicators 
will be added in this results framework.  
 

PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 

 
The Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP P110959 + PPAP AF P146003) is scheduled to close on June 30, 
2019 and has delivered significant benefits to PNG’s cocoa and coffee sector farmers. In order to build on and 
consolidate PPAP’s achievements, the PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) would 
continue to support the cocoa and coffee sectors, and may also add the following commodities: small livestock, spices, 
rubber and coconuts. The additional commodities to be supported under the new project will be narrowed down to 2 
or 3 commodities based on criteria, including level of preparedness of the value-chain and possible return on 
investments11. Further stock-taking will be required during the project preparation, including, if the need is identified, 
specific value-chain analysis to help the decision-making process. DAL has already started this work which should be 
completed prior to pre-Appraisal. The FAO Investment Center will support the DAL and the WB Task Team in this stock-
taking exercise and commodity final selection. 
 
Beneficiaries: GoPNG’s emphasis is on agriculture to accelerate economic growth and generate revenues, this may 
require a targeted approach towards farmers willing to move from subsistence to semi-commercial or commercial 
farming (therefore being less inclusive than in the case of PPAP). However, the smallholder farmers remain the primary 
direct beneficiaries of the new project, together with the groups and cooperatives formed by those better-off and 
willing to address common issues collectively. While building on PPAP, considerations around the possibility of looking 
at a complementary window targeting more progressive farmers and those who are ready to take risks and form more 

                                            
11 Agreed criteria comprise: (i) competitiveness and existence of a market justifying good return on investments, (ii) availability of technical advisory and 
extension services for these specific commodities, whether of public or private origin, (iii) tradition of integrating the selected commodities in cocoa and 
coffee farming system, as a diversification strategy, (iv) importance of women participation in the specific commodities, (v) share of the value-chains’ 
income remaining with the smallholder producers, (vi) size of the population involved or benefiting from the selected commodities, and (vii) commitment 
of different level of Government (including Provincial and District) to it. 

commercial alliances under a common set of constraints and opportunities will be explored. Additional direct 
beneficiaries will be SMEs (mainly micro- and small private enterprises) involved in agri-business activities (storage, 
processing, marketing, inputs supply). DAL and Commodities Board staff will also benefit from capacity building 
interventions. 
  
Regarding the geographical scope, the MTDP identifies ten “Economic Corridors” for priority services delivery, defining 
zones for development of public transport and utilities network, social services and integration of economic plans 
including agriculture. The PACD will align its geographical scope to this GoPNG strategy and support some of these 
economic corridors, based on transparent selection criteria to be defined during preparation. 
 
The PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) -  interventions will be delivered through five 
components:  

 
Component 1: Institutional capacity building 
The project will address institutional capacity gaps at (i) the central level - DAL, statutory bodies in charge of 
commodities targeted under the project (Cocoa Board, Coffee Industry Corporation, Spices Industry Board, the 
Livestock Development Corporation (LDC) and the Rubber Board – list to be confirmed as per commodities selected 
under the project) and links with the private sector – and, (ii) the decentralized level – provincial and district capacity to 
deliver services: extension, advisory and veterinary services, access to inputs. Research needs may also be included and 
will depend on further discussion during preparation.  
  
This first component will also support the GoPNG in reviewing and, if required, reforming their policy and regulatory 
framework, notably on climate-smart agriculture, extension and veterinary services, quality standards and food safety. 
 
Component 2: Infrastructure networks and logistics 
The infrastructure network, including roads and storage/processing facilities, remains a major bottleneck to farmers’ 
capacity to access markets. This project should contribute to its improvement, with a focus on infrastructure that has a 
public good nature and is essential to the selected value chains. Examples of such infrastructure include feeder roads, 
municipality-managed small-scale slaughterhouses (ensuring better food safety and waste management / pollution 
reduction) or laboratories (for safety and quality tests). As per the PPAP model, feeder roads will be designed and 
constructed to be resistant to heavy rains occurring during the rainy season: they will be slightly curved, include large 
concrete gutters on the side and small log-bridges on water stream sites – therefore adapted to heavy rains which are 
increasing and longer-lasting due to climate change. 
 
Component 3: Productive Partnership-like interventions 
Integrating smallholder farmers into effective supply/value-chains and linking them to markets remains a priority for 
the GoPNG. For this, the Productive Partnerships’ model implemented under the PPAP has been successful and should 
be a strong building block to scale-up. However, additional focus should be put on approaches that promote the 
establishment and capacity building of farmers’ cooperatives that will strengthen the sustainability of the model, 
among other lessons learned.  
 
This component will promote access to services and markets by facilitating the establishment of Productive 
Partnerships, and their access to finance (Matching Grants; involvement of financial institutions) that could finance 
small collective infrastructure (e.g. small storage and processing facilities like community-managed cocoa 
fermenteries), and the introduction of innovative technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture (agro-forestry, 

water collection and micro-irrigation, drought resistance varieties, intensification of small livestock production such as 
poultry and pigs, and bio-digesters). This will be done through establishing two windows for financing:  

(i) one focusing on on-farm productivity (garden regeneration, innovative technologies, etc.) and more inclusive 

regarding smallholder farmers willing/unwilling to join partnerships – this window will expand on the PPAP 

model where a Lead Partner (often from the private sector) can aggregate smallholder farmers and channel 

support to them (advisory services, training, inputs); and  

(ii) one focusing on value-addition and marketing of products, and targeting better-off farmers willing to address a 

common issue (storage, agro-processing, marketing, access to inputs, etc.) collectively through groups and 

cooperatives who become the recipient of the funds. 

 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:  
This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, 
conduct project M&E including Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),12 and comply with safeguard mitigation 
measures.  It would provide training and equipment to modernize DAL operations (computer hardware and software, 
office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed for project activities. It would also 
support the development and implementation of a communications strategy, as well as general awareness and 
sensitization campaigns about project activities. 
 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0):  

Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the government of PNG may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to 
support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources 
under the project from other project components to cover an emergency response. These activities would be carried 
out, as needed, to ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be 
used in the event that an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Target provinces and districts are yet to be confirmed. The project is likely to support core coca production areas in the 

province of East New Britain, the autonomous Region of Bougainville (tropical island regions) and East Sepik (Momase 
Region), and coffee production areas in the provinces of Eastern Highlands, Western Highlands and Simbu (highlands 
regions). The project may expand its geographical coverage with potential support in the livestock, spices, rubber and 
coconut sectors in the same areas.  
PNG is characterized by diverse agricultural and ecological environments, tropical climate and fertile soils. Physical 

characteristics vary considerably between regions and will be described once project location and sectors are confirmed. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Livestock (DAL - lead agency) through a Project 

                                            
12 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the objective to improve project 
efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects information on project implementation, even in insecure 
settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project 
teams through different iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from beneficiaries 
but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 



Coordination Unit (PCU), with specific Project Management Units (PMUs) established for each selected commodity. The 
Department of Works (DOW) will be designated responsibility for infrastructure networks and logistics activities related 
to rural feeder (not paved) roads. 
 
Capacity for implementing safeguard policies is currently weak in each of these agencies. The DAL lacks specific 

safeguard resources. The current World Bank financed PPAP has addressed safeguard capacity constraints within the 
cocoa and coffee PMUs however capacity remains limited and confined to these sub-sectors. DOW has an Environmental 
Management Unit (EMU) however this unit is under-resourced and relatively inexperienced. To address these constraints, 
the PACD will establish a core safeguards team consisting of senior environmental and social specialists within the PCU to 
ensure the effective implementation of safeguard policies across all project activities. The PACD will also finance 
additional environmental and social specialists within DOW to oversee safeguard requirements for project infrastructure 
network and logistic activities related to rural roads. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as Category B. The proposed 
investments are small-scale and potential adverse 
impacts can be managed. There are no potential large-
scale, significant or irreversible impacts associated 
with the project. 
 
The project will finance small collective infrastructure 
for partnerships (Component 3) including innovative 
technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture 
(agro-forestry, water collection and micro-irrigation, 
drought resistance varieties, intensification of small 
livestock production (poultry, pigs) and bio-digesters) 
that have the potential for positive impacts on the 
environment. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project will invest in infrastructure networks to 
improve access to market (Component 2). This will 
involve the rehabilitation of feeder roads and the 
development of small-scale community infrastructure 



 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 11 of 14  

     

(e.g. small-scale slaughter house and laboratories). 
These small-scale investments have the potential to 
cause some minor adverse environmental and social 
impacts however these are readily managed through 
standard mitigation measures. 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the 
partnership/grant process. The ESMF will incorporate 
the requirements of the World Group’s 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) 
and industry specific guidelines for agribusiness, food 
production and pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emergency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including a screening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project will not finance any activities that 
significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or 
natural habitats as the screening procedures in the 
ESMF will exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Potential project target sectors including cocoa, spices 
and rubber are frequently associated with agro-
forestry in PNG, often in a positive way. No adverse 
impacts on forests are anticipated. The ESMF will 
contain measures to properly manage the risk of any 
unforeseen adverse environmental impacts of these 
activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support the sustainable use of 
chemical fertilizers and pesticides within an holistic 
farm management model and integrated pest 
management approach. The client will review and 
update the current PPAP Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) following the standards and requirements set 
forth in OP4.09 and the World Group’s Environmental, 
Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness 


and food production. The project will include 
measures to strengthen the institutional capacity for 
implementing IPM in project areas. This will include a 
stronger focus on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources. Screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project is likely to be located in areas where 
Indigenous Peoples are the sole or the overwhelming 
majority of direct project beneficiaries. Accordingly, a 
separate Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) is not proposed. Rather, in accordance with the 
provisions of OP 4.10, the elements of an IPPF is 
included in the overall project design.  
 
The ESMF will outline steps for ensuring free and prior 
informed consultation are undertaken and broad 
community support is achieved for each Partnership 
and Infrastructure activity under Components 2 and 3 
respectively. This will include a Beneficiaries 
Partnership Framework and Consultation Guidelines. 
 
A Social Assessment will be conducted across target 
sectors/provinces during project preparation to inform 
project design and will include consultations with 
farming communities, local level government 
representatives, grower associations and 
cooperatives, youth and women’s groups, extension 
workers, the private sector, and other relevant 
stakeholders. 
. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
The RFP will include a voluntary land donation 
protocol to ensure that this approach is properly used, 
verified and documented. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The PPAP PCU is in charge of coordinating the preparation of the proposed PACD. Safeguards specialists working for the 

PPAP, together with the support of external safeguards consultants, will conduct the social assessment and consultations 
across target sectors/provinces to inform project design and the preparation of ESMF and RFP. 
 
A Project preparation Advance (PPA) will be processed once the Concept Note is approved and the procurement process 

for these consultants will start after. Therefore, first drafts of these studies are not expected before end of August 2018. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity (P163239) 

 
 

  
Jan 05, 2018 Page 1 of 17  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA22919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Albania P163239 Regional and Local Roads 
Connectivity 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 23-Jan-2018 25-Apr-2018 Transport & Digital 
Development 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Albania Development 
Fund 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers, and to 
strengthen selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets 

 
Components 

Component 1 - Accessibility Improvement 
Component 2 - Capacity Building for Municipalities 
Component 3 - Implementation Management Support 
front end fee 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 




 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
Albania has experienced rapid growth since 1990, rising into the ranks of middle-income countries in 2008. 
It emerged from the collapse of isolationist communism in the early 1990s as one of the poorest countries in 
Europe but since then has experienced a growth of nearly 6 percent per year. The rapid pace of growth helped 
the country narrow the per capita income gap with the rest of Europe from 18 percent of average European 
Union (EU) incomes in 1998 to 30 percent by 2012, and this fueled aspirations to join the EU. Growth 
successfully halved poverty from 25.2 percent in 2002 to 12.5 percent in 2008. However, the global and euro 
area crises in 2008 brought Albania's growth to a near standstill by 2012, and the country is struggling to 
recover, particularly given its historic ties to Europe’s poorer performing economies. The aftermath of the 
crisis presented an increase of the poverty rate, to around 14 percent in 2015, particularly in urban and coastal 
areas, along with rising unemployment affecting mostly youth and women. 

Recently, economic activity has picked up and the near-term economic outlook for Albania is positive. 
Economic growth is expected to accelerate to 3.8 percent in 2017 (from 3.4 percent in 2016 and 2.2 in 2015), 
supported by private investment and consumption. Investment is mostly linked to two large foreign direct 
investment-financed energy projects (the Trans Adriatic Pipeline and the Devoll hydropower plant), and 
consumption is supported by job creation and the easing of credit conditions. Net exports were helped by 
tourism and a recovering commodity market. Growth is projected to moderate to an average of 3.6 percent 
for 2018–2019 with completion of the two large energy projects and no other large projects planned.  

The Government remains committed to making deep structural reforms. Over the past years, the 
Government implemented a range of reforms, including improvements in Public Financial Management (PFM) 
(clearance of arrears, tax reforms), mitigation of fiscal risks from pensions and the energy sector, reduction of 
nonperforming loans, and improvements in doing business. Results were positive: growth picked up, the fiscal 
deficit declined, and the public debt started to fall. This provided a window of opportunity for advancing 
ongoing structural and fiscal reforms, to reduce macroeconomic risks and better support long-term growth. 

Albania applied for EU membership in 2009 and became an official candidate for accession in June 2014. 
This entails strong commitments in the transport sector, which manifest themselves in signing, with the 
European Commission, the Memorandum of Understanding for the Core Network creating the South East 
Europe Transport Observatory (SEETO)1 and in signing the Transport Community Treaty in July of this year. 
The treaty will help the Western Balkan countries align their national transport laws with those of the EU. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
Roads and highways are the predominant mode of land transport in Albania and provide essential 
connectivity for freight and personal mobility. Roads are one of the highest value public assets, estimated at 
about US$6 billion. The overall length of Albania’s road network is about 15,000 km; 4,000 km of national 

                                                           
1 The main aim of SEETO is “to promote cooperation on the development of the main and ancillary infrastructure on the South East 
Europe Core Regional Transport Network and to promote and enhance local capacity.” 


roads; and 11,000 km of regional, local, and urban roads.2 The Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MoIE), 
formerly the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, is responsible for the policy and regulatory framework 
and technical standards. The Albania Road Authority (ARA) is responsible for managing the national road 
network and the municipalities are responsible for managing the regional and local roads. The Albania 
Development Fund (ADF) was established in 1993 with support from the World Bank, to implement regional 
and local roads projects mainly financed by international development partners.   

In 2015, Albania implemented significant administrative and territorial reforms consolidating 372 
communes and municipalities into 61 municipalities to increase the cost efficiency of local units so that they 
can provide better services. The new municipalities consolidated the responsibilities from the previous levels 
of local government—municipalities, communes, and regional councils—each of which was administering 
road networks within their jurisdiction, respectively, within city/town boundaries, within commune 
boundaries, and regional roads in regional council areas. Within the current regional and local road network, 
the function comprises (a) regional roads that connect groups of villages to the national road network or with 
main administrative centers of a municipality and (b) local roads that provide transport links between villages 
and farms. 

The infrastructure planning and prioritization process still has some way to go to provide transparent and 
economically efficient outcomes. With support from the World Bank, progress has been made by the 
Government in developing Medium-term Budget Plans (MTBPs) 2015–2017 to prioritize higher impact new 
investments. A framework that is more aligned with the budget realities is slowly emerging and more fiscal 
discipline is applied at all levels to avoid accumulation of arrears in the road sector. Under the proposed 
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity Project (RLRCP), a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated 
for the selection of project roads which target investments that complement productive sectors of the 
economy and particularly in agriculture and tourism. This process provides an example for investment 
prioritization, transparency, and governance at a local level. 

Maintenance of the road network has been systematically underfunded, undermining the sustainability of 
the sector. The ongoing Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP) is addressing highest 
priority maintenance needs of 4,000 km of national roads while the proposed RLRCP will support the asset 
management of regional and local roads under the control of municipalities. 

The regional and local network is in bad condition overall, with more than 50 percent of network 
categorized in poor condition, 30 percent in fair condition, and less than 20 percent in good and very good 
condition. Some sections are impassable for parts of the year, thus restricting access to essential public 
services of health and education, as well as to economic centers. As of 2016, the maintenance expenditures 
for regional and local roads was allocated at approximately 300 Euro per km per year,3 which is extremely 
low and can only cover the routine maintenance, with no allowance for periodic maintenance or 
improvements. Investments and maintenance of regional and local roads are financed by local taxes 
combined with unconditional grant transfer from the central government. The poor condition of roads is a 
manifestation of the weaknesses in the municipalities planning, implementation and/or monitoring 
capacities.    

The Government of Albania (GoA) has taken large strides in improving conditions of the regional and local 
         

road network in the past decade but more work is necessary. ADF implemented a Rural Road Program, during 
the period 2008–2016, with World Bank support which crowded in US$386 million in financing from IFIs. The 
program improved1,200 km of rural roads in 12 regions and 61 municipalities which improved the mobility of 
over 2 million people. The World Bank’s engagement through the Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP), 
from 2008 to 2013, was evaluated as highly satisfactory which is an important milestone. The program was 
indeed highly successful, exceeding its developmental and implementation outcomes while recognizing there 
is still room to consolidate the e network improvements in a sustainable manner to enable growth in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors. 

The existing condition of regional and local road network is not able to serve the emerging tourism industry4 
and hinders the development of the agricultural sector.5 Over the past few years, the GoA has developed key 
strategic instruments including the National Territorial Development Strategy and the Coastal Management 
Strategy that provide a vision for the development of Albania over the next 15 years (2015–2030). These 
strategies highlighted a number of challenges which include improved road connectivity and the need to 
invest in municipal capacity to improve tourism destination management. The on-going Integrated Urban and 
Tourism Development Project is addressing these issues in the South of Albania while the proposed RLRCP will 
support improved access to tourism development areas in the project road areas of Albania. 

In October 2014, the GoA approved the five-year Strategy for Rural and Agriculture Development, drawing 
upon the strategic planning approach used by the EU under its Common Agriculture Policy 2014–2020. One 
of the obstacles pointed out by the strategy is lack of market access for agricultural products through an 
appropriate network of national, regional, and local roads. Considering that in Albania the agri-food industry 
is responsible (directly and indirectly) for almost half the economy-wide jobs, improving market access 
through better road connectivity is critical for the development of the country. It is also important for 
productive inclusion of women, who represent half of those employed in the sector (the highest share of 
participation of women in agriculture in the Western Balkans) and 80 percent of informal employment in the 
sector.  

Road safety remains a major social and public health issue in Albania. Although the number of accidents has 
dropped in recent years, Albania still compares unfavorably with countries in the region or EU member states, 
with the World Health Organization estimated 15.1 fatalities per 100,000 population—while it is 11.9 in 
Montenegro, 9.1 in Greece, 7.7 in Serbia, 4.3 in Germany, 5.1 in France, and 2.9 in the United Kingdom.6 In 
response, the GoA aims to reduce the number of fatalities by 50 percent in 2020, in comparison to 2009.7 The 
GoA has increased its attention to road safety reforms, including the adoption of the Road Safety Strategy and 
Action Plan in 2011 and adoption of mandatory Road Safety audit8 for all new roads. The RRMSP is 
strengthening the capacity of the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety Council, introducing road safety audit training 

                                                           
4 Tourism is a significant contributor to the Albanian economy, with 8.4 percent of total GDP in 2016, and is forecasted to rise to 10.8 
percent by 2027. Its contribution to employment is also significant, directly supporting 85,500 jobs (7.7 percent of total 
employment) in 2016, and is estimated to grow to 120,000 jobs (10.1 percent of total employment) by 2025.  
5 Agriculture is the single largest contributor to GDP in the country (22 percent in 2015) and the largest employer (41 percent in 
2015). Agricultural productivity and the competitiveness of the sector are adversely affected by the fragmented and subsistence-
oriented supply base, poor enforcement of food safety standards, infrastructure deficiencies, including poor transport networks and 
access to markets and tourism hubs, among others.  

 
6 World Health Organization. 2015 “Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015.” 
7 Government Decision No. 125, February 23,  2011, on “Implementing Objectives for Improving Road Safety.” 
8 By Amendment to Article 71/, introducing “Road Safety Audit” to the Highway Code. Decision 815 in November  2011. 

accreditation courses, supporting media campaigns, and enhancing the Accident Information System. The 
RLRCP will build on these reforms and address road safety through improvements to regional and local road 
infrastructure. 

Better links from the regional and local road network to the national road network will complement 
envisioned improvements in the country’s trade and transport facilitation competitiveness which are being 
supported under the separate proposed Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation Project. Improved feeder 
and distribution links from the regional and local road network to the national network together will reduce 
cost of trade and transport, lower the cost of importing and exporting for goods and services including 
agriculture and tourism.  These two areas will be the focus of the proposed RLRCP. 

A major emergent issue affecting sustainability of the road sector is the road network vulnerability to 
climate changes and natural disasters. Floods in recent years have increasingly affected the infrastructure 
and consequently the access of population and farmers to markets which have been substantially disrupted. 
A World Bank-executed Technical Assistance (TA) funded by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery (GFDRR) is starting to address the issue of vulnerability of the road network and how to improve 
road asset management. Implementation of the TA outcome will be implemented as one of the components 
of the proposed RLRCP. 

In recent years, several IFIs have supported road sector investments and reforms in Albania. Several IFIs 
including the World Bank, European Commission, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD), European Investment Bank (EIB), and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) are the main partners 
supporting the GoA including: (i) improvement of planning and budgeting process, (ii) introducing better 
management practices to avoid future arrears, (iii) deepening ARA reforms , and (iv) providing financing for 
priority projects. Bilateral partners including the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) and the 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) are involved in supporting the new municipalities to 
capacity building, asset and resource management under their administration with a focus on water supply 
and sanitation, solid waste, and municipal financing. The proposed RLRCP presents an opportunity to develop 
an overall investment and policy framework for the regional and local roads sector that can be supported 
through the joint efforts of different development partners. In this context, the EBRD is currently in discussions 
with GoA to match the World Bank financing with a further US$50 million loan for a parallel operation. 

Gender gap. Gender gaps in construction and transport sectors, where less than 5 percent and 17 percent of 
all employed respectively, are women, are very substantial. Therefore, promoting women’s economic 
opportunities as part of the efforts to reverse poverty trends and boost shared prosperity are part of the 
project objectives. A separate TA funded by the State and Peace Building Fund (SPBF) administered by the 
World Bank will be looking into opportunities in this regard. The results from this TA will be implemented 
through the proposed RLRCP. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers and to strengthen 
selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets
 

Key Results 
 

• Number of agricultural and tourism centers connected by improved project roads 
 

• Reduced travel time on project roads 
 

• Demonstrated better asset management capacity by selected municipalities through adoption of 
Municipal Transport Investment and Maintenance Plan. 

 
D. Project Description  

 
The Albania RLRCP is expected to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$50 million. The RLRCP will focus on the 
role that improved roads can play in enabling connectivity driven economic gains, particularly in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors, both key drivers of growth and employment in Albania. More specifically, 
the proposed RLRCP will support tourism development through improving road access to existing and 
potential tourism destinations and providing quality tourism-friendly amenities (for example, parking lot for 
tourist bus, viewpoints) and signage along the roads in the project areas. It will also support the integration 
of agricultural producers to agri-food value chains and market participation, particularly for women who make 
up the majority of the workforce in agriculture. 

To achieve these overarching goals and set an example for investment prioritization at the municipal level, 
a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated in the RLRCP road selection. The selection of project 
roads was done through a two-step prioritization process including the development of a long list of 1,400 km 
candidate roads based on consultations between the ADF and 61 municipalities and a short list of 200 km 
candidate roads using multi-criteria analysis, considering tourism destinations, agriculture potential, 
beneficiary population, and economic efficiency indicators. The selection process reflects the priority from 
the municipalities as well as the GoA’s vision on rural roads investments that support tourism and agriculture. 
This approach also allows for easy scale-up to a program for the GoA, municipalities, and other developmental 
partners to implement. 

The RLRCP will include capacity building TA in support of the municipalities to improve management of road 
assets and strengthen links between roads, improved agricultural market access, and tourism development 
plans where they exist. The RLRCP is designed to address the sustainability of road maintenance at the 
municipal level which is a significant challenge following the transfer of local and regional road assets to the 
municipal level. The RLRCP is also designed to address road safety issues in regional and secondary roads in 
the selected municipalities to provide safer and sustainable infrastructure. 

In addition, the project will implement action plans on ways to promote climate resilience and women’s 
economic opportunities in regional and local roads in Albania as follows:  

• Climate Resilient Road Assets for Albania: Albania’s vulnerability to climate change and natural 
disasters, for example, flooding, landslides, and earthquakes, within the road sector, is being analyzed 
under a separate Technical Assistance and its outcome will inform the prioritization of investment to 



provide more sustainable and resilient road assets. The TA outcomes will be incorporated into the 
RLRCP designs of specific road sections.  Improved regional and local roads at time provide an 
alternative to the national road network critical links during extreme weather events. The TA will also 
include recommendations to adjust the design standards for regional and local roads and apply them 
to the project roads. 

• Promoting Woman’s Employment in Road Sector in Albania: the capacity of local stakeholders to 
reach out and increase women’s inclusion and participation in road maintenance programs is being 
analyzed under a separate TA. The outcome will consider policy options to provide support to 
contractors that explore opportunities to promote women’s employment in high skilled jobs in their 
respective workforce.  The focus will be on more and better jobs.  
 

The project will finance the following components. 

Component 1. Accessibility Improvement (Total cost US$47.03 million; IBRD US$47.03 million) 

This component will finance the rehabilitation of regional and local roads; consultancy service for designs, civil 
works supervision, and technical and road safety audits; and road safety initiatives.  

• Subcomponent 1.1. Climate resilient road rehabilitation works (Total cost US$45.83 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of about 50 km of regional and local roads within 5 to 6 
municipalities. The roads will be designed according to Albanian standards with particular attention to their 
climate resilience (such as to flooding and landslides) given the vulnerability of the network. As a first-year 
program, three project roads in three municipalities, totaling 40 km, have been selected based on further 
surveys and a rigorous multi-criteria analysis on the short-listed 200 km of roads. The remaining roads will be 
identified and prioritized during implementation. Where roads serve tourism areas or pass through urban 
areas, attention will be given to footpaths, bicycle paths, safety improvements, orientation signage, and 
aesthetic considerations. In addition, new bike lanes and sidewalks will be build, to encourage the shift to 
cleaner modes of transport. This subcomponent will also finance all necessary designs, civil works supervision, 
and technical and road safety audits, although the designs of the first-year program were already financed by 
the GoA.  

• Subcomponent 1.2. Road Safety Initiatives (Total cost US$1.2 million). This subcomponent will 
consist of identification of potential road safety interventions on regional and local roads that are not included 
in Subcomponent 1.1 but within the project municipalities. Identification efforts shall include both road risk 
mapping using available crash data and a road safety inspection of sections linked to Component 1.1 roads. 
These interventions will address accident blackspots and include traffic calming measures, footpaths, crash 
barriers and junction design. 

Component 2. Capacity Building for Municipalities (Total cost US$0.85 million; IBRD: US$0.85 million) 

This component will build capacity in the project municipalities’ to manage their transport system and road 
assets in a sustainable way and to maximize the impacts of improved accessibility on agricultural production 
and tourism potential. It will develop standard approaches that will be implemented in a few municipalities 
in this project but can subsequently be rolled out more widely. The following activities are envisaged: 

• Subcomponent 2.1. Municipal Transport Capacity Development for all Participating Municipalities 
(Total cost US$0.45 million). This subcomponent will focus on developing municipal systems for road 
maintenance and road planning following the recent transfer of road assets to the municipal level. It will: (i) 
assess municipalities capacity, local planning instruments and processes for road planning and maintenance 
and public transport planning, (ii) develop recommendations for addressing weaknesses, and (iii) provide 
training based on the recommendations. The focus will be on road maintenance and will include support on 
programming, budgeting, sustainable financing for road rehabilitation and maintenance priorities, asset 
management and maintenance execution. Public transport planning will extend to public parking and bus 
terminals, and safety measures. The subcomponent will also finance the preparation of a standard service 
level agreement contract for maintenance between the municipalities and the service provider and will 
provide training to the municipalities on its use.  

• Subcomponent 2.2. Linking Farmers to Markets (Total cost US$0.20 million). This subcomponent will 
support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide technical support for 
linking agricultural producers to local demand, including through local markets and tourism centers. The focus 
will be on production areas adjacent to the road infrastructure supported by the project. The subcomponent 
will provide an assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under 
the 100 villages program or other development partner programs. Potential activities include  supply chain 
activities for key agricultural products; recommendations for alleviating impediments in connecting roads, 
warehouses, harvesting facilities, regulations; developing collection zones; and promoting “Eat Albania” 
restaurants. This subcomponent will also increase the World Bank’s evidence base for supporting women 
smallholder farmers and women-led agriculture small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to start and/or enhance 
their participation in agri-food value chains in Albania; analyze the barriers that women face in accessing 
markets, in general, but particularly in light of the new business opportunities that the project is hoped to 
deliver; and recommend the ways to address them.9 

• Subcomponent 2.3. Managing for Tourism Growth (Total cost US$0.20 million). As above this 
subcomponent will support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide 
technical support to promote agro-tourism in the project municipalities. The subcomponent will provide an 
assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under the 100 villages 
program or other development partner programs. The subcomponent will also provide technical support to 
concerned municipalities to plan for this growth and mitigate any possible environmental and social impacts. 
Where appropriate support may also be given to steer public and private investments in tourism related 
infrastructure and services.        

Component 3. Implementation Management Support (Total cost US$2.0 million; IBRD: US$2.0 million) 

This component includes incremental operational cost of the ADF, development and maintenance of 
Geographic Information System (GIS) and prioritization database for regional and local roads, midterm 
evaluation, and capacity-building initiatives for the ADF. It will also include the implementation of a Project 
Impact Assessment to assess the project’s impacts on key social, transport, agriculture, and tourism indicators. 
This is similar to the approach used by ADF in the previous Rural Road Program using financing from the 
development partners and outsourced expertise.    

                                                           
9 The project scope and available budget will likely not allow for addressing most of the recommendations resulting from the gender 
analysis of this subcomponent. Still, in light of the large gender gaps in agriculture and the focus that the CPF rightly puts on them, 
the team considered it important to integrate gender analysis as part of the envisaged study. The recommendations will be provided 
to the client and will also be used to inform the World Bank’s future activities.  

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The project will be implemented over four years and seven months by the ADF, which has strong experience 
and track record as an implementing agency of road projects financed by the World Bank and other 
development partners since its inception in 1993. A Project Management Team (PMT) will be established 
within the ADF, staffed by its own personnel, which will also coordinate with representatives of the respective 
municipalities. The PMT will manage project activities, such as procurement, social impact assessments, 
safeguard functions, monitoring and evaluation, and so on. When necessary, the project management 
function will be supported by consultants. A budget for such operating costs has been allocated in Component 
3. 

It is recognized that the participation of municipalities is critical during both project preparation and 
implementation. During the project preparation, the ADF has worked very closely with municipalities in the 
prioritization exercise, and several consultations with municipalities and local communities have taken place 
during the preliminary designs of the project roads. Before starting the civil works, an Investment Agreement 
and a Function and Maintenance Agreement will be signed by the municipalities, defining duties that 
municipalities must carry, e.g. maintenance requirement, after the project roads are handed over. The ADF 
will monitor the compliance of these agreements. When procuring and implementing capacity building 
activities, municipalities will provide ADF with inputs to TOR and sign off outputs.  

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities. This Component will also 
finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and 
local road network.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself financed under the same component will 
also support improving the road safety aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive 
social impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will finance rehabilitation of priority regional roads across the municipalities. Construction will 
mainly occur within the existing right-of-way, and the estimated cumulative length of project road segments 


is 50 km. Three project roads were selected for implementation in the first year, and are located in Shkoder, 
Pogradec and Fier municipalities. There is no geographical focus for the remaining roads to be financed. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Bekim Imeri, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Natasa Vetma, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is categorized as category B and not 
expected to have significant or irreversible 
environmental impacts given the rehabilitative 
nature of works to be financed.  Anticipated civil 
works will primarily entail rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads.  Potential negative 
environmental impacts may include, but not limited 
to: (i) temporary construction -related effects on 
noise, dust, and air quality; (ii) temporary localized 
water quality impacts resulting from possible 
drainage and sewage pollution; and (iii) temporary 
changes in access to, and the use of, public spaces 
during construction. The exact project locations are 
still not known as the prioritization of rural roads is 
still ongoing. For that reason, preparation of 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) is 
proposed prior to appraisal. ESMF is prepared to 
facilitate screening, assessment, and management of 
environmental and social issues for activities to be 
taken up by the project in subsequent years. The 
ESMF ensures preparation of appropriate and World 
Bank safeguard policy-compliant safeguard 
instruments during project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in 
nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that 
reason, the ESMF defines procedures for identifying 
and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. 
No new construction will be allowed in nature 


protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but 
only rehabilitation of the existing roads. In addition, 
no activities will be allowed in or in proximity of 
critical habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not have any impacts on forests 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project is not expected to trigger pest 
management policy. The investments will not 
promote or increase the use of the pesticide. 
Although the project will finance solely roads 
rehabilitation, the ESMF provides guidance for use of 
herbicides for roads maintenance. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project is not expected to trigger OP 4.11. The 
investments will be focused on rehabilitation of 
existing roads. Nevertheless, due to the countries 
cultural richness, during the earthworks chance finds 
might be possible. For that reason, ESMF includes 
provisions on chance finds and required 
practices.For each such subproject, the ESIA and 
ESMP will be prepared, prior reviewed by the World 
Bank environmental specialist, and 
cleared/consulted with the Albanian Agency for 
Protected areas (or relevant environmental 
authorities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No Not relevant 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads. Roads connecting 
villages with the regional centers, touristic/cultural 
sites and agricultural fields. Given the linear nature 
of the works the land-take impacts will be minor and 
linear, adjacent to the existing road. Thus there will 
be small land taken. Displacement of households or 
businesses is not expected either, nor any impact on 
livelihoods. Given that the project is a rehabilitation 
of existing roads, there will be no need for access 
roads, thus it is not expected to address associated 
land-take cases. To address the social safeguards 
instrument, the borrower will prepare Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that will guide the land take 
activities during the whole cycle of the project 
implementation. If for any sub-project it is expected 
that the footprint will be known during the 
preparation phase of the project then the borrower 
will prepare site specific abbreviated or full fledge 
(depending of the impact) Resettlement Action Plan. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No Not relevant 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project activities will not have impact on 
international waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Not relevant 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities and short new segments 
only where they present natural continuation / connection. Under the same component, the project will also finance 
and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and local road 
network. This implies that the project will possibly have some adverse environmental impacts; however, these would 
be site specific and would not be significant nor long-term. For the project to remain category B, ESMF defines 
following environmental criteria for eligible subprojects: a) category A sub projects will not be financed; b) for sub 
projects in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, only rehabilitation of the roads would be allowed and 
no new construction. No activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats; c) New construction should 
be limited and allowed only in some specific cases for example where segments are missing or alignment of a section 
that is currently particularly difficult of dangerous; d) The construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of roads on 
existing right of way would be allowed only in form of one or two lane roads. 
Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in the nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that reason, 
the ESMF defines procedures for identification and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. No new 
construction would be allowed in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but only rehabilitation of the 
existing roads. In addition, no activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats. For each of such sub 
projects ESIA and ESMP would be prepared, priory reviewed by WB environmental specialist and cleared / consulted 
with the Albanian Agency for Protected areas (or relevant Environmental Authorities). For all supported TA activities, 
the TORs for these activities should include environmental and social considerations in line with the triggered 
safeguards operational policies. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself will also support improving the road safety 
aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive social impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
As the project will finance mainly rehabilitation of existing roads, no major alternatives were, nor will be considered. 
Some alternatives will be taken in consideration during design when considering roads width and possible new 
connections. All those alternatives will be examined in site specific environmental due diligence documents prepared 
during project implementation. The ESMF screening procedure will help guide the Client in ensuring that the site-

specific impacts are mitigated, that no additional safeguards policies are triggered and that no category-A works are 
financed 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Albanian Development Fund (ADF) will be implementing the project. ADF has experience in managing 
environmental and social impacts of World Bank-financed infrastructure investments and other infrastructure projects 
financed by international finance institutions. The ADF project team includes experienced environmental and social 
specialists.  
To comply, the ADF prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as Resettlement 
Policy Framework, satisfactory to the Bank, to guide the overall project as the exact subproject locations are still not 
known or are currently being assessed. The purpose of this ESMF is to guide the Environmental and Social Assessment 
process, i.e. to facilitate screening, assessment, and management of environmental and social issues for activities to 
be taken up by the project in subsequent years. Environmental due diligence documents envisaged by ESMF include: 
ESIA, ESMPs and ESMP checklists. In addition to ESMF, the Borrower prepared a sample Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for Fier-Seman road rehabilitation. 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared parallel with the Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESMF)/ The documents were disclosed on the December 22th and the consultation held on January 4th . 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Major stakeholders are ADF and municipalities in which the projects will be implemented. ESMF documents was 
disclosed and publicly consulted prior to appraisal. ESMF with the call for public consultation was disclosed on the ADF 
website on December 22, 2017 and major municipalities participating in a project (paper or electronic) for two weeks. 
The ESIA for Fier-Seman road was disclosed on ADF website and in Fier municipality on January 5, 2018. In addition to 
the public call, the government and relevant non-governmental organizations were invited through official invitations 
sent out by the ADF. Public consultation meetings were held in Tirana (January 4, 2018r) and Fier (January 15, 2018). 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed and consulted parallel with the Environmental and Social 
Framework (ESMF) 
The similar procedure will be followed for site specific ESMPs during project implementation as defined by the ESMF. 
All due diligence documents will be disclosed on the ADF websites respectively, and hardcopy will be available at their 
premises as well in participating municipalities for at least two weeks following public consultation as per ESMF. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate-smart Irrigated Agriculture Project (P163742) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2018 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Sri Lanka P163742 Climate Smart Irrigated 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 28-Aug-2018 08-Nov-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture in 
selected hotspot areas. 

 
Components 

Agriculture Production and Marketing 
Water for Agriculture 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 140.00 

Total Financing 140.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 125.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 125.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 



     Counterpart Funding 15.00 

          Borrowing Agency 10.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 5.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Sri Lanka is a Lower Middle-Income country with a GDP per capita of USD 4,073 (2017) and a total population 
of 21.4 million people. Following 30 years of civil war that ended in 2009, Sri Lanka’s economy grew at an average 5.8 
percent during the period of 2010-2017, reflecting a peace dividend and a determined policy thrust towards 
reconstruction and growth; although there were some signs of a slowdown in the last few years. The economy is 
transitioning from a predominantly rural-based economy towards a more urbanized economy oriented around 
manufacturing and services.  Economic growth has contributed to the decline in the national poverty headcount ratio 
from 15.3 percent in 2006/07 to 4.1 percent in 2016. Extreme poverty is rare and concentrated in some geographical 
pockets. 
 
2. The Government that came to power in 2015 envisions promoting a globally competitive, export-led 
economy with an emphasis on inclusion. It has indicated keenness to undertake reforms in the areas of public finance, 
competitiveness, governance, and education sectors. In 2017, the Government presented Vision 2025, a policy 
document that both identified economic limitations due to the constrained fiscal space and presented structural 
reforms (including the promotion of private sector participation) to address key economic challenges and strengthen 
economic growth. Despite Sri Lanka’s remarkable economic achievements, many people continue to be at risk of falling 
back into poverty. 
 
3. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to climate-related natural disasters that have major economic impacts. Long-term, 
annual losses for housing, infrastructure, agriculture, and relief from natural disasters are estimated at LKR 50 billion 
(USD 327 million), with the highest annual expected losses from floods, cyclones or high winds, droughts and landslides. 
This is equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP or 2.1 percent of GoSL expenditures. Due to the increased sophistication of the 
economy the damage caused by the 2016 and 2017 floods and landslides was more than twice as high in US$ terms 
than the worst flood disasters between 1992 and 2011. 
 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of Sri Lanka’s culture and economy.  The agriculture sector 
contributes 7.7 percent to GDP and still employs approximately 27 percent of the population.  Of the country’s 
approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, around 80 percent is under smallholder production, with 
around 1.65 million smallholder farmers operating on average less than 2 hectares.  Sri Lanka has successfully attained 


self-sufficiency in rice through policy interventions including fertilizer subsidies. However, expenditures on vital public 
services, such as Research and Development (R&D) and extension services account for only three percent of total 
agriculture expenditure and much of this limited budget is spent on rice research. The focus on self-sufficiency in rice 
has limited farmer’s opportunities to diversify into higher value products and kept the sector concentrated in the low 
value food crops.  As a result, agriculture productivity, as measured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP), has only grown 
by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 1980 and Sri Lanka lags significantly behind other South and East Asian 
countries. Women contribute to over 38 percent of the farming operations in Sri Lanka. However, the unemployment 
rates of women are more than double that of men at all age levels, with more than 60 percent of women engaged in 
agriculture working as unpaid family labor. Furthermore, only 10 percent of female farmers receive extension services 
in comparison to 90 percent of male farmers.  
 
5. Irrigation is a key feature of the smallholder agriculture sector.  Sri Lanka has a long history of water 
management for agriculture production.  The expansion of crop cultivation into the dry zones of the north, east and 
south-east of the country was enabled through the construction of elaborate water management systems, dating back 
to the period between 500 BC and 300 AD. The systems are based on water capture in small reservoirs commonly 
known as “tanks” connected via canals into “cascades” which enabled crop cultivation throughout the country 
including those areas with long and variable dry seasons. Tank cascades remain the primary source of water for dry 
season cultivation of approximately 74,150 hectares, supporting the livelihoods of approximately 154,744 farmers.  
Recently, water scarcity has increased because of high inter-annual and inter-seasonal variability in rainfall, catchment 
area land-use changes which have reduced the proportion of rainfall available for capture in downstream tanks, and 
the growing demand for water to meet the needs of a growing population.  For example, drought in 2016 and 2017 
affected 1,927,069 people across 17 districts, according to the Disaster Management Centre. During the Maha season 
in 2016, 612,224 hectares of paddy were cultivated of which 50,615 hectares were damaged due to the drought, with 
total production of MT 2.383 million, 30 percent of the average in last ten years. 
 
6. Hotspot areas are the most vulnerable to climatic events .  Although much of the country has been subject 
to the increased frequency and severity of climate e vents, some areas have emerged as being particularly 
susceptible to either flood or drought events, or both.  These are areas which are predominantly agriculture based 
and therefore the livelihoods of smallholder farmers are at risk.  Hotspots have been identified through a rigorous, 
analysis of empirical evidence by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), 
the World Food Program (WFP) and the International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 
 
7. The management of irrigation water suffers from institutional fragmentation and lack of local accountability. 
The management of irrigation tanks has undergone a transformation in the post-independence period. Community 
institutions which originally managed these tanks were initially replaced with a new GoSL-led institutional system that 
ultimately became ineffective. To overcome the top-down management of tank systems, since 1978 there have been 
experiments in Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM), involving local communities in the management of irrigation 
schemes. PIM was approved as official policy in 1992 and Farmer Organizations (FOs) were created by the Agrarian 
Services Act of 1991 to manage minor tanks. Despite this policy direction, less capacity of FOs to manage limited 
remaining water and lack of strong oversight from GoSL have compounded the situation. Within GoSL, the responsibility 
for the management of these tanks currently lies with three different institutions: Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM); Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and, Provincial Councils (PCs). The responsibility 
for system maintenance budgeting and implementation is shared across these institutions and FOs often with unclear 
mandates. Water user fees were removed after the independence, and GoSL started to allocate maintenance budgets 
which are insufficient to meet maintenance needs. But, FOs collect contribution from farmers and they are 
maintaining their own Operation and Maintenance (O&M) funds. 




 
8. While many of these tanks are still functioning, some are in a completely dilapidated condition and the 
overall performance is low.  Past tank rehabilitation efforts have largely failed to produce the desired results for many 
reasons. Firstly, insufficient attention has been paid to water and land use management in the upstream catchment 
areas. The supply of water from upstream catchment areas is in most cases decreasing because of land use changes, 
including deforestation and infrastructure development, which has also increased the flow of silt into the supply canals 
and tanks resulting in declined water inflows into the tanks and reduced water storage capacity in the tanks. Secondly, 
previous rehabilitation efforts have not adequately accounted for the hydraulic inter-connectedness of tanks within 
cascades resulting in sub-optimal development of water resources and negative downstream impacts. Finally, past 
rehabilitation efforts have not sufficiently factored in either growing water demand in the tank command areas or the 
likely future impacts of climate change, such that rehabilitated tanks have failed to provide enough water supply to 
meet even current demand. 
 

9. Improved access to irrigation and better water management needs to be addressed in conjunction with 
improving productivity in the sector.  Agriculture productivity is low due to an inhibiting policy framework, weak public 
services and low levels of private investment.  With rice self-sufficiency secured, a consensus has recently emerged 
within the GoSL that the country should take a more strategic approach to addressing low productivity by (i) 
modernizing water resource infrastructure, minimizing flood damages and managing water allocation more efficiently 
and (ii) diversifying the agricultural sector away from relatively low value food crops towards high value and export-
oriented commodities. In the water sector, an integrated basin approach to water investment and management needs 
to be built on integrated basin plans developed through effective stakeholder participation. As a middle-income country 
in an economically strong region, farmers can capitalize on growing domestic consumer demand for diversified, 
nutritious, and higher-valued foods and take advantage of the country’s proximity to fast growing neighboring markets. 
The GoSL has recently implemented measures to improve the competitiveness of the agriculture sector, such as 
promoting commercial and export-oriented agriculture through attracting and leveraging investments from farmer 
producer organizations and agribusinesses for high value agriculture production and value addition under the Bank-
supported Agriculture Sector Modernization Project.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD) 
  
10. The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder 
agriculture in selected hotspot areas. 

 
Key Results 

11. The key results indicators to assess project outcomes are: 

• KPI 1: Increase in water productivity at farm level (Custom); 

• KPI 2: Increase in agriculture productivity of crops (Custom); 

• KPI 3: Crop diversification index (Custom); and 

• KPI 4: Direct project beneficiaries, segregated by gender (CRI). 
 

D. Project Description 
  
12. Theory of Change: The project will address the key problem of the vulnerability of agriculture systems in 



climatic hotspot areas of the country.  The drivers of this vulnerability are (i) lack of farmer access to reliable 
sources of irrigation water, (ii) insufficient protection of agriculture land from floods; (iii) low levels of 
diversification in agriculture production; and (iv) limited adoption of climate-smart technologies. Addressing 
these issues will involve an approach that (i) addresses expected long-term trends in climate change including 
the frequency and severity of climatic events (flood and drought); (ii) adopts a catchment scale approach to water 
management; and (iii) integrates agriculture and water by working with farmers and Farmer Organizations (FOs) 
to improve the sustainable management of water and soil resources, and promote the adoption of suitable on-
farm water management and crop production technologies. 
 
13. The proposed project interventions will introduce catchment level hydrological assessments that 
incorporate future climate change projections to assess water availability and identify appropriate investments 
for upper catchment area treatments, water harvesting, rehabilitation of irrigation systems and reduced flood 
damage. Once water availability is assessed in a river basin, watersheds, sub-watersheds, cascades and individual 
tanks, then technical designs will be carried out for the tank irrigation systems, which consist of watershed 
catchment area, tank headworks, canal system and agriculture production area. The water stored in rehabilitated 
tanks will be used to commence CSA activities. Management of irrigation schemes will be enhanced through 
improved capacity of FOs. The project would support the identification, demonstration and adoption of 
technologies to both improve water use efficiency and enable farmers to diversify their production and move 
into higher value crops. Finally, support would be provided to enable farmers to have improved market access. 
Through these interventions, as stated below, the core project objectives of improving climate resilience and 
increased productivity would be achieved. 
 

 
 
 
14. Project Beneficiaries: The primary project beneficiaries will be over 470,000 smallholder farmers in 
hotspot areas (375,000 ha) in eleven administrative districts (Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, 
Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Ampara, Hambantota and Moneragala) spread 
across six provinces (Northern, North Central, North Western, Eastern, Southern and Uva) in the dry zone of Sri 


Lanka (see Project Area in Annex 9). Smallholder farmers consist of small farmers (1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and 
marginal farmers (less than 1.0 ha).  They will gain knowledge and technology transfer and access to 
infrastructure assets to enhance climate resilience in farming resulting in increased revenue from crop 
diversification and participation in emerging value chains.  Many technical and managerial staff of the 
participating agencies will benefit through training and capacity building activities. The project will also promote 
participation of youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure that they would benefit from the 
project activities. 

 
15. Hot-Spot Area Development Model: Given the centrality of tanks in the agrarian livelihoods of the dry 
zone of Sri Lanka, their current levels of neglect and the increasing vulnerability of these areas to both droughts 
and floods in quick succession with consequent impacts on agricultural production and incomes, the 
rehabilitation of tank-based irrigated agricultural systems is key to improving the resilience of these areas and 
the agrarian communities that depend on them. Resilience being ‘the ability of a system to bounce back or return 
to normal functioning after adversity’,1 the Hot-Spot Area Development model aims to enhance the resilience of 
these areas and those who depend on them for their livelihoods. Climate shocks add to relatively low paddy 
productivity. Resilience will be built through stable and rising incomes of agrarian families living in these hotspot 
areas despite increasing climatic variability. The expected results of this novel model will be achieved by (1) 
flexible and adaptive management of existing and improved irrigation water storage and delivery structures to 
make irrigation more reliable in the face of rising climatic variability (including more frequent episodes of high 
intensity rainfall and flooding and/or drought); (2) better agricultural inputs, techniques and practices that will 
help farmers maximize water use efficiency given rising climatic variability – and reduce crop harvest losses; and 
(3) better access to new markets and higher prices, through marketing higher up the value chain, more 
competitive agri-enterprises and upgraded infrastructure for agricultural trade to stabilize and increase incomes 
from agricultural livelihoods. The project will prioritize nutrient-rich foods to improve year-round nutrition. 
 

16. Phasing: In view of the complexity and innovativeness of the project and to learn lessons, the project will 
be implemented in three overlapping stages. The first stage (2018–2021) will cover three Hot-Spot Areas 
(Anuradhapura, Kurunegala and Kilinochchi districts), whereas the second (2020–2023) and third (2021–2024) 
stages will cover the balance eight districts. Progress will be reviewed annually and prior to completion of every 
stage, to sanction the next stage of implementation. All project financed activities in a stage will be completed in 
3 years but the O&M activities will continue till end of the project.  

 

Project Components 

 
17. Component 1: Agriculture Production and Marketing (US$ 42 million). The objective of this component 
is to improve agriculture productivity and diversification through the adoption of CSA practices and improved 
on-farm water management. 
 
18. Component 2: Water for Agriculture (US$ 92 million). The objective of this component is to facilitate (a) 
planning for water and other infrastructure necessary to support climate-resilient irrigated agriculture, (b) 

 
construction of the planned infrastructure; and (c) co-management of this infrastructure by central/provincial 
governments and the local community. 
 
19. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million). The objective of this component is to ensure the 
quality of overall project management, while ensuring smooth coordination of activity implementation by various 
agencies and strategic partners at national and subnational levels. This component will finance (i) the consultancy 
and operating costs of the PMU and DPD Offices and of different project executing agencies, including for 
fiduciary and safeguard aspects; (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities at baseline, midterm and 
end of project, including geotagging of the assets created; and (iii) information, education and communication 
campaigns to make all stakeholders aware of the project. 

 
20. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0.0 million). This emergency response component 
will allow for rapid reallocation of project proceeds in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or crisis that 
has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact. 

 

21. Climate Co-Benefits: The project seeks to derive Climate Co-Benefits (about 95 percent) through: (i) 
enhanced water security at farm level through the rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and 
improvement in water efficiency; (ii) improved soil health through the adoption of good agricultural practices to 
improve soil fertility, soil nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and (iii) improved 
adaptation to climate risks through increased farm productivity and crop diversification. 

 

22. Project Cost and Financing: The project will be financed through a six-year Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) loan. The total project cost is US$140 million and will be funded by an IBRD loan of US$125 million, 
with the GoSL contribution of US$ 10 million to cover salary costs on parallel basis and the Beneficiaries 
contributing US$ 5 million in kind.  Retroactive financing up to an aggregate amount of US$ 5 million will be 
available for eligible expenditures incurred under all project components and all categories prior to the date of 
signed Loan Agreement, but on or after July 01, 2018. 
 
E. Implementation 
 
23. The key design features incorporated in the institutional and implementation model include: multi-
stakeholder approach - different stakeholders involved in the field of climate resilient irrigation and agriculture 
are expected to contribute to project implementation from national to sub-national levels; coordinated 
approach - stakeholders are expected to share knowledge and resources in a collaborative manner at each level; 
citizen engagement - local smallholder farmers, medium sized agribusiness owners, common interest groups, 
producer organizations, individual entrepreneurs and their customers will be involved in the planning & 
implementation of project activities, along with government counterparts, NGOs, academia and the private 
sector; consistency with the National Poverty Alleviation Programme – since the project will also work with the 
People’s Company of the Grama Shakthi Programme implemented at Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level; Use 
of existing government staff – except a few of the full-time key professionals to be recruited from the open 
market, the rest of the staff will be from existing government cadres and work on a part-time basis at both 
national and provincial levels; and gender equality - the project design and approach will take into account the 
gender dimension and ensure that the project provides equal opportunities for women to participate in the 
project cycle. 

 

24. Institutional arrangements:  The project is fully integrated in the GOSL administration, and the 
implementation is designed to capitalize on existing government agencies at national, provincial, district, 
divisional, and   Grama Niladhari Division levels. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established under 
the Ministry of Agriculture, whereas Deputy Project Director’s Offices (DPD Offices) will be established under 
the Ministries of Irrigation & Water Resources Management and of Provincial Councils and Local Government. 
At provincial level, there will be Provincial DPD Offices set up in each of the participating Provinces to implement 
the project. The Provincial DPD Offices will be set up under the Chief Secretaries in Kilinochchi, Kurunegala, 
Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts, and they will cover the district level 
activities of the respective districts. In addition, a District Unit of the DPD Office will be established under the 
District Secretary at the Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development in Puttalam, Batticaloa, 
Mullaitivu, Polonnaruwa and Ampara Districts to coordinate all agencies operating at district level.  
 

25. There will be a Project Appraisal Team (PAT) set up at district level, and it will be coordinated by the 
District Planning Director. The PAT is an independent body and will report to the DPD. In addition, at the district 
level, there will be an advisory committee headed by the District Secretary. The Divisional secretaries of the 
participating divisions and district and divisional level heads of the government agencies, representatives of 
chamber of commerce, Associations of Farmer/Producer Organizations and NGOs will participate in the Advisory 
Committee. The Advisory Committee will guide the project implementers at the district level to implement CSIAP 
effectively. 

 
26. At Divisional level, there will be a Divisional Unit of the Provincial DPD Office set up at the Agrarian 
Service Center (ASC), and it will be headed by the Divisional Officer of the ASC. The Divisional Unit will function 
as a supporting unit to the Provincial DPD office and work closely with the District Unit to implement the Project 
effectively. The community based organizations, such as Farmer Organizations (FOs), Producer Groups (PGs), and 
Grama Shakthi People’s Company (GSPCs) operating at the Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level are the 
institutions that will be actively involved in the project together with the beneficiary farmers at the community 
level. Given the transformative nature of the project, institutional coordination across the relevant sectors is 
emerging as a critical task for the PMU in developing an effective project implementation mechanism to achieve 
convergence with other programs. The institutional arrangement is further described in Annex 2 of the PAD. 
 
27. Implementation arrangements:  Overall project implementation is the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA). Since the institutional capacity of MOA is limited and special skills are required to implement 
the complex project activities, the project will draw expertise from the Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM), Department of Agriculture (DOA), Department of Agrarian Development 
(DAD) and Irrigation Department (ID), as well, and acquire outside expertise, including consulting services. The 
day-to-day management and operation of the project is the responsibility of the Project Management Unit 
(PMU), headed by a Project Director (PD) appointed by MOA and assisted by national level Deputy Project 
Director’s offices in MIWRDM and MSPCLG as well as provincial level Deputy Project Director’s offices. The 
project will give attention to institutional coordination across departments, agencies, and strategic partners 
involved in the implementation of project activities. Specifically, as the MoA has an existing PMU under the 
ASMP, core functions such procurement, FM and safeguards would maximize the use of existing capacity.  Overall 
project oversight is the responsibility of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), established in the 
Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs (MNPEA) and chaired by its Secretary. The main responsibility 
of the NPSC is to provide strategic guidance for the implementation of the project and to act as the interface 
between the central and provincial institutions. The NPSC also approves the annual work program and budget 
for the project, endorses the working arrangements with strategic partners, and is briefed by the Bank (and the 


PD) on the outcomes of implementation support and review missions carried out with the Bank team at least 
biannually. 

 
28. The PMU is responsible for ensuring that: (i) all project activities are planned, financed and 

implemented as per the project annual work program and budget, (ii) project implementation is in line with 
operational guidelines of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), (iii) project procurement and financial 
management activities are carried out in timely manner as per the World Bank’s Procurement for IPF Borrowers 
(2016), the project fiduciary manuals and the procurement plan, and (iv) social and environmental safeguards 
applicable to the project are fully complied with. The PMU is also responsible for monitoring project activities, 
preparing the quarterly and annual project progress reports, and ensuring that all reports (including financial 
reports) are submitted to the World Bank in timely manner.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed project will be implemented in 11 districts in the dry zone climate vulnerability hot spots, 
covering at least 5 major watersheds. The mean annual rainfall is under 900mm (much of it being received 
during the northeast monsoon season from November to January) and mean annual temperature ranges 
between 28°C to 32°C. Droughts that persist for more than three months are common. It has a climax 
vegetation of dry evergreen forest and moist deciduous forest, with forests giving way to a stunted, 
shrubby, drought-tolerant vegetation in its driest parts. The forests found in most parts are secondary 
vegetation, which developed after hundreds of years of repeated clearing and cultivation. The natural 
vegetation has adapted to the annual change from flood to drought. The forests have been largely cleared 
for agriculture, timber or grazing, and many of the dry evergreen forests have been significantly degraded. 
Several protected areas have been established to protect some of remaining natural forests. Agriculture, 
settlements and other development activities have fragmented most of the forests giving rise to human-
wildlife conflicts, particularly with elephants. Overall, about 30% of Sri Lanka’s labor force is engaged in 
agriculture, and in the dry zone that has been the frontier for irrigation based development, directly or 
indirectly connecting entire population to agriculture. However, most farm households have multiple 
livelihood strategies as income from one source is insufficient for living. The predominant form of 
settlement in the project area is ‘village’ organized around a tank that is part of a cascade system. Although 
many of these small tank based villages have been incorporated into large and medium scale irrigated 
agricultural development schemes managed by the government, a substantial number of tank-villages that 
are rain-fed, persists. Most settlers in the project area have been granted land ownership and smallholdings 
predominate, and sub-division and fragmentation is common in tandem with the occurrence of large 
operational holdings – all devoted to food crop cultivation. Irrigation communities in the dry zone are 
connected with the government system of administration and management, including for irrigation 
management. Additionally, highland agriculture and illegal slash and burn agriculture also can be observed 
alongside small-scale inland fishery activities which take place in man-made tanks. 


G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Darshani De Silva, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Bandita Sijapati, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

In order to mitigate potential environmental and 
social impacts that may be caused due to physical 
interventions and to ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided 
and/or mitigated, appropriate environmental and 
social management measures will be guided by the 
EAMF. The EAMF provides detailed analysis of the 
scale of due diligence required (such as 
environmental assessments, environmental 
management plans, etc.) for potential activities 
under the project. Additionally, a RPF has been 
prepared to identify and mitigate land-related social 
impacts under the Project. A ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. SESA will inform 
the mini-watershed planning process to ensure 
broader watershed-level impacts are integrated into 
the planning process. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
There will not be any financing of private sector 
entities under this project and therefore this policy is 
not applicable for this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP4.04 applies to all types of natural habitats 
including natural forests. There is the possibility of 
impacting catchment forests due to dam 
rehabilitation activities. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas. No activities on 
commercial forestry is supported by the project. 
However, dam improvement work may impact some 
of the catchment forests.  There will be watershed 
protection activities, which would have positive 
impact on forests. These impacts will be managed 



through the safeguard instruments that will be 
developed under OP 4.01 and OP 4.37. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Because of the standardization, intensification and 
diversification of agricultural activities under the 
project, changes in the application of pesticides for 
pest and disease control are foreseen. It is not clear 
at this point, if the project would finance the 
procurement of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) that has been prepared under the Agriculture 
Modernization Project building on Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) principles has been adopted by 
this project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

As of now, no project activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources (PCR), 
as defined by OP 4.11.  There are also no new 
construction of irrigation infrastructure planned. 
Mitigation measures if any activity takes place closer 
to PCRs and measures on PCR chance finds will be 
included as part of the mitigation measures defined 
in EAMF under the OP 4.01. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There is no conclusive evidence/information 
available that establishes the presence of indigenous 
people in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will support civil works and other 
activities associated with construction, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of small-scale market 
infrastructure, tank systems, water harvesting 
structures, irrigation schemes, etc. At present, these 
activities are envisaged to take place on existing 
canals and schemes or land belonging to individual 
farmers, and the need for taking private land under 
the project is not expected. However, there may be 
need for additional land, albeit minimal, for 
catchment area treatment, reestablishment of canal 
reservations, and rehabilitation/reconstruction of 
irrigation schemes. Further, there may be 
encroachers or others using the land necessary for 
the civil works thus requiring adequate mitigation 
measures to be put in place during project 
implementation.  Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared in accordance 
with OP/BP 4.12. Further, to support the mini-
watershed planning process, a ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project plans to improve and rehabilitate small 
dams and the EAMF will include the process to be 
adopted on safety of dams including required 
expertise under the OP/BP 4.01. irrigation schemes 
to be reconstructed/rehabilitated would entail 
minor works to improve existing capacity of the 
tanks to ensure the cascade system functions 
efficiently. The Dam Safety and Water Resources 
Management Project financed by the World Bank  
has already rehabilitated most of the larger tanks 
and their respective dams and has also set up dam 
safety panel to monitor the interventions and 
operations. They will continue to provide guidance 
to the decisions that will be taken on this project.  All 
the requirements applicable to the project will be 
identified early during the implementation stage so 
that all the necessary plans and organization set-up 
are completed on time. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project area covers hot spot areas spanning Ampara, Batticaloa, Trincomalee, Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, 
Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts in Eastern, Northern, 
North Central, North Western, and Uva Provinces. The first stage of the Project (2018-2021) will cover three Hot Spot 
Areas, whereas the second stage of the project (2020-2022) and third (2022-2024) will cover the balance eight 
districts. However, the exact locations for the specific interventions under the Project have not been identified, and 
the selection of activities will be determined only during implementation.  
 
The project is classified as an Environmental Category B.  It is expected to bring positive environmental and social 
benefits to the project areas through the scale-up of climate-resilient agricultural technologies and farming practices 
that help improve soil health, water-use efficiency and crop products, catchment area treatment to promote more 
efficient use of surface water and more sustainable use of groundwater for agriculture and development of waterbody 
capacity of climate hotspots, and overall improvement in the productivity of small-holder farmers. Components 1 and 
2 may involve physical activities that could have adverse environmental and social impacts if these aspects are not 

 

fully integrated into hot-spot area development plans and negative environmental and social risks are not identified 
and mitigated properly. Likewise, some activities supported under the project, such as small scale market 
infrastructure, construction and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, water storage facilities, etc.,  are likely to cause 
social risks and impacts, including land acquisition, impacts on livelihoods, loss of assets, etc. Although the project 
activities will be confined to rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and support to existing farmlands, some of the 
project districts consists of known physical cultural resources that can be impacted during works carried out under the 
Project. 
 
The promotion of climate smart agriculture systems and related value chains under the project could also lead to 
changes in the application of pesticides for pest and disease control. At present, project-supported climate-smart 
agricultural activities are envisaged to take place on existing farmland, and no expansion or creation of new 
agriculture systems into fragile habitats is foreseen. Likewise, the project will bring improvements to watershed 
protection and promote agricultural practices that are expected to reduce pressure on natural habitats and the 
likelihood of encroachment into sensitive ecosystems. However, some activities may negatively impact natural 
habitats because of the proximity of project activities, such as the construction or upgrading of rural infrastructure. 
The project plans to undertake catchment treatment as part of village-level watershed plans to make them more 
climate resilient and, which may bring positive impacts on natural forests in the upper catchment areas due to 
additional protection measures. Such areas that require additional protection related activities are expected to be 
identified through SESAs.  
 
Some negative impacts to forests are expected during tank rehabilitation work and while the project will primarily 
support the increase in the storage capacity of tanks through removal of excess sedimentation and establishment of 
mechanisms to reduce future sedimentation, some inundation of forests may still be possible, particularly in those 
areas where small tanks have been abandoned and natural forest regeneration has taken place on the tank bed.  
 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Based on the available information, no potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under 
the project.The project interventions will spread across 11 hotspot areas where the nature/scope of future activities is 
presently not known. Regardless, the SESA proposed to be carried out during implementation for each hotspot will 
help in identifying any indirect and/or long-term impacts of future activities and mitigating such impacts as part of 
project interventions. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts can be considered only during implementation once the 
project area and the specific activities are known. In principle however, the EAMF and the RPF include measures that 
need to be adopted in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. For instance, a 'negative list' has been prepared 
under the EAMF which among others indicates types of sub-projects that will not be financed under the project (e.g., 
activities that involve significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, activities that would increase 
human-wildlife conflict, construction of large new infrastructure within or directly adjacent (in buffer zones) to 
protected areas, etc). Likewise, to avoid impacts of land acquisition, the RPF indicates that to the extent possible, sub-
project activities will be carried out in the existing footprint of the infrastructure facility, utilize public land or land that 
is voluntarily donated, and only in exceptional basis will there be acquisition of private land under the Project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 


capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared to guide the screening of 
activities for physical investments, technical assistance, project supported-advisory, and policy support interventions 
and resulting implementation from an environmental perspective and mitigation actions to manage their 
environmental impacts. The EAMF defines the screening and decision-making process based on the screening, the 
content, procedures and responsibilities for the preparation and implementation of individual sub-project 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to address site-specific risks and 
impacts and subsequent monitoring and reporting requirements. The EAMF also includes sectoral environmental 
management guidelines for the subsectors of agricultural processing, which will be applicable under the matching 
grant program. To ensure impacts to natural habitats are mitigated, the EAMF prescribes proper due diligence 
mechanisms, including relevant preventive and mitigation measures to protect local ecosystems and habitats to be 
included in the respective sub-project EMPs with special attention given to ensure risks and impacts due to human-
elephant conflict are mitigated where such conflicts exist and using successful co-existence models that already have 
been demonstrated within the country. In order to ensure negative impacts to forests are minimized, the EAMF 
includes screening criteria and relevant mitigation measures. In addition, a separate Pest Management Plan (PMP) 
prepared under the Agriculture Modernization Project developed based on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
principles has been adopted by this project.  
 
Likewise, the RPF sets out principles and guidelines to identify and assess the potential social impacts and risks, 
prepare mitigation plans as part of sub-project preparation, institutional arrangements and processes to be followed 
for the Project. This includes: (i) principles and procedures for screening and assessing impacts; (ii) the criterion and 
due diligence processes based on risks, including the provisions for entitlements and eligibility criteria; (iii) guidelines 
for preparing time-bound action plans to ensure compliance with WB's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and 
national regulations relating to land acquisition; (iv) institutional arrangements for implementing resettlement action 
plans; (v) guidance for public consultation process and disclosure of safeguard documents; (vi) mechanisms for 
grievance redress, monitoring and evaluation of process and outcomes; and (vii) responsibilities of the GoSL and WB in 
relation to the preparation, implementation and progress review of social safeguards documents for the various CSIAP 
sub-projects.  
 
In addition to the EAMF and the RPF, as part of hot-spot area development, Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessments (SESAs) will be undertaken to be integrated into the village-level plans. All irrigation infrastructure 
related interventions require a screening to be included in the SESA to verify whether upstream medium to large scale 
dams are present and connected hydrologically and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed, outline follow-up 
actions. If the presence of upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been 
rehabilitated or strengthened and have dam safety implications, the project will undertake an inspection and 
evaluation of the safety of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history, and a review and evaluation of 
the mandated dam owner’s operation and maintenance procedures. A report will be provided on the review’s 
findings, including recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the 
existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary dam safety measures or remedial work will be financed 
under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken, including recruitment of a 
competent professional to design and supervise the work, and the Dam Safety Panels established under the 
Department of Irrigation and Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka will provide the guidance and continuous due diligence 
as necessary. As part of SESAs, physical cultural resources will be documented, and the EAMF includes screening 
criteria to ensure sub-projects will not produce any negative impacts to such resources. The EAMF also includes 
procedures to be adopted during a chance find.  
 


In terms of capacity, the Ministry of Agriculture has recently been exposed to world Bank-financed Project while the 
Irrigation Department has two ongoing operations supported by the Bank. In addition, some of the provincial councils 
(e.g., Northern and Eastern) have been involved in World Bank financed operations. However, a comprehensive 
capacity building program for implementation of safeguards instruments prepared under the Project as well as the 
social and environmental management within the sector, will be prepared during implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary key stakeholders are smallholder farmers, producer organizations, productive alliances, agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, implementing organizations, government departments/units, including technical and managerial staff 
of participating agencies. The project will actively promote youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure 
that they are fully engaged in and also benefit from all project activities.  
 
During the preparation of the safeguards instruments, consultations were held on 18 June 2018 in Anuradhapura and 
on 21 June 2018 in Colombo, and feedback received during these consultations have been included as part of project 
design and minutes of the consultations with details of the participants, have been included as part the RPF. 
Additionally, the EAMF and the RPF also include consultation strategy which among others emphasizes that all 
stakeholders will be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner while preparing site-specific safeguards instruments 
as well as during implementation. The process of consultation will be documented and account taken of the results of 
consultatoins, including any agreed actions resulting from the consultation. The RPF and the EAMF also requires that 
all the social and environmental assessment documentation and site specific safeguards action plans (e.g., EMP, SIMP, 
RAP) will be made available to the public by the PMU through the project website and notices through media (as 
relevant), prior to start of civil works, and or tending of works contract. The EAMF and the RPF have also been 
disclosed in-country as well as through World Bank's external website. 
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24200 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

India P166745 National Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(Additional Financing to 
the National Rural 
Livelihoods Project ) 

P104164 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

National Rural Livelihoods Project SOUTH ASIA 23-Feb-2018 20-Apr-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

DEA National Rural Livelihood 
Mission 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of theruralpoor that 
enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial andselected public services. 
 

 
Components 

Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support: 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 500.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 250.00 

     World Bank Lending 250.00 
 



Total Government Contribution 250.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
  
OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED 
 

  
Decision 

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 

Country Context 
 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies and has experienced a 

substantial decline in poverty. The Indian economy registered gradually rising growth from 5.5 
percent in 2012-13 to 8 percent in 2015-16. This was supported by robust private consumption, a 
resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. Since the 2000s, India has made 
remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between 2004 and 2011, poverty declined sharply 
from 38.9 to 21.6 percent at the international poverty line ($1.90 PPP/day). With over a 100 million 
people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing world 
as well as that of Middle Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, rapid rise in 
rural wages, greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, 
were the key drivers of poverty reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided 
further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the construction sector and rural wages suggest that 
the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Agriculture continues to be important for rural Indians and there are 68 percent of the rural 

population dependent on it for livelihoods and about 49 percent of the labor force works in the 
agricultural sector but paradoxically it contributes only around 10 to 11 % to National gross domestic 
product (GDP). The Government of India’s new agenda of “Doubling Farmer’s Income”, which not only 
emphasizes upon productivity enhancement, intensification and diversification but also on agri-
processing, Agri-logistics, resource use efficiency, agriculture marketing and sustainability could 
possibly transform the Indian Agriculture. The opportunities in the agribusiness sector and local level 
primary value addition are growing with the changing consumer basket and increasing urbanization 
and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. Small producers have the opportunity to directly 
participate in this value chain if they are organized and provided with appropriate infrastructure, 
technology and information support. 



3. Non-farm economy, in recent times, has emerged as an important livelihoods source in rural 
India. A shift away from agriculture toward nonagricultural wage employment and reduced reliance 
on agricultural income has become evident. Non- farm activities contributed 65% rural income in 
2016-17 (Chand, 2017). Diversification into non-farm interventions (both self-employment and 
wage employment) marks the shift from low-productivity jobs to high productivity and it is an 
important pathway for poverty reduction and employment generation. Non-farm rural jobs are 
predominantly in manufacturing, services (including public administration, education, health, 
community, other personal or household services) and trade and transport (including wholesale 
and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, transport, storage and warehousing and communication).  
 

4. The Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India launched the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission in 2011 as its flagship program to enhance rural livelihoods and reduce rural poverty in the 
country. The world bank supported National Rural Livelihoods Project provided intensive support 
to the launch and scale up of the NRLM over the last 7 years. The National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) has now been scaled up to o all 29 states of the country.  The intensive approach 
successfully demonstrated by NRLP in around 500 blocks is now being implemented across nearly 
2500 blocks across 29 states through the NRLM program. A total of 45 million rural women are 
currently part of Self-Help Groups and they have cumulatively leveraged nearly 25 billion USD of 
financing from commercial banks since the launch of the NRLM program in 2011.  

 
5. Ministry of Rural Development has subsequently launched two critical programs that aim to 

leverage the National Rural Livelihood Mission and scale up efforts to enhance agriculture incomes 
and on-farm incomes for the rural poor namely the Mahila Kisan Sashiktikaran Program (MKSP ) 
and the Startup Village Entrepreneurship program . The Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) is launched as a sub-component of the Deendayal Antodaya Yojana-NRLM to improve the 
status of women in agriculture, who constitute 33% of the total agricultural labour force, and 
enhance economic opportunities available to them. The program exclusively focus upon small and 
marginal farmers, sustainable agriculture practices and vulnerability reduction. Community 
Resource Persons (CRP) are identified as best practitioners (locally named as Pashu Sakhi, Krishi 
Sakhi etc.) and are instrumental in promoting farm sector livelihoods (agriculture, animal 
husbandry and NTFP), through community to community sharing and learning – as a “proof of 
concept”. The ‘Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme’ (SVEP) launched by Government of 
India in 2014-15 aims to promote and support existing rural entrepreneurs by providing bouquet 
of business development services including entrepreneur capacity building, seed & growth capital 
along with handholding support for business development. Currently, the programme is being 
implemented in 47 Blocks across 14 states with support of 5 technical support agencies. Results 
from SVEP and other world bank supported programs to promote SMEs will inform the scaling up 
of enterprise development initiatives to be taken up under NRETP ( NRLP-AF) 

 
6. The Government of India has recently launched Mission Antyodaya to improve the well-being of 10 

million households from 5000 economic clusters (covering around 50,000 Gram Panchayats) by 
addressing multiple dimensions of poverty through convergent actions under wide range of existing 
development schemes and following a saturation approach. The movement of Panchayats away 
from poverty will be tracked through a mobile based application i.e. “Panchayat Darpan” using a 
set of indicators having differential weightage scheme. In a list of 24 indicators, 30% weightage has 
been provided on GP level Infrastructure development; another 30% on Human Development 
outcomes and rest 40% weightage has been given to livelihoods promotion. Mission Antyodaya 
further accelerates economic transformation process building on the NRLP outcomes 



 
7. One of the central lessons learned during the last seven years of implementation of NRLM has been 

that while investments in building institutional platforms of rural poor households is a critical 
foundation for sustainable poverty reduction, it is not sufficient unless these institutions are 
engaged in higher level production systems and have better market interface. Integration of core 
social mobilization and leveraging of financial resources have been adequately demonstrated. The 
next level challenge is to leverage social capital into economic opportunities and crowd in private 
investments; and engage with more commercial partnerships to integrate rural households into 
higher-level income opportunities. Therefore, one of the main thrusts of the NRETP (NRLP- AF) will 
be to develop value chains using end-to-end investments in selected commodities and facilitating 
access to finance to support enterprises in agriculture and allied sectors, thus contributing to 
productivity and profitability. The proposed project will build on existing investments and 
institutional capital to bring further income increase and inclusive growth in rural areas.   

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Original PDO  
 

1. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Current PDO  
 

2. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Key Results:  

3. The PDO indicators for the additional financing are:  

• 60% of SHGs# federated into Village Organizations.  

• 40% of SHG members* report reduction in high cost debt 

• 50% of SHG members report 30% increase in asset. 

• 20 % increase in income of households that have accessed technical and financial services1 
 
D. Project Description  
        
Project Beneficiary:  

1. The proposed NRETP (NRLP AF) intends to support 100 districts from the existing 13 NRLP States 
towards high end technical assistance and investment support towards deepening and scaling up of 
the economic transformative initiatives that were introduced as part of dedicated funds under NRLP. 

 
1 Define technical and financial services that will be provided/considered  



Additionally, it would support to the Mission Antyodaya program that intends to further accelerate 
economic transformation in selected areas, building on the NRLP outcomes.  

 
2. While MoRD through their own increased budget allocation would continue to saturate and bring 

remaining rural poor into the fold of women SHGs,  the specific investments under additional financing  
will work with targeted households that are already part of SHGs and would focus on strengthening 
of existing network (higher level federations i.e. VO and above) of community organizations of women 
having potential to be mobilized into producer groups and producer organizations and transit to next 
generation economic initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise and 
skills development etc. MoRD will directly reach out to over a million households through these 
initiatives. The project will support around 50000 individual enterprises; and around 100,000 youth 
will be trained and placed with in formal job markets using the resources available under DDUJKY and 
other skilling & entrepreneurship program of the Government of India. 

Project Component 

3. Component 1: Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
This component will continue to finance technical assistance consultancies, human resources, 
training and development of training material/approaches. Financing under this component will 
endeavor to place skilled professionals to work with NRLM at the national, state and district levels. 
As mentioned in the section on rationale, the TA will be focused on helping the National and State 
teams transition to a new phase of the NRLM that involves greater focus on economic initiatives such 
as high value agriculture and value chain development, enterprise and skills development. Given that 
experiences from these initiatives are relatively nascent, the additional financing support will 
emphasize sourcing of technical support from agencies (Public, Private and NGOs) with the requisite 
technical expertise in rural enterprise development.  National, regional and international experiences 
and skills may be sourced for this objective.   

 
4. In addition, a new sub component focused on providing technical assistance for Mission Antyodaya 

will be introduced. Specifically, as part of this sub component:  
 

a. TA will be provided for Mission Antyodaya at the national, state and district level.    
b. Support under this sub-component will be for 13 NRLP states and nearly 100 districts in those 13 

states. The 100 districts with the highest intensity of the NRLM implementation will be selected 
for the project. These districts will be the districts with the highest amount of mobilization and 
capitalization (both the catalytic capital from NRLM and the finance from commercial banks) and 
the possibilities of having transformative economic potential. Additionally, and as far as possible, 
the project will strive for coordinated technical or investment support with the blocks and 
panchayats selected under Mission Antyodaya and those under NRLP.   
  

5. Component 2. State Livelihood Support  
The activities to be financed under this Component will remain essentially the same but with further 
refinements to focus on the next generation institutional and investment support as described above 
in the rationale. Sub component 2.1 (State Rural Livelihoods Support) will remain the same but 
district level support will be focused on 100 districts that will be selected for project coverage under 
this NRETP (NRLP AF). Under sub component 2.2 (Institution Building and Capacity Building) financing 
will be oriented towards the mobilization of the producer groups and producer organizations. Under 
sub component 2.3 (Community Investment Support) the focus would be on financing community 



organizations mainly towards enterprise and skill development initiatives. The quantum of financing 
under sub component 2.4 (Special Programs) will be significantly scaled up and most of this financing 
will be focused on scaling up initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise 
and skills development etc.  that were introduced under the dedicated funds under this sub-
component during the project restructuring undertaken in January 2016. 

 
6. Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed 

under this component. The component will continue to finance pilot initiatives and technical 
assistance consultancies that support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth 
employment, among others, for rural poor households.  Learning and documentation of experiences 
from these initiatives will be emphasized. 

 
7. Component 4. Project Implementation Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed under this 

component. This component will continue to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level, finance the Monitoring and Evaluation activities and ICT initiatives.  
Learning and documentation of experiences under the economic transformative investments and institutional 
strengthening programs will be emphasized. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
1. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:  The MoRD through National Rural Livelihoods Promotion 

Society (NRLPS)/National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will be responsible for overall technical 
assistance, guideline formulations, National level partnerships, coordination, monitoring, supervision and 
release of funds to thirteen participating States. At the State level, the project will be implemented by the 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) set up under NRLM as per the agreed framework detailed out in 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Each participating States will carry out a diagnostic study of pro-poor 
agriculture value chain and potential of cluster based enterprise development based on which they will 
prepare their Annual Action Plan (AAP) or multi-year State Perspective and Implementation Plan (SPIP). 

 
 
 
 . 

   
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The additional finance would cover about 100 districts in the current 13 states. The states are spread across 
different agro climatic zones with varied natural and geographical features ranging from wet and humid to 
dry and deciduous as well as include some coastal areas. All the states have previous experience in 
implementing NRETP (NRLP AF) supported livelihood activities in varied agro climatic zones. There is also 
prior experience of working in different geographies and with environmental and social setting of the rural 
areas, which are primarily agrarian. The expected locations influenced by additional financing are likely to 
be similar to those covered under the ongoing NRETP (NRLP AF), and therefore, poses no significant risks of 
potential cumulative and localized significant adverse environmental impacts. Livelihood activities would 
continue to centre around the sustainable use of natural resources, where these are available at project 
locations. NRETP (NRLP AF) NRETP (NRLP AF) The additional financing will be spread across 100 Districts in 
13 high poverty states. The states and project areas were identified based on their high incidence of rural 
poverty and socioeconomic backwardness as well as higher concentration of marginalized population 
groups such as scheduled tribes (indigenous peoples) and scheduled castes. States like Bihar and UP have 
substantial population of Scheduled Castes (SC) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) who are more vulnerable 
and marginalized compared to general population. On the other hand, states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and parts of Rajasthan, MP, and Maharashtra are dominated by tribals. Within these geographies, 
the NRETP (NRLP AF) will prioritize districts/blocks with higher levels of social mobilsation and financial 
capitalization, which will overlap with pockets of higher tribal and marginalized populations.  

 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project proposes to scale-up the existing livelihoods promoted through dedicated special funds. The livelihoods 
include varies use of natural resources and linked processes, such as, Agriculture, Dairy, Small ruminants, Fisheries, 
Non-Timber Forest Produce (lac culture, hill broom, tamarind etc.). The project will also support Non-farm enterprises 
including small processing units and value addition. The project has been consciously promoting special initiatives for 
environmental sustainability of livelihoods such as community managed sustainable agriculture, fodder cultivation and 
stall feeding of milch animals and goats etc. However as the project proposes to scale-up the same interventions 
through additional financing, improper management of any of these livelihood activities and unawareness among the 
SHG members may result in negative impacts, such as: (i) indiscriminate use of chemical inputs in agriculture leading 
to contamination of soil, water and surroundings; (ii) degradation of common grazing lands due to increased pressure 
of grazing and improper pasture management practices; (iii) decreased regeneration capacity of NTFP species in forest 
areas; and (iv) over use of water resources, particularly ground water etc. Most of these activities are small-scale 
interventions, spread over wide areas in several villages. Further, any potential adverse environmental impact and risk 
from these activities can be mitigated, contained and even reversed. Therefore, no potential large scale, significant 
and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies 
on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) have been triggered 
recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-
based livelihoods. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project funds are 
unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, embankments, etc. (Project funds would not 
support activities involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 is not 
triggered. The key social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the NRETP (NRLP AF) are: ensuring project 
interventions and implementation processes are aligned with the socio-cultural context in tribal areas and respond to 
their development priorities; inclusion of traditionally marginalized social groups such as scheduled castes, migrant 
labor, and other households identified under socioeconomic census survey (SECC); promoting strategies that reduce 
gender gaps and advance women’s economic empowerment; and mitigation of any localized, adverse impacts from 
small scale infrastructure that would be coming up in project areas. No adverse long terms impact on tribals and 
indigenous population are expected from this project. OP 4.10 is triggered as states and districts having substantial 
tribal population are included in Project areas. OP. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition is not envisaged. Small scale community level, infrastructure such as citizen service centres, training 
centres and custom hiring centres are expected to come up largely in pre-existing facilities. However, some of these 
may require small land parcels that are expected to be leased or donated by Panchayats or local government 


departments or individual donors with proper MoUs and due diligence. Given the size of small scale infrastructure, a 
large portion of which is expected to be rented/leased with no or minimal construction, the risks of labor influx are 
not going to be significant. Project interventions are not expected to cause any adverse livelihood impacts and 
restriction of access to land and resources as a result to land taking by the project.  
  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: No 
severe or long-term impacts are expected due to proposed livelihood activities, mainly implemented through the 
women Self Help Groups. Agriculture, livestock, fisheries, non-timber forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved and individual and household level investments in 
these sectors generally do not result in potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project areas. Further, as 
the experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up by the SHGs and 
federations under the ongoing project is likely to remain so during the additional financing. No adverse long term 
social impacts are envisaged from the AF interventions and investments. The potential long-term positive impacts are 
expected to be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the poorest households, especially of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women. The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, 
security and sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes. The project villages would most 
likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in 
claiming their rights and entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes. Gender 
relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and confidence to voice their needs and 
priorities in both the public and private spheres. Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are 
expected to be much more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Since this is an additional financing aiming to scale up successful interventions, no analysis of alternatives was 
undertaken. However, based on implementation experience during the ongoing project, the safeguards strategy will 
continue to mainstream the environmental best practices into the Package of Practices (PoP) of the livelihood 
activities (e.g.: stall feeding in goatary, non-chemical pest control measures in agriculture). In addition, Promotion of 
alternate green solutions like use of renewable energy, Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture are planned 
during the additional financing. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken during the ongoing project for addressing safeguard policies issues will continue throughout the 
implementation of the additional financing. EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would 
apply to all the clusters in the project and appropriate capacity building support for compliance with regulations and 
awareness building on better environmental practices in livelihood activities would be provided. Efforts will be made 
to develop and apply a sustainability index for funding potential activities through the dedicated fund. The index will 
be based on the principles of resource efficiency, minimal adverse impacts and post-investment support continuation 
of the livelihood. An assessment of the EMF in select states was undertaken during the ongoing project .There is mixed 
experience in terms of borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures required for addressing safeguards 
issues. Most of the states (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan) have had previous experience 
in implementing livelihood projects and other states have also implemented EMF and SMF under NRETP (NRLP AF). 
States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects as well as NRETP (NRLP AF) have a higher 



 

level of readiness and competency to implement the EMF. Some of these states (e.g. Bihar) have implemented the 
green solutions at a considerable scale. The above findings from these assessments are being incorporated into the 
updated EMF To streamline these capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will have the Livelihood Specialists as the anchor person for EMF to 
support and monitor the implementation in the participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit 
(SMMU) of the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level 
(Livelihood Managers), district levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to streamline the EMF 
requirements at all levels. The Technical Partners on different value chains will be taken on board for integration of 
the best practices and regulatory requirements into the Package of Practices and Capacity Building programs. The 
NRETP (NRLP AF) social management framework (SMF), including OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes), 
will continue to apply to the AF. The SMF comprises strategies for targeting and inclusion of scheduled castes and 
schedule tribe groups/areas, consultation and participation, gender & women’s economic empowerment, citizen’s 
engagement, grievance redress and safeguard screening/mitigation planning for community projects involving 
land/infrastructure. The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key requirements 
of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to free, prior and informed consultations and broad community support. The SMF 
includes specific provisions for informed consultations, participation and inclusion of the SC/ST and other excluded 
households, with a special focus on tribal people. The SMF also provides for institutional arrangements and capacity 
building activities of project staff, community institutions and partner agencies. Community projects involving 
productive infrastructure and land donation would follow consultative, transparent and voluntary procedures. MORD 
and the 13 SRLMs have implemented the SMF and its constituent strategies with varying levels of intensity and quality 
in the ongoing NRLP satisfactorily. Under the NRETP (NRLP AF), the capacities and performance of the social 
development staff and partners would be strengthened through a range of measures. NRETP (NRLP AF) aims to 
intensify interventions, financing & technical support for high value agriculture, rural value chains, skills and 
enterprises, producer organizations, innovative livelihood approaches, digital financial inclusion as well as productive 
infrastructure for post-production processes and value addition. Technical Assistance will also be provided to 
convergence (Mission Antoyodaya). Partnerships with technical resource agencies from private and non-profit and 
public sector will be strengthened. Increased investments in high value agriculture, enterprises, productive 
infrastructure and financing of producer organizations would need more explicit criteria for inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing as well as social safeguard screening to minimize elite capture and social exclusion. 
Dedicated HR and Capacity building program on socially inclusive and gendered value chains/enterprises, social 
safeguard screening and risk mitigation and social sustainability will be supported to ensure satisfactory social 
performance of project counterparts. To respond to these focus areas in the AF, MORD has updated the existing SMF 
especially with respect to social inclusion protocols, social safeguard screening mechanisms and inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing criteria for financing of producer organizations and productive infrastructure. Additional 
measures on staffing, capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge programs as well as citizen engagement and 
grievance redressal would be implemented. The results framework will continue to track and report on gender, 
inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. NRETP (NRLP AF) will significantly advance the 
gender mainstreaming and women’s economic empowerment agenda through strategies/specific interventions on 
women led producer organizations and enterprises, Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) and upgrading 
of skills in selected self-employment occupations for women SHG members and youth. Interventions on digital 
payments, financial inclusion/literacy, Business Correspondents (BC) and enterprise financing will lead to significant 
financial empowerment of rural women. Support to Mission Antoyodaya will strengthen women’s advocacy and 
agency in delivery of social safety net and entitlement services for the rural poor. Nutrition sensitive agriculture and 
interventions on food handling and hygiene will benefit the women disproportionately. The results framework will 
continue to track and report on gender, inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. Client 
has also been organizing regular reviews and lesson learning events on the gender, social inclusion and vulnerability 



reduction dimensions of the SMF. A discrete stocktaking review was undertaken at Midterm stage of the project. 
Overall the project has been performing satisfactorily on mobilsation, inclusion and financial and economic 
empowerment of women and marginalization communities particularly tribals and SC households. SMF 
implementation and reporting would need to improve further on safeguards, GRM and benefit sharing dimensions of 
productive infrastructure and economic clusters. As described above, these are the aspects that are being updated in 
the SMF  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the SHG members, groups and federations of rural poor in the 
project districts, technical partners, relevant government departments etc. The existing safeguards arrangements will 
continue to apply. If required, the existing EMF document will be updated based on a short field assessment and 
would be disclosed in English and the local language (Hindi) on the websites of the NMMU, State Departments of Rural 
Development and on the Bank’s InfoShop. The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and non-governmental 
organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder 
consultations to inform the design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following field consultations were also 
held.  
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
Guangxi Poverty Reduction Project (P163138) 

 

 Project Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2018 | Report No: PIDA155787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

China P163138 Guangxi Poverty 
Reduction Program for 
Results 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC 23-Apr-2018 28-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
CHINA 

Guangxi Poverty Alleciation Office, Guangxi 
Agriculture Department 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The program development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty 
Reduction Program (CPRP) in the Targeted Counties. 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 5,129.00 

Total Operation Cost 400.00 

Total Program Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
      

 
B. Introduction and Context 

 


Country Context   
China’s success in reducing extreme poverty since the economic reform period is widely recognized as an 
event of global significance. Based on the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day (expressed in 2011 
purchasing power parity), the World Bank estimates that the incidence of poverty in China declined from 
877.8 million in 1981 to 87.4 million in 2012 (or from 88.3 percent to 6.5 percent of the total population).  
These World Bank estimates indicate that about 790 million Chinese escaped poverty during this period, 
representing about 72 percent of global poverty reduction. These estimates of declining poverty have 
been matched by broad-based improvements in nutritional status, educational attainment, longevity and 
other health outcomes, as well as other indicators of well-being. In fact, China was the first country to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the number of people living in poverty by 
2015, and it did it ahead of schedule. This highlights the country’s leading role in global poverty reduction. 
 
In its Thirteenth Five Year Plan (13th 5YP), Chinese government made an ambitious commitment to 
eliminating rural poverty by 2020, ten years before the WBG’s target of 2030. The Plan includes an explicit 
poverty eradication goal: “All rural residents falling below China’s current poverty line will be able to lift 
themselves out of poverty” and underlines the importance of focusing poverty efforts: “We will identify 
and register those living in poverty throughout the country …(and) will strengthen dynamic statistical 
monitoring of these populations….”. Poverty eradication in China refers not only to help people earn more 
than a minimum income threshold, but also have access to basic goods and services. Consequently, the 
plan includes a list of anti-poverty programs in eight fields: locally viable industries, labor services, finance, 
relocation from inhospitable areas, transportation, ecological conservation, education, health care and 
social security. 
 
The Chinese government has established a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to achieve the goals 
of the 13th 5YP. Central to this strategy are two institutional innovations which have the potential to 
provide important global lessons to other countries. The first is accurately targeting poverty households, 
villages and counties with the establishment of the National Poverty Registration System (NPRS).  The 
NPRS, established in 2013, is a census of all poor people and villages in China which timely tracks a wide 
range of detailed data about the characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The first is 
accurately targeting poverty households and villages through the establishment of the National Poverty 
Registration System in 2013.  The NPRS is a census of poor villages and people in China (about 70 million 
at its inception), which timely tracks characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The 
database is closely integrated into the reporting, prioritization, and accountability lines running upward 
from the village, county, region, and national levels. It provides critical information from the annual 
assessments of which households or villages have exited poverty, are at risk of falling back into poverty, 
or face challenges exiting from poverty. It thus plays a key role in both the identification of the remaining 
poor and the monitoring of programs to eradicate poverty.  
 
Secondly, since 2016, China has introduced the concept of decentralization of poverty reduction efforts 
with the aim to empower county governments to achieve their poverty targets. It consolidates large 
number of earmarked poverty reduction funds into a program-based budgeting system tailored to local 
context. and hold local governments accountable for achieving their poverty reduction targets. It works 
through consolidation of dozens of rural and agricultural earmarked funds which county governments are 
now authorized to use to develop a poverty reduction program tailored to local context.  The designated 
poverty counties have now been put fully in the driver’s seat for achieving poverty reduction goals. 



 

Nevertheless, the program development and implementation remains to be a great challenge for the 
county governments, as little technical guidance and support is provided to them from higher authorities.   
 
The proposed Program for Results operation (PforR) enhances these institutional advancements through 
connecting planned activities more closely to poor households and villages in the NPRS database, and 
aligns fiscal inputs with results by introducing improved planning, budgeting and monitoring systems for 
poverty programs in Guangxi. It also aims to help to improve the monitoring of poverty reduction 
programs in one of the most impoverished regions of the country. The lessons from adopting these 
innovations in Guangxi can serve as learning experience to similar complex settings in the rest of the world 
and will help the WBG in supporting other countries eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context  

Guangxi poverty reduction program is a continuing success, which is supported by strong government 
leadership, substantial and increasing funding, and broad assistance from society. In the areas of more 
intense poverty, it has brought about 18 percent annual reduction in rural poverty from 4.68 million poor 
in 2013 to 2.61 million poor in 2016.  However, Guangxi is still one of the 10 provinces in China with rural 
poverty rates above the 7 percent and, given its population size, is one of the six provinces with more than 
3 million rural poor (as of 2016), partly due to low soil fertility in the karst mountain areas and low levels 
of infrastructure and connectivity to other regions in China.   Moreover, as of 2013, the poor in Guangxi 
represented approximately 0.8 percent of the global poor. In this regard, helping the region to achieve its 
poverty eradication goal, would have a noticeable contribution to global poverty eradication. 
 
The Guangxi 5YP aims at achieving poverty eradication not only through households having a regular 
source of income above the minimum poverty threshold, but also in terms of access to housing, basic 
health care, compulsory education, appropriate roads to villages, safe drinking water, access to electricity 
and access to telecommunications. This is akin to a multi-dimensional definition of poverty, and is defined 
in Guangxi as the 8+1 “haves”. Despite of rapid poverty reduction in recent years, projections indicate 
that, to achieve poverty eradication, poverty reduction rates for the period 2016-2020 will have to be 
faster than the ones experienced in 2013-2016. Analysis of data indicates that poverty reduction is closely 
linked to rural net incomes, and that agricultural activity is the main driver of growing rural incomes. 
Moreover, data from the NPRS shows that when asked about the main cause poverty, lack of income was 
the cause mentioned more often by interviewees. Nevertheless, in some counties, other gaps such as lack 
of access to roads or safe drinking water can be the significant cause of poverty. 
 
Mountainous areas of Guangxi are exposed to extreme events, such as heavy rains and floods and to a 
lesser extent longer dry spells on a seasonal basis, as well as climate variability. In addition, Guangxi is also 
classified with high river flood risks and with medium water scarcity risk, especially in karst mountain areas 
where majority of the rural poor are located.  Areas with medium water scarcity could potentially 
transition to more adverse condition with climate-induced drought, affecting crops and/or resulting in 
agriculture competing with drinking water requirements. Mountainous conditions combined with average 
annual rainfall of 1,500-2,000 mm could result in floods and landslides, which could cause damages to 
rural roads.  Guangxi’s present hazard level may increase in the future due to the effects of potential 
climate change. For example, rainfall intensity (which is already above the national average) is expected 
to increase across a range of climate scenarios (Ying et al, 2014 and Wang et al 2015, respectively).  
Knowledge about, and adoption of, climate resilient and climate smart agronomic practices and 



technologies among Guangxi farmers and farmer cooperatives needs to be strengthened to address these 
climate change vulnerability issues in rural areas.   
 

PforR Program Scope  
Guangxi 13th 5-Year Plan (5YP), sets a target of lifting all rural people out of poverty by 2020. Specifically, 
the 5YP sets its main goals to lift: (i) all 4.52 million registered rural poor people out of poverty (end-2015 
figure); (ii) some 5,000 remaining poor villages out of poverty status; and (iii) 54 poverty counties out of 
poverty status. Guangxi Rural Poverty Reduction Program (GRPRP) is summarized in the document: 
“Guangxi Tackling Poverty Thirteen Five Year Plan”, issued in December 2016. It defines the poverty 
reduction strategy for the region to achieve the poverty eradication objectives of the National 13th 5YP. 
 
Within the GRPRP lies the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program (CPRP). The CPRP represents 
a sub-set of the GRPRP in the following ways: (i) it covers 54 designated national and provincial level 
poverty counties; (ii) over 40 earmarked funds from national, regional, municipality and county sources 
are pooled together to constitute the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF); (iii) expenditures are 
prioritized by the counties in conformance with the 13th 5YP Poverty Reduction Plan priorities; and (iv) 
program activities are targeted at poverty households and villages identified in the national poverty 
registration system. At the heart of the CPRP’s more integrated and locally-driven approach is an annual 
mechanism of bottom-up budgeting in the designated poor counties for meeting their poverty reduction 
targets, coupled with transparent and accountable financing, monitoring and evaluation support from 
higher levels of government. 
 
The proposed PforR will support a sub-set of the activities, funded under CPRF with some exclusions and 
in a circumscribed geographic area. Moreover, the proposed PforR will also support enhanced 
expenditure monitoring efforts that the region will be able to report on budget allocation and execution 
by its major subprograms.  
 
The timeline of the proposed PforR is 2018 – 2021, which are the remaining years of the 13th 5YP, and 
one additional year for verifying results.  
 
The geographic boundary of the proposed PforR is circumscribed to 28 selected counties out of 54 poverty 
designated counties. The subset of 28 counties have high poverty rates (above 11 percent) or large 
poverty headcounts (above 60,000) and is representative of the rural poor in Guangxi. As of 2016, the 
selected 28 counties account for 12.6 million rural population (some 30 percent of rural population); and 
for 1.8 million rural poor, approximately 52.5 percent of the rural poor in the region. Moreover, the 
selected counties are diverse in several dimensions. Most of them are located in mountain areas -usually 
associated with high poverty rates- and a few in the river plains at the center of the region. Among the 28 
counties, there are 20 so called “deep poverty” counties, with poverty incidence rate of about 18 percent 
in 2016. There are also 9 autonomous counties (which sit specific ethnic minorities) and the proportion of 
ethnic minorities among the poor is 67.6 percent, slightly higher than in non-selected counties, 63.9 
percent. The age and gender distribution is like in the rest of the poverty-stricken counties in the region 
(i.e., lower share of adult females and higher share of elderly than the region’s average). 
To ensure the sharper focus on achieving the Government 2020 poverty reduction targets, the Result 
Areas (RAs) of the proposed PforR cover a key subset of the Government program activities, which are to 
the extent feasible, aligned with the government’s own targets. The RAs were selected considering that 
they: (i) make a strong contribution to achieving the government’s 2020 poverty alleviation targets; (ii) 

must be linked to specific measurable results; (iii) provide “value added” in terms of interventions that 
are innovative, scalable or expand upon on-going and planned piloted initiatives; and (iv) incentivize 
behavioral changes.  
 
Results Area 1: Improved Income Generation for Rural Poor. The goal is to increase the direct impact of 
the CPRP on the incomes of the targeted poor households through enabling rural poor to engage in 
agriculture-related economic activities and skills development. The proposed PforR would encourage: (i) 
increased allocation of the CPRF funding towards development of farmers cooperatives and poverty 
reduction leading enterprises; (ii) enhance institutional mechanisms associated with these two programs 
for improved poverty targeting and fund-use efficiency through introducing poverty reduction 
accreditation mechanisms for the enterprises and improved operational and governance standards and 
poverty targeting of farmer cooperatives; and (iii) significantly scale selected vocational skill training 
activities, and improving poverty and gender targeting of these programs.  
 
Results Area 2: Improved Infrastructure for Rural Poor. This results area supports the delivery of basic 
rural infrastructure for the designated poor villages in the targeted poverty counties under the CPRP 
funding arrangements. The goal is to ensure that the registered poor households have access to adequate 
rural drinking water supply and rural roads, which are required to meet Guangxi eight plus one "haves", 
multi-dimensional poverty eradication criteria needed to graduate households from poverty. The types of 
measures to be supported under the PforR include drinking water supply and rural roads. In addition, the 
proposed PforR would strengthen Guangxi infrastructure project management capacity with an aim to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CPRF expenditures, and thus their poverty reduction impact 
through developing and adopting an IT-based pipeline project management system.   
 
Results Area 3: Cross-cutting Issues for Enhanced Program Implementation.  This Result Area supports 
the improvement of institutional arrangements and capacity through the introduction of poverty 
reduction program budgeting and enhanced monitoring and evaluation systems, with an aim to enable 
the governments to better align budget allocation with the expected output/outcomes and timely 
monitor the progress, efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation. The key activities are 
clustered around two themes: (i) enhancement of the CPRF program-based budgeting systems; and (ii) 
strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of poverty reduction activities. 

 
C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  

 
Program Development Objective(s)  

The proposed PforR development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi 
Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the targeted counties.   

 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) finds that, in general, the existing legal and 
regulatory framework of environmental, health and safety, and social in China, and in Guangxi are 
consistent with the World Bank’s PforR Policy and Directive. During the PforR preparation, initial 
environmental and social screening was conducted based on the whole 13th 5YP in order to provide 
insights for the definition of the PforR boundary. Activities with potential significant adverse 



environmental and social impacts were excluded from the PforR boundary. These include ecological 
resettlement, major infrastructure construction projects (i.e. class 4 and higher roads), extractive 
activities, disaster relief and preparedness, and returning farmlands to forests. In addition, there are some 
activities subject to limitations, such as rural tourism development, which is limited to guest rooms, 
catering and agri-tourism, without involving physical cultural resources. In addition, the PforR excludes 
any activity subject to EIA Report, especially those located in natural forests; in or near physical cultural 
resources at/above county level; or in or near significant natural habitats. 
 
Some activities supported under the PforR may have potential negative impacts or risks. Pest 
management and livestock waste management are considered the main issues from an environment, 
health and safety perspective. Guangxi is promoting livestock farms to be established and run by farmers’ 
cooperatives under the context of poverty reduction. Livestock waste management is handled by 
individual farmers, who often have inadequate capacity of livestock raising. The ESSA thus recommends 
enhancing the technical capacity of staff in county livestock bureau and enhance technical training and 
support to farmers (PAP action). The current pest management system is aligned with the international 
good practices. The key aspects in the pest management system, such as mandatory system for 
production and sales permits for pesticides, pest disease monitoring and forecasting, and trainings for 
farmers, are satisfactorily performed by relevant institutions. 
 
The assessment of social risks of the activities to be supported under the PforR, concluded that there 
would not be significant social conflicts caused by its activities. However, the PforR would have limited 
social risks in terms of land acquisition or voluntary land donations and land transfers, effective 
participation and consultation, and grievance redress mechanism. The ESSA recommends developing a 
community participation and consultation manual, which will be the PAP action. 
 
OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities could potentially involve water 
extraction for rural water supply systems and irrigation from the Pearl River Basin, which is regarded as 
an international waterway, as certain tributaries of the basin originate or flow through Vietnam.  
 
Consultations and information disclosure. Between November 2017 and January 2018, meetings were 
held with representatives from Guangxi region, and three counties government institutions to discuss 
policies and procedures on land acquisition and resettlement, land use right transfer, ethnic minority 
development, among others. Formal public consultation meetings were held during April 14-15, 2018, in 
Nanning and in Du’An county. An electronic copy of the draft ESSA report was uploaded on Guangxi 
government official website and hardcopies were made available together with the consultation 
announcement to key stakeholders prior to formal consultations. 
 

E. Financing 
 

Program Financing 
 

Source 
Amount 

(US$ Million) 
% of Total 

Government 
5.13 93 




IBRD 
0.40 7 

Total 
5.53 100 

 












































President’s report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the
Western States Agribusiness Project


Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Western States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$20.26 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$8.98 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a 10-year
grace period and a service charge of three quarters
of one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: US$3.98 million

Financing gap

Cofinancier(s):

US$4.47 million

Implementing partners

Amount of cofinancing: US$1.05 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$0.99 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.78 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness
Project, as contained in paragraph 54.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context

1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive
path of political and economic reforms since 2011. These aim to introduce elements
of popular representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and
inclusive social development, improve the business environment, attract foreign
investment and reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar’s population was estimated at 53.9 million in 2015, of which some
66 per cent is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic groups
and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being resource-rich, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia. An estimated one third of the population were living below the poverty line in
2005, but this proportion had dropped to one fourth by 2014. The 2015 Human
Development Report ranked the country 148th among the 188 nations rated, with a
human development index of 0.536. Myanmar’s per capita gross national income
was estimated at US$1,160 in 2015. The annual growth rate of gross domestic
product accelerated from 4.8 per cent in 2011 to 7.2 per cent in 2015, while
inflation was reported at 8.4 per cent at the end of that year.

4. The agriculture sector is the core of the economy, generating 37 per cent of GDP
and employing about 70 per cent of the working population in 2015. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty; and there is significantly
greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also higher among ethnic
groups compared to the majority population.

5. Disparities exist among and within states and within communities. Rural poverty is
largely a function of poor resource endowments. The rural poor are typically
landless people and small and marginal farmers, usually owning between less than
one and five acres of land. They lack access to adequate food and to essential non-
food items and services. Many of the poorest live in isolated hill tracts and upland
areas of ethnic states, which were previously ravaged by decades of civil conflict
that left them isolated and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. IFAD’s strategy in Myanmar is to support the Government in creating a model for
agricultural modernization and rural transformation in each agroecological zone of
the country. The first investment – the Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in
Myanmar (FARM project) – created the model for agricultural development, service
delivery and enterprise growth in the central dry zone. This model is now being
scaled up by development partners and the Government across the entire dry zone.
The second investment – the Eastern States Agribusiness Project – establishes the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

2

model for agribusiness development and community agroforestry, and will create
farming and employment opportunities across the eastern hilly zone for ethnic
groups, indigenous people, ex-combatants, and returning migrants. The third
investment – the Western States Agribusiness Project – to be financed under the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle – creates the model
for climate-resilient agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods, to be implemented across the western upland areas and forests. With
these projects, IFAD is fulfilling its strategic objective of helping the Government
create optimal models for modernizing agriculture across agroecological zones, with
a strong focus on the ethnic states.

7. The project’s rationale is anchored in the Government’s policies to reduce economic
and social disparities in rural areas. It is consistent with the National
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for Economic and Social
Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development Action Plan. The
project’s rationale has four dimensions: (i) to provide a systemic structural
response to the challenges of, and opportunities for, rural transformation in
southern Chin and northern Magway; (ii) to create a model for the environmentally
sustainable modernization of agriculture in degraded sloping areas, which generates
economic benefits for poor households; (iii) to rehabilitate productive infrastructure
in ways that optimize sustainable use of the natural resource base; and (iv) to
forge pathways for communities to transition from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods through better access to inputs, knowledge and services. Activities for
livelihood-support and nutrition-sensitive agriculture have also been included, to
address important needs among local communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project is located in southern Chin State and the northern Magway Region,

which share a common river basin. These areas have among the highest
concentrations of poverty in Myanmar. Chin State is located in the hilly western
border area. Its people belong to the Chin ethnic group and its 53 officially
recognized subgroups. Southern Chin is home to some of the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. Magway Region is situated in the central dry
zone, and its population is mostly of the Bamar ethnic group. The region is poor
and food-insecure, and has suffered a series of natural calamities and major
harvest losses in recent years.

9. The project’s target groups consist of: (i) small and medium-scale farming
households in upland and lowland areas; (ii) livestock producers; and
(iii) non-farming and landless households. Women and women-led households will
be prioritized; and youth, as the primary agents of change at the community level,
will be the focus of activities involving technological innovation and
commercialization.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s goal is to improve the social and economic status of rural households

in a climate-resilient manner in the northern Magway Region and southern
Chin State. Its objective is to increase household incomes and enhance food
security and nutrition quality. Its investments focus on commodities and services
that have comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project’s two expected outcomes are: (i) access to productive and social

infrastructure is improved; and (ii) technological, financial and policy environment
for small farmers and agribusinesses is enhanced.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

3

12. Component 1: Infrastructure. The project will finance strategic investments in
productive and social infrastructure.

13. Subcomponent 1.1: Productive infrastructure. The project will finance:
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to ensure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to farms; (ii) rural access roads linking farms to markets; (iii) irrigation
technology for home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity; and,
(iv) land consolidation on a pilot basis. These investments will generate
opportunities for increased incomes, reduce on-farm and off-farm production costs,
and improve food security for communities and households. They will also improve
water management, reduce water conveyance and application losses by
30-40 per cent, improve drainage and reduce siltation, and conserve groundwater.

14. Subcomponent 1.2: Social infrastructure. The project will invest in social
infrastructure facilities mainly at the household level, particularly targeting the
needs of women and the poorest households. Domestic water supply, rainwater
harvesting, and renewable energy solutions will be eligible for support. Scheme
selection will be participatory, sensitive to cultural considerations, and subject to
social, technical, financial and environmental feasibility. The ownership,
management, operation and maintenance of all facilities constructed will be
optimized to ensure sustainability.

15. Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity-building. The project will build capacities in the
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department and the Department of
Rural Development of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MoALI) –
responsible for productive and social infrastructure respectively. This will be done
through the provision of technical assistance; strengthening of staffing and office
facilities; awareness of water, sanitation and hygiene issues; awareness of
nutritional diversity; and capacity development for social mobilization.

16. Component 2: Services. The project will invest in agricultural modernization and
enabling services to optimize resource management, productivity and benefits in
areas of infrastructure investment.

17. Subcomponent 2.1: Agricultural modernization. The project will invest in a
range of agriculture, livestock and technical services to modernize production and
trigger improvements in food security and nutrition, livelihoods, and economic
returns. Services delivered to farming households will include land titling,
technology transfer, skill development, access to inputs and supplies, access to
markets and information, contractual linkages, and access to financial resources.
Climate-resilient sloping agricultural land technology will be promoted. Services
delivered to the landless will focus on technical and business management skills,
microenterprise development and private-sector linkages.

18. Subcomponent 2.2: Financial services. Building on FARM experiences, the
project will support financial inclusion for small farmers, livestock owners and the
landless, ensuring equal access for ethnic groups and women. It will invest in:
(i) savings and credit groups, promoting financial literacy; (ii) a rural business fund
to support microenterprises; (iii) an agribusiness fund to help agribusinesses set up
processing facilities in the project area; and (iv) a line of credit to refinance project-
related agriculture, livestock and enterprise-lending operations by licensed financial
institutions.

19. Subcomponent 2.3: Policy engagement. The project will contribute to an
inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for rural development in Myanmar,
specifically related to the project’s implementation experiences. It will focus on:
(i) transition from shifting to sedentary agriculture and associated customary land
laws; (ii) re-categorization of high-value commercial crops from non-timber forest
products to agricultural or industrial crops; and (iii) agricultural service delivery and
market linkages.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. Based on an institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar
contexts and the country strategy, the project’s implementation approach is to:
(i) strengthen MoALI and other relevant agencies at the state level, and increase
their responsibilities for implementing activities in a sequenced manner; (ii) engage
with reputable implementing partners to serve as lead technical agencies and to
gradually devolve responsibilities to public agencies as their capacities mature;
(iii) establish small state-level project implementation offices (PIOs) for
coordinating implementation at state level and for monitoring and reporting on
progress ; and (iv) establish a project management unit (PMU) in the Department
of Rural Development (DRD) that will be integrated within DRD structures. The PMU
will be responsible for project implementation, fiduciary management, work
planning and budgeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and policy interface
functions. It will manage contracts with implementing partners and public and
private entities.

B. Organizational framework
21. MoALI, in its capacity as lead project agency, will be responsible and accountable

for the project. The DRD of MoALI will be the project's focal department. The
Ministry of Planning and Finance will enter into subsidiary financing agreements
(SFA) with selected licensed financial institutions for administration of the credit
line.

22. The project will be governed by a National Project Steering Committee and two
project coordination committees (one in each location). It will be managed by the
central PMU established within DRD and the two decentralized PIOs (one in each
location).

23. The project will be executed by implementing partners, MoALI at the state level,
and the private sector. They will lead social mobilization, community interfacing and
policy engagement. Infrastructure will be implemented by the Irrigation and Water
Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) and DRD, in collaboration with
private-sector engineering firms and contractors, as required. Agricultural
modernization will be implemented by MoALI knowledge centres (KCs), brokering
services and markets for the target groups, in collaboration with producer
associations and community organizations. Financial services will be provided by
licensed financial institutions.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. The annual work plan and budget will be the key management tool for
planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. It will be
based on project design, cost tables and the implementation manual; and it will be
informed by operational experiences and challenges. The logical framework will
constitute the main reference for framing annual work plan and budgets, to create
clear linkages among proposed activities, budget requirements and expected
outputs, outcomes and impacts. A participatory planning approach will be applied,
to ensure that project investments reflect the target groups’ needs and aspirations.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. The project’s M&E system will be designed to provide
reliable information to facilitate results-based management. It will be aligned with
the M&E system developed under the FARM, and will help strengthen MoALI’s
system for monitoring the effectiveness of official development assistance. The M&E
system will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring, focusing on physical
and financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring, focusing on the
use of outputs and measurement of benefits at the household and community



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

5

levels; and (iii) impact assessment, evaluating impacts against objectives. All M&E
data, analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by poverty status, gender, and
ethnicity.

26. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s learning system will be
structured at the state, region and central levels. It will capture information on
progress, lessons and solutions to implementation constraints. A consolidated
annual project review will be performed towards the end of each fiscal year, to
assess physical and financial progress against the targets and towards the
objectives.

27. Knowledge management will be a systematic feature throughout the project. To
enable effective knowledge management and sharing, results and lessons from the
project will be systematically documented through specific studies and knowledge
products commissioned by the PMU and/or the PIOs. The M&E system will be a key
knowledge source. Innovations observed during implementation will be documented
for possible scaling up. The MoALI and PMU will be responsible for sharing
knowledge documents through dedicated websites, workshops and seminars.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating

measures: (i) financial reporting based on automated systems; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) use of a financial management manual
integrating controls with operations; (iv) technical assistance and external
oversight; (v) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits and
independent external audits; and (vi) a good governance framework to ensure
accountability and transparency.

29. Financial management. The PMU will be responsible for all aspects of project
financial management, including budgeting, financial statements and reporting,
withdrawal applications for IFAD disbursements, and the coordination of audit
processes.

30. Flow of funds. Designated accounts in United States dollars will be opened for the
IFAD loan and the IFAD grant, and will be operated using the imprest method. Bank
accounts denominated in local currency will be opened at the PMU level, with
signatories at appropriate level for operational efficiency.

31. Financial reporting. The PMU will maintain separate accounts for the project, in
accordance with the cash basis of accounting. The financial statements prepared for
the project will be supplemented with additional data as necessary, so as to provide
minimum disclosures under international accounting standards.

32. Project expenditure will be recorded using the accounting software currently used
by the PMU of another ongoing project in MoALI. Further customization is foreseen
to enhance the software’s reporting capability.

33. Taxes. IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, adopted
in 2009 and amended in 2014, allow IFAD financing to be used to pay taxes. The
payment of taxes with IFAD funding is foreseen for the project. The Ministry of
Planning and Finance has formally requested IFAD to cover taxes on the basis that
tax exemption is impractical and the tax burden is low.

34. Audit. The project will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General of the Union
(OAG), which has adopted INTOSAI audit standards. OAG conducts mostly financial
audits, with some procurement and performance audits.

35. Procurement. IFAD procurement guidelines will apply to the project. The
programme implementation manual will specify detailed procurement requirements
and procedures. The procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and
time estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

6

Borrower and reflected in the procurement plan. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop PMU and PIO procurement capacities.

E. Supervision
36. The project will be supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation support

mission will be undertaken annually; and MoALI offices at the central, state and
regional levels will participate in these missions. A midterm review mission will be
undertaken jointly by IFAD and the Government at the end of the third year of
implementation, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging
impact and likely sustainability of project activities, and to make recommendations
and any adjustments for the remaining project period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total project cost, including duties, taxes and contingencies, is estimated at

US$20.26 million over a six-year implementation period. Indicative costs for each
component are detailed in table 1. Indicative costs by expenditure categories are
provided in table 2.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Infrastructure 4 065 58.6 1 124 16.2 963 13.9 780 11.2 6 932
1.1 Productive
infrastructure 3 573 83.2 278 6.5 117 2.7 327 7.6 4 294
1.2 Social
infrastructure 146 9.1 627 39.0 383 23.8 453 28.1 1 610
1.3 Capacity-building 346 33.7 219 21.3 463 45.0 1 028

2. Services 3 938 32.4 2 854 23.5 1 050 8.6 3 509 28.9 796 6.6 12 146
2.1 Agricultural
modernization 1 148 12.4 2 854 30.8 1 050 11.3 3 427 37.0 796 8.6 9 275
2.2 Financial services 2 708 100.0 2 708
2.3 Policy engagement 81 50.0 81 50.0 163

3. Project management 981 83.2 198 16.8 1 179
Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$8.98 million, an IFAD grant of

US$3.98 million, a government contribution of US$0.99 million, a
beneficiary/private-sector contribution of US$0.78 million, and implementing
partners’ cost-sharing of US$1.05 million. The financing gap of US 4.47 million may
be sourced through cofinancing identified during implementation or through a
subsequent PBAS cycle.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil works 3 256 91.9 44 1.2 117 3.3 127 3.6 3 554
2. Vehicles 255 100 255
3. Equipment 24 100 24
4. Consulting

services 633 21.2 1 489 52.5 861 30.3 2 984
5. Training 661 38.0 303 17.4 777 44.6 1 741
6. Goods,

services
and inputs 1 615 23.0 2 141 30.5 1 050 15.0 1 528 21.8 652 9.3 29 0.4 7 015

7. Credit 2 276 100 2 276
8. Salaries

and
allowances 152 8.6 1 189 67.7 416 23.7 1 757

9. Operating
costs 104 15.9 549 84.1 652

Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257
*

Disbursement categories will be specified in schedule 2 of the negotiated financing agreement. A maximum of six disbursement categories is
envisaged to allow sufficient flexibility during implementation.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. The project is expected to directly benefit 76,810 households, of which 10,190 in

Chin and 66,620 in Magway, encompassing a total of 390,410 rural women and
men. Many additional households will indirectly benefit from project activities. The
estimated project cost per beneficiary household is US$327.

40. Project benefits will be generated from improved infrastructure, land tenure,
agricultural technology, market access, enterprise growth and financial services.
The main beneficiaries will be small farming households, landless/tenant
households, and off-farm households. The key results will be higher incomes,
additional jobs, better food security and nutrition, and secured climate resilience.

41. The project’s economic internal rate of return over 20 years is estimated at
32 per cent.

D. Sustainability
42. The sustainability of project investments is based on the underlying business

relationships that the project will generate between small farmers and markets, and
between enterprises and markets. Global development experiences have shown
that profitable business relationships are an optimal instrument for making
investments sustainable and for breaking the cycle of dependency and poverty.

43. Project sustainability is also based on: (i) access to knowledge: KCs will be low-cost
facilities that will eventually operate on a cost recovery basis; (ii) access to
markets: upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes
will ensure smallholder access to markets; (iii) access to land: the project will
invest in securing land tenure and ownership, particularly in Chin State; (iv) access
to water: irrigation and drainage improvement, combined with participatory water
management, will improve water distribution and operation and maintenance;
(v) access to basic needs: social infrastructure will cover underlying needs related
to food security, nutrition, and domestic water supply; (vi) access to finance:
financial inclusion activities will link smallholders and landless microentrepreneurs
to the formal financial sector; and (vii) access to extension: use of MoALI extension
officers as KC managers trained by the project will ensure continuity in service
delivery.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

8

44. Exit strategy. The project’s exit strategy is to strengthen public institutions at the
central and state levels, to rely on a range of institutional service providers for
implementation, to foster profitable business relationships among producers and
markets, and to improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
45. The project’s main risks are in the governance, expropriation, fiduciary and capacity

areas. They will be mitigated by a robust project governance framework, a set of
legal assurances to be negotiated with the Government, substantial technical
assistance and capacity-building, and the underlying business relationships to be
fostered.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. The project’s goal and objectives are aligned with the Strategic Framework
2016-2025 in terms of market-driven smallholder development and rural business
growth. It is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines,
and in particular with the Fund’s policies on targeting, rural finance, land tenure,
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, as well as with the partnership and climate change strategies, and
the Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
47. The project’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s poverty reduction mandate and the

Government’s policy for reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar’s National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of multilateral and bilateral development partners, and with the
Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Working Group.

Innovations and scaling upC.
48. Innovation. The project is the first substantial investment in Myanmar’s western

states to address the climate change challenges posed by erratic rainfall, intra- and
inter-annual drought, and record high temperatures that are undermining farm
productivity and the livelihood options of the rural poor. It introduces several
innovations in its model for climate-smart agricultural development in the
upland/lowland areas of the western states. Key innovations in the Myanmar
context include: (i) introduction of sloping agricultural land technology;
(ii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iii) livelihood diversification, with potential for greater value-added; (iv) promotion
of smallholder-driven small businesses and microenterprises; and (v) support for
adapted rural finance products and services.

49. Scaling up potential. Given the transient nature of the current agriculture sector
regulatory framework in Myanmar, particularly in view of the major political
changes that occurred in 2015, there is an important window of opportunity for
scaling up the methodologies and results pioneered by IFAD-financed operations in
Myanmar. The country programme is engaging in this in two ways: (i) successful
service delivery models are already being replicated and brought to scale in other
parts of the country by the Government, partners, and the private sector; and
(ii) policy engagement opens avenues for scaling up investments based on
implementation experiences, the fostering of stakeholder alliances to capture policy
proposals, capacity-building for policy development, and the promotion of policy
advocacy within national processes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

9

Policy engagementD.
50. The project will contribute to an inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for

rural development in Myanmar, specifically related to the project’s implementation
experiences. It will support formulation of the policies and regulations needed to
enhance and sustain project investments, and to contribute to the ongoing policy
discussions on broader agricultural modernization and rural transformation. Policy
engagement will also aim at scaling up successful approaches in other states and
regions of the country, and will contribute to the project’s exit strategy.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
51. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

52. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

53. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
54. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to eight million
nine hundred and eighty four thousand United States dollars (US$8,984,000)
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to three million nine hundred
and seventy eight  thousand United States dollars (US$3,978,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President


































































49026-002: Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3633-VlE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in .the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 42. AoriZ Z.OA2

VIE 49026



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated A2. Ap«^ 70^ between SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, 
Ha Giang, and Lang Son (“Project Provinces”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make 
available to the Project Provinces the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ARVC” means agriculture and rural value chain;

(b) “Candidate Subproject” means a candidate subproject for financing 
under the Project, a list of which has been agreed upon between the 
Project Provinces and ADB and provided in the PAM;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);



2

(d) ' “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan to help in carrying out activities as described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the 
Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(f) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and'requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable.) of 
the SPS;

( (h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any
x update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces and

cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(k) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces pursuant to 
the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

( (I) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Onlending Agreement” means, the agreement or agreements entered 
into between the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and each of the 
Project Provinces for the purposes of relending a portion of the 
proceeds of this Loan as specified in Section 3.01 of this Loan 
Agreement;



3

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) . “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project facilities” means facilities developed, constructed, updated 
and/or maintained under the Project;

(t) “Project Province” means each of the Borrower’s provinces of Bac 
Kan, Cao Bang, Ha Giang, and Lang Son where the Project is carried 
out;

(u) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Framework” or 
“REMDF” means the resettlement and ethnic minority development 
framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(v) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Plan” or “REMDP” 
means each resettlement and ethnic minority development plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Project Provinces pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
REMDF and cleared by ADB;

(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces to ADB that describes progress 
with implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the 
REMDPs (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;

(y) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement 
and the relevant provisions of the PAM; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule.set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall (i) make a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Project Provinces through budget allocation, and (ii) 
relend the balance of the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Provinces under the respective 
Onlending Agreements, all upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



5

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 
Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2023 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4. 02. The Borrower, through the Project Provinces, shall 
enable ADB's representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant 
records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project Provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Onlending Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under any Onlending Agreements shall be 
assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates the Project Provinces 
as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or 
permitted under Section 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02 and 
5.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 
Project Provinces pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan 
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as 
if taken by the Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on the Project Provinces under
Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 
of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

State Bank of Vietnam
47-49 LyThai To 
Hanoi, Viet Nam



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(84-4) 38250-612 
(84-4) 38258-385

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2331.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

LEMINH HUNG 
Governor 

State Bank of Viet Nam

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase production, and movement of goods
and passengers within the Project Provinces and to major domestic and international 
markets.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs.

Output 1: Road network connectivity among the Project Provinces 
improved. Carrying out Subprojects to upgrade provincial and district roads, 
including road safety measures and training.

Output 2: Rural water supply improved. Carrying out Subprojects to 
develop water supply schemes.

Output 3: ARVC infrastructure in Lang Son province improved. Carrying 
out Subprojects to support the development of shared horticultural trade and 
marketing services for horticultural commodities, through provision of viability 
gap grants to the selected enterprises and producers groups.

Output 4: Decentralized public asset management processes 
established. Supporting the implementation of the Borrower’s decentralized 
public asset management program.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2023.



10

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.



11

SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed put of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for:

(a) Category 1A, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Bac Kan Province, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and executed and 
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government 
entity) and the Bac Kan Province, and is legally binding upon the 
parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(b) Category 1B, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Cao Bang Province,. in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Cao Bang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(c) Categories 1C and 2, until the Onlending Agreement between the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and the Ha Giang Province, in form 
and substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Ha Giang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms; and

(d) Category 1D, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Lang Son Province, in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Lang Son Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated for 

ADB Financing 
(Dollar)

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account**

Category Subcategory
1 Project Costs 144,686,400

1A. forBac Kan Province* 32,884,373 100% of total expenditure claimed***

1B for Cao Bang Province* ' 33,039,415
100% of total expenditure 
claimed***

1C for Ha Giang Province* 31,418,624
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

1D for Lang Son Province* 47,343,988
100% of total expenditure 
claimed****

2 Consulting Services for Ha Giang Province* 1,587,004
66 percent of total expenditure 
claimed***

3 Interest Charge 3,726,596 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 150,000,000
Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.

** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
*** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services.
**** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services and detailed engineering design consulting services.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) National Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for the respective
Subprojects which involves environmental impacts until it has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s competent 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

7. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject
involving involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous peoples impacts until the relevant 
Project Province has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP for the Subproject 
based on the Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of the REMDP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Fixed Budget Selection for Project audit

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB,
unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement 
Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social, 
Financial and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. 
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Project Provinces and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM 
and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) 
the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the ADB’s Category A environmental criteria as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for each Subproject and all Project facilities are made 
available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related 
Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in 
compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective REMDP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Involuntary Resettlement Category A as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards,
the REMDF or the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to 
ensure , that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the 
Subprojects until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and



17
Schedule 5

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

7. ' The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) the REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the respective REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Indigenous Peoples Category A as defined under the Safeguard 
Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower shall make available and cause the Project Provinces to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and the REMDP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the relevant Project Provinces with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation 
of the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the 
REMDP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project Provinces to do
the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;



18
Schedule 5

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts' 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the REMDP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

f 12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources are allocated 
for implementation of the GAP; and (c) progress on implementation of the GAP, including 
progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced 
labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from using a legally permissible means of expressing 
their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of 
employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, 
information. on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular, reports.

Selection and Implementation of Subprojects

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
only Candidate Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project; (b) Candidate 
Subprojects in each Project Province are taken up in the order of priority as indicated in the 
PAM; (c) feasibility studies and detailed design for such Candidate Subprojects are carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions under the PAM; and (d) only Candidate 



19
Schedule 5

Subproject which meets feasibility criteria as provided in the PAM is financed as a Subproject 
under the Project.

Community Awareness and Beneficiary Participation

16. The Borrower shall ensure that Project Provinces promote active community
awareness and stakeholder participation in the design, implementation and performance 
monitoring of Subprojects, through (a) disseminating the nature of the proposed Works in 
open public forums, and (b) establishing a mechanism for public consultation during Project 
physical implementation activities.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the counterpart
funding required for successful Project implementation is timely allocated and provided. The 
Borrower shall further cause the Project Provinces to adequately staff and equip their 
respective Project management offices.

18. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project
Provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Consulting Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

19. The Borrower shall ensure that each of the Project Provinces shall (a) prepare
a maintenance management plan that includes estimates of the physical works and 
associated costs required for routine and periodic maintenance, as well as provisions for 
emergency repairs for the whole life of the Project facilities; (b) include the maintenance 
management plans in its annual budgets and provide adequate funds in a timely manner 
from provincial budgets to implement the maintenance management plan; and (c) establish 
mechanisms for the safe and proper use for each of the Project facilities in accordance with 
national regulations and practice, including, but not limited to, posting signs on roads and 
bridges of maximum weight limits, and as necessary alerting users of hazards or establishing 
physical barriers that prohibit vehicles above a certain size to pass.

Financial Management

20. The Borrower shall ensure that the financial management action plan as
agreed between the Project Provinces and ADB and included in the PAM is implemented in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe as indicated in the PAM, but in any case within one 
year of the Effective Date.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower (a) acknowledges ADB's right to investigate, directly or through
its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practices relating to the 
Project; and (b) agrees to cooperate, and shall cause the Project Provinces, and all other 
offices of the Borrower, organizations and entities involved in implementing the Project to 
cooperate, fully with any such investigation and to extend all necessary assistance, including 
providing access to all relevant books and records, as may be necessary for the satisfactory 



20
Schedule 5

completion of any such investigation. In particular, the Borrower shall ensure that (a) periodic 
audits of the Project contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are 
carried out; (b) relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) are included in all bidding documents for the Project; and (c) contracts financed under 
the Project include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of Project Provinces, contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.


































































47381-005: Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2


LOAN NUMBER 3625-SRI

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2)

between

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 18 MAY 2018

SRI 47381



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 18 May 2018 between DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the 
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the 
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program;

(B) by a periodic financing request dated 2 October 2017, the Borrower 
has applied to ADB for (i) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on concessional 
terms (“Concessional Loan”); and (ii) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on regular 
terms (“Ordinary Operations Loan”); each for the purposes of the Project described in 
Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement (as defined 
hereafter);

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Ordinary Operations 
[Concessional] Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from its ordinary 
operations resources an amount of thirty-one million Dollars ($31,000,000) for the purpose of 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the 
context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II



The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventy-nine million Dollars 
($179,000,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR; and

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0,10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 



outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in 
Section 2.01(6) of the Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan Regulations 
and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary 
Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where 
any such item has hot been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with 
those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the 
contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 



terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) 
shall have been fulfilled.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, 
the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with its terms, subject 
only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations.



ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Each of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and 
Mass Media, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and Director General of the Department of 
External Resources of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Secretary
Ministry of Finance and Mass Media
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka

cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources

Facsimile Numbers:

+94 11 243-3349
+9411 244-7633

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 
OF SRI LANKA

By__________________________
R.H.S. SAMARATUNGA 

Secretary
Ministry of Finance & Mass Media

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SRI WIDOWATI
Country Director 

Sri Lanka Resident Mission



SCHEDULE 1

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)


2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount 
of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be 
the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as 
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category 6 is for interest and commitment charges
on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works, Consulting 
Services, and PMU and PIU operational costs, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 
20% of the Loan amount.



TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account
Category Subcategory

1 Civil Works 140,470,000

1A UEC-ICB-2A 114,890,000 85% of total expenditure 
claimed

1B NWPC-ICB-1

•‘ili;:’ ;z
1
 y? 

I:« 

_■ 
51^!^;:

25,580,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

2 Environment Mitigation 820,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

3

Consulting Services 
(Project Management, 
Design and 
Supervision 
Consultant)

5,970,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

4 PMU and PIU Operation Costs 7,000,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Equipment Operation Maintenance 5,660,000
81% of total expenditure 
claimed

6 Interest andCommitment Charges 17,240,000 100% of amounts due

7 Unallocated 1,840,000 feiiwS
TOTAL 179,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3570-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development Project - Additional Financing)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 9 JANUARY 2018

CAM 41435



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 9 January 2018 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a financing agreement dated 27 December 2009 between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADB Financing Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional 
loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in various currencies equivalent to two million one 
hundred thirty-two thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR2,132,000) and a grant in an amount 
of twenty-seven million three hundred thousand Dollars ($27,300,000), for the purpose of the 
project described in Schedule 1 to the ADB Financing Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a concessional loan from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement (“Project”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied for a grant from ADB’s special funds 
resources in an amount equivalent to four million two hundred seventy-five thousand Dollars 
($4,275,000) (“ADF Grant”) and ADB has agreed to make the ADF Grant to the Borrower for 
the purposes of the Project pursuant to a grant agreement of even date herewith between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”);

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (“IFAD”) for a loan (“IFAD Loan”), to be partially administered by ADB in an 
amount of ten million Dollars equivalent ($16,000,000) to assist in financing a part of the 
Project, pursuant to an agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and IFAD (the 
“IFAD Financing Agreement”);

(E) the Project shall be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (“MAFF”) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic 
Development Secretariat (“NCDDS”), and for this purpose the Borrower shall make available 
to MAFF and NCDDS the proceeds of the loan provided herein and the ADF Grant upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



2

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following.meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “DRM” means disaster risk management;

(d) “DRR” means disaster risk reduction;

(e) "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB; „

(f) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means an environmental 
management plan for a Subproject,' including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project in 
consultation with the Borrower and approved by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or ADF Grant, including related services 
such as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, 
and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services; •

(j) “ICT” means information and communication technology;



3

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP” means the indigenous people plan 
for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the IPPF and cleared 
byADB;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared 
byADB;

(m) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3 and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means an initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(o) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(p) “LIG” means a livelihood improvement group;

(q) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 4 
August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “Participating Commune” means a participating commune located in 
one of the Participating Provinces included in the Project;

(u) “Participating Province” means a participating province included under 
the Projeqt;

(v) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and 
endorsed by ADB, which sets forth procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(x) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
4 August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



4

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(y) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means each of MAFF and NCDDS, or any 
successors thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying 
out the Project;

(z) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 
modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be 
installed and maintained under the Project;

(aa) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 
for the Project, including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means the resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the RF and cleared by 
ADB;

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB, that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(ee) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 
procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time 
to time) providing procedures applicable to all externally-financed 
projects and programs;

(ff) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject selection criteria set forth in herein and detailed in the PAM; 
and

(gg) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



5

ARTICLE I!

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty-five million seven hundred twenty-five thousand 
Dollars ($45,725,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for.the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 July 2023 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agencies to (i) maintain separate accounts, and records for the Project; (ii) prepare 
consolidated annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such 
audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds and the ADF Grant proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to enable 
ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the 
Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the. Project with the auditors appointed 
pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative 
of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that 
such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the 
Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and 
any relevant records and documents.



7

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and

(b) the IFAD Loan shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation 
or shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: .

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement shall have been duly authorized, 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness shall have been fulfilled..

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as .additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) th© ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding up'on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms, to the extent applicable.



8

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Sec tion 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Sec tion 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Ministry of Economy and Finance
Street 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855-23) 427 798
(855-23) 428 424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaiuyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2231.



9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister, Ministry of Economy and 

Finance

PMENT BANKASIAN DEVE

By
SAMIUELA TUKUAFU 

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



10

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen
climate and disaster resilience and improve access to markets in the Participating Communes 
in the Participating Provinces in the Tonle Sap Basin.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Output 1: Rural productive infrastructure and livelihood improved with
capacity in disaster risk management enhanced by:

(a) rehabilitating roads and upgrading irrigation infrastructure for at least 
two crops per year;

(b) strengthening existing LIGs and establishing additional LIGs in the 
Participating Communes and establishing aq LIG association to improve 
their sustainability; and

(c) strengthening of DRM in Participating Communes through training on 
identifying, planning and implementing DRR measures, including 
incorporation of DRR considerations in infrastructure Subprojects.

Out put 2: Enabling environment for increased agricultural productivity,
diversification and climate resilience created by:

(a) providing training on climate-smart agricultural practices through paddy 
selling groups, LIGs and market improvement groups;

(b) promoting the production of climate-resilient rice seed varieties upon 
confirmation of market demand; and

(c) improving value addition for rice, vegetables and chicken value chain 
through (i) establishing multi-stakeholder value chain platforms, (ii) 
establishing market improvement groups, (iii) strengthening existing 
small-scale agribusinesses; and (iv) establishing additional 
agribusinesses.

Out put 3: Project management strengthened by continuing support for-
Project staff at national, provincial, district and commune levels on Project 
management.

3. Consulting Services will be provided to support the above-stated activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 January 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Financial charges during implementation -
Interest during construction” is for financing the interest charge on the Loan during the 
implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account 
and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when 
due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Percentage and Basis for 

Withdrawal from the Loan 
Accounti

Category Subcategory

1 Works 30,243,000 ■

1A Works-ADB 30,243,000 93% of total expenditure claimed

2 Livelihood inputs 2,118,000

2A Revolving fund J 225,000 5% of total expenditure claimed*

2B
Other livelihood inputs - 
ADB

1,893,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Goods and services 2,660,000

3B
Goods and services - 
ADB

2,660,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

4
Capacity development 
and training

2,111,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

5 Consulting Services 5,445,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

6 Recurrent costs 2,238,000

6B Operations and 
maintenance

/ 2,238,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

7

Financial charges 
during implementation -
Interest during 
construction

910,000 100% of amount due

TOTAL 45,725,000

*Exclustve of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



15

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
Other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works  procured on the basis of the procurement methodsshall.be
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids under
international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of the 
Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) and 
2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. -

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



16

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement ' ,

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for operation
and maintenance for infrastructure in accordance with agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject:

(a) involving environmental impacts, until (i) each Project Executing Agency 
has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IEE for an 
applicable Subproject pursuant to the EARF and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such IEE; (ii) the Ministry of Environment has granted the 
final approval of each relevant IEE, if it is required by Sub-decree 72 
ANRK.BK on Environment Impact Assessment Process; and (iii) each 
Project Executing Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
each relevant EMP into the Works contract for Category "B" Subprojects 
and the Project Environmental Code of Conduct for Category "C" 
Subprojects;

(b) involving involuntary resettlement impacts, until the Borrower has 
prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final RP based on the RF 
and Subproject's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
RP; and

(c) involving indigenous peoples impacts, until each Project Executing 
Agency has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IPP 
based on the IPPF and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower may apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Single Source Selection for Project implementation consultants.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants in accordance with
procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe, any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



17

Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. All draft contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
first draft contract procured under national competitive bidding procedures, first contracts 
procured under community participation for operations and maintenance and first draft contract 
procured under shopping and all draft contracts for‘Consulting Services shall be subject to 
prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in 
the Procurement Plan.



18

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Counterpart Support and Q&M

2. The Borrower shall ensure that adequate counterpart funds for the Project are
provided on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
Project Executing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any 
Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

3. The Borrower shall ensure the release of adequate funds to support the O&M
of irrigation schemes underThe Project and ensure that the irrigation is registered on the 
Borrower’s Information System on Irrigation Schemes to ensure eligibility for any government 
O&M funding. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure that the roads are included in the 
Ministry of Rural Development inventory to ensure eligibility for any government O&M funding.

Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria

4. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to
ensure that all Subprojects are selected and implemented in accordance with the screening 
and eligibility criteria as agreed with ADB and set forth in Appendix 3 to the PAM.

Safeguards - Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable 
Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the respective IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for environment as defined in the SPS is financed under 
the Project.

Safeguards - Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project 
facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 



19

Schedule 5

under the related Works contract and that all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of Borrower relating to 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure 
that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or a 
Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for involuntary resettlement as defined in the SPS is 
financed under the Project.

Safeguards - Ethnic Minorities

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project, each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; (c) the IPPF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective 
IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for indigenous people or ethnic minorities under the SPS 
is financed under the Project

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agencies to
make available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, the 
RF, the IPPF, each EMP, each RP and each IPP (if any).

Safeguards-related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents arid contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP, the RP and the IPP, if any (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 



20

Schedule 5

preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agencies with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the 
IPP (if any);

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall do, or cause the Project Executing Agencies to do the
following:

(a) submit social safeguards monitoring reports to ADB as part of the 
quarterly and annual progress reports, and environmental safeguards 
monitoring reports semiannually in January and July each year and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any), promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any) 
promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable, to ADB is established in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant EARF, EMP, RF, RP (if any), IPPF or IPP (if 
any), within the timeframes specified in the relevant documents, to consider safeguards 
complaints.



21

Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan and ADF Grant are used to finance any activity included in the 
list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the'Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall or cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB-under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

18, The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 17 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as part of the quarterly and annual progress reports.

Gender and Development

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least one women to be elected to join each 
management committee of the new LIGs and service teams, (ii) at least 25% of unskilled 
workers employed are women, (iii) at least 60% of rural loans are taken by women, (iv) 
commune councilors from selected target communes have received training on gehder- 
responsive DRM, (v) at least 200 agribusiness enterprises (30% owned by women) such as 
chick production and feed production are operational, and (vi) at least 40% of market 
improvement group and paddy selling group members are women.

Governance and Anticorruption

20. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall (a) comply with ADB's
Anti corrupt ion Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



22

Schedule 5

21. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and'accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. ,

22. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall disclose, through the
Project website, accessible by general public, information about various matters concerning 
the Project, including general project information, procurement, project progress, and contact 
details in the English and Cambodian languages, as applicable. The Project website shall also 
provide a link to ADB’s integrity office for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations of 
corrupt practices arising out of the Project and its activities. With regard to procurement, the 
website shall include: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning bidder; 
(c) the amount of the contracts awarded; (d) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; and 
(e) the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.




































































51081-002: Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3746-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

KGZ 51081



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated //^^^^Z f̂eetween KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 

(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the purposes 
of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources ("Grant”) in the amount of sixteen million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($16,800,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(b) “Disaster Risk Management Component” means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(c) "DWR” means the Department of Water Resources and Melioration 
under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;



2

(d) “EARF" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “Hydrometeorology Installation Works" means Works to install any 
hydrological and/or meteorological equipment under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project, including any Works to install 
the hydrological posts referred to in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(k) "Irrigation Infrastructure Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “KyrgyzHydromet” means the Agency for Hydrometeorology under the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto;

(m) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MOES" means the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(p) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;



3

(q) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) “PIU” means the Project implementation unit to be established within 
DWR to assist with the execution of the Project;

(s) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time In accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(t) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(u) "Procurement Regulations" means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(v) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreement) means DWR and MOES, both 
individually and collectively, or any successor to either of them 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(w) "Project facilities" means the irrigation infrastructure to be protected, 
modernized and provided, and the equipment to be installed, piloted and 
provided, under the project;

(x) “RF" means the resettlement framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(y) “RP” means the resettlement plan for a Subproject, or, as may be 
required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);



4

(cc) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Irrigation Infrastructure 
Component of the Project that meets the subproject eligibility criteria set 
forth in the PAM;

(dd) “Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract; and

(ee) “WUA" means a water user association or union of water user 
associations established and operating under the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on “Unions (Associations) of Water Users and Unions of Water 
User Associations" adopted by the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 8 February 2002 and signed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 15 March 2002, as such law may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-one million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($21,800,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the Items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4. 02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 



6

were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, the Works and the Services, and any relevant records and 
documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Grant Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the execution and delivery of the Grant Agreement on behalf of the Borrower 
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary governmental action.

Section 6. 02, The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 



7

to be furnished to ADB: that the Grant Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with Its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement,

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erklndik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Authorized Representative

CountryJOirector
Kyrgyz Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved climate change and disaster resilience
of infrastructure and water security.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) the protection and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to improve 
the productivity of approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigated land, 
including by upgrading and constructing main (primary and secondary) 
canals, lower-level (Intra-farm and on-farm) canals, and associated 
infrastructure such as protective mudflow crossing structures, cross­
regulators and offtakes;

(b) the enhancement of (i) irrigation system management, including by 
developing and Implementing joint DWR-WUA irrigation system 
management plans with, among others, water delivery scheduling and 
O&M financing and planning; and (ii) agricultural land management, 
including by developing WUA on-farm water management and 
agricultural management plans with, among others, irrigation 
scheduling, cropping patterns, and cultural methods, and providing 
capacity building for farmers and community members; and

(c) the improvement of national disaster risk management capacity, 
including by providing heavy machinery and special equipment for 
preventative and rehabilitation works at the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES; enhancing the asset 
management of such centers; providing capacity building for disaster 
risk management, including project planning; installing hydrological 
posts for KyrgyzHydromet in approximately 20 sites; and piloting an 
information system for enhanced data collection, processing and flood 
warning.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2025,

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”), (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
Insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1
DWR - Civil Works (Off-farm 
Canal and Ancillary); Equipment & 
Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,390,973
76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2
MOES - Civil Works; Equipment 
& Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,559,541 76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

3 Interest during Implementation 849,486 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 21,800,000

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM and its 
appendices. Any subsequent change to the PAM or its appendices shall become effective only 
after the approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy 
between the PAM or its appendices on the one hand, and this Loan Agreement or the Grant 
Agreement on the other, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement shall 
prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements; the Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (I) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower, through DWR, shall not award any Works contract for a
Subproject which involves environmental impacts until DWR has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the State Agency of 
Environmental Protection and Forestry of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

This paragraph 3 shall apply similarly to MOES for all Hydrometeorology Installation Works 
that are covered by an IEE and EMP.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. This paragraph 4 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology 
Installation Works that are covered by an RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each 
Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and all Project facilities comply with (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; 
(b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the respective IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project, each Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and 
all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule 
agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities 
are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

7. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP for the Subproject.

This paragraph 7 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology Installation Works that are 
covered by an RP.

Indigenous Peoples

8. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, through DWR and/or MOES (as the case 
may be), shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.



16
Schedule 4

Human and Financial Resources to Implemerit Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the RPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant IEE, EMP and RP (to the extent they concern 
impacts on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works (as the case may be) that were 
not considered In the relevant IEE, EMP or RP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of any Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works that were not considered in the 
relevant IEE, EMP or RP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and



17
Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or RP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan or Grant are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall Include specific provisions in 
the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall strictly monitor compliance with
the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

15. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower shall make available all counterpart funds required for the timely
and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of funds or cost overrun, 
through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable funds In a timely manner. 
In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to DWR and MOES and ensure 
that DWR and MOES have sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from any Works, 
Goods and/or Services contract under the Project.

Operational Covenants - DWR

17. The Borrower, through DWR, shall appraise and select all Subprojects in
accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the PAM. The Borrower, through DWR, 



18
Schedule 4

shall ensure that the selection of sites for the feasibility study of potential Subprojects, and the 
selection of sites for the implementation of selected Subprojects, are undertaken in accordance 
with criteria and procedures agreed upon between DWR and ADB as set out in the PAM and 
its appendices.

18. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each Subproject is implemented
in accordance with applicable design and technical specifications and construction norms 
satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, quality control and contract management 
are performed in accordance with best international industry practice, The Borrower, through 
DWR, shall ensure that the detailed design of each Subproject incorporates the findings of the 
climate risk assessment that was undertaken as part of the feasibility study of the Subproject.

19. (a) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that all Project facilities are
operated and maintained, in an effective and sustainable manner, in accordance with the 
applicable laws, regulations and standards of the Borrower and, in other respects not covered 
by such laws, regulations and standards, in accordance with best international industry 
practice.

(b) The Borrower, through DWR, shall timely develop, approve, adopt and 
implement a joint WUA-DWR sustainable O&M plan for each irrigation infrastructure to be 
protected and modernized under the Project. As set out in the PAM and its appendices, each 
such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (i) a water delivery schedule and (ii) an asset 
management plan including an O&M budget and cost sharing. The Borrower, through DWR, 
shall ensure that budgetary and other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as 
necessary for the O&M of each irrigation infrastructure to be protected and modernized under 
the Project, and, at any given time, the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall 
not be less than the total sum required, at that time, to cover the O&M expenditures indicated 
in the O&M budget referred to in this sub-paragraph (b).

(c) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure the timely development and 
implementation of agriculture and on-farm water management plans under the Project. As set 
out in the PAM and its appendices, each such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (I) 
cropping patterns including introduction and diversification of crops and (ii) irrigation methods 
and scheduling. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each such plan shall be 
endorsed by the Council (established and operating under the applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower on WUAs) managing the WUA that will be implementing the plan.

Operational Covenants - MOES

20. (a) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all equipment and
information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk Management 
Component of the Project are operated and maintained appropriately and In accordance with 
the standards and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, and adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. 
The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that adequate, appropriate and timely 
arrangements and resources are in place for the preventive and standard maintenance of the 
said equipment and information systems after their warranty periods expire. The Borrower, 
through MOES, shall timely develop and implement sustainable asset management and 
maintenance plans for the heavy equipment to be provided to the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES.



19
Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all MOES divisions, 
offices and units, including MOES associated entities and centers, that receive and operate 
the equipment and information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are adequately staffed with personnel who have been 
fully trained, in accordance with the requirements of and as otherwise contemplated by the 
PAM, to operate and maintain them.

(c) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all heavy machinery 
and associated equipment provided under the Disaster Risk Management Component of the 
Project is used only by MOES, or a government agency duly authorized by MOES, and only 
for the purpose of preventative and recovery works related to disaster risk management, 
including the maintenance of structures provided under the Project to protect irrigation 
infrastructure from flood and mudflow. The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that such 
equipment is not leased or otherwise permitted to be used by any third party for any 
construction or other commercial activity.

(d) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all hydrological and/or 
meteorological equipment and information systems provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are, in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower, transferred and/or made available for use by KyrgyzHydromet 
promptly after their provision.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

23. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall provide updated Information on
the Project on their websites, including information on performance, business opportunities, 
bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3745-VIE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and 

J . i 4

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED Zf

VIE 49404



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated MW between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (“MARD”) and the following provincial peoples’ committees: Binh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh Thuan 
Provincial People’s Committee (“Participating PPCs”), and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to the Participating PPCs the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon 
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“CCF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a grant from its Climate Change 
Fund ("CCF Grant’’) in an amount of three hundred thousand Dollars ($300,000) for the 
Project;

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("NTF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant provided by the 
Netherlands Trust Fund (“NTF Grant’’, and collectively with the CCF Grant, the “Grants”) 
under the Water Financing Partnership Facility in an amount of seven hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($750,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement dated 2? December 2018 between ADB and the Participating 
PPCs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB, and the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s 
Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s 
Committee and Ninh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall include the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak 
Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong Provincial People’s 
Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as context requires.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “EA" (or “Project Executing Agency”) for the purposes of, and within 
the meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MARD, and the 
Participating PPCs or any successors thereto acceptable to ADB, 
which are responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(d) “EMP" means each environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards’’ means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(f) “Ethnic Minorities Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;



3

(h) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MARD” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, or any successor thereto;

(n) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) “Participating PPCs” means all and any of the provincial peoples’ 
committees of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan, or any successor thereto, which are responsible for the 
carrying out of their respective Subprojects under the Project;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “REMDP” means the resettlement and ethnic minorities development 
plan, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by each 
Participating PPC for relevant Subprojects (if required) under the 
Project and cleared by ADB;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower, through MARD, to ADB that describes 
progress with implementation of and compliance with the EMP, the RP 
and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;



4

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Subproject" means a part or component under the Project that is
carried out by the corresponding Participating PPC and described in 
greater detail in the PAM;

(v) “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement(s) between the 
Borrower and the Participating PPCs, as described in Section 3.01 of 
this Loan Agreement; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall provide the proceeds of the
Loan to the Participating PPCs through (i) budgetary grant transfers; and (ii) relending to the 
Participating PPCs under Subsidiary Loan Agreements upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Participating PPCs to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.



6

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall 
be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the CCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled; and

(b) the NTF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
No. 28 Tran Hung Dao Street
Hoan Kiem District
Ha Noi, Viet Nam

Facsimile Number:

(84-4) 2220-8020



7

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2231.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DINH TIEN DUNG
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to establish climate-resilient and modernized
irrigation systems in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Strengthening of irrigation management services, which includes 
support to:

(i) irrigation water allocation and delivery services; and

(ii) maintenance of irrigation systems;

(b) Modernizing 8 irrigation Subprojects to provide water on-demand to 
farmers cultivating high value crops;

(c) Adopting efficient "on-farm" water management practices, which 
includes:

(i) providing farmers with information and training on best 
irrigation practices to improve their water productivity; and

(ii) providing farmers with technical advice on identifying and 
developing appropriate micro irrigation systems that meet their 
individual requirements.

3. The Project includes provision of Consulting Services, as detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for project expenditures under a Subproject until the 
Borrower has furnished to ADB a written confirmation that the respective Participating PPC 
had executed a Subsidiary Loan Agreement(s) on terms and conditions consistent with this 
Loan Agreement. For avoidance of doubt, this withdrawal condition applies individually and 
severally to each Participating PPC.



11

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Binh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,826,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

2 Ninh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

29,495,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Khanh Hoa Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

15,113,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

4 Dak Nong Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,641,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

5 Dak Lak Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services, 
Project Administration)*

19,925,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

TOTAL 100,000,000

*Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
**Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



12

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

4. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the
Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) National Competitive Bidding.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) ADB has granted the final approval of the updated EMP, which is 
prepared based on the relevant Subproject’s detailed design; and



13

Schedule 4

(b) the Participating PPC has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
the updated EMP into the relevant Works contract

8. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts, and/or impacts on ethnic minorities, until the relevant Participating 
PPC has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP based on the relevant 
Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB’s clearance of such REMDP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Fixed Budget Selection;

(b) Consultants’ Qualifications Selection; and

(c) Single Source Selection.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



14

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that
their respective Subprojects are carried out in accordance with environmental assessment 
procedures provided in the lEEs as agreed between MARD and ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

5. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Ethnic Minorities

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project and all Project 



15

Schedule 5

facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to ethnic 
minorities; (b) the Ethnic Minorities Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Participating PPCs to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the 
REMDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

9. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Participating PPCs to do the
following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP, 



16

Schedule 5

promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with 
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; 
and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

10. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

12. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 11 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include: (i) 
equality of project benefits and opportunity-sharing between men and women; (ii) reduction in 
gender inequalities and social risks (HIV/AIDS transmission prevention, human trafficking 
prevention during construction of works); (Hi) training of women (including those from ethnic 
minorities) on micro irrigation and in overall system management and operations; (iv) 
increased representation of women in decision-making bodies; and (v) collection of sex- 
disaggregated data for benefit monitoring and evaluation.



17

Schedule 5

Operations and Maintenance

14. The Borrower shall cause each of the Participating PPCs to (a) adopt a tariff
structure in accordance with the Borrower’s appropriate regulations, whereby the tariffs are 
set at levels as to enable each Participating PPC, at a minimum, to fully recover Its respective 
operations and maintenance costs; and (b) launch its implementation in the Project financed 
irrigation schemes.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower, through the Participating PPCs, shall make available, promptly
as and when needed, the funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources as shall be 
necessary or required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB, promptly at its reasonable request, evidence satisfactory to ADB that such 
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources are available for purposes related to the 
Project. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Participating PPCs 
have followed applicable procedures to budget for, and have obtained sufficient funds to 
satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 12 months from the date of the Effective Date, each Participating PPC
shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism in accordance with the 
provisions of the lEEs and the Participating PPC’s corresponding REMDP, and acceptable to 
ADB, is established. The grievance redress mechanism shall be translated to the local 
dialect and disclose in a place that are accessible to the local communities to make them 
aware of the grievance mechanism and their potential involvement and responsibilities in the 
project activities. The grievance redress mechanism shall include the names of the focal 
persons in the provincial project management units and the procedures for submitting 
complaints.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.

19. The Borrower shall disclose, through the websites of the Participating PPCs,
information about various matters concerning the Project, including general project 
information, procurement, Project progress, and contact details in the English and 



18

Schedule 5

Vietnamese languages. The website will also provide a link to ADB’s Office of Anticorruption 
and Integrity (http://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main) for reporting to ADB any grievances or 
allegations of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. With regard to 
procurement, the website will include information on the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract 
awarded, and the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.























































LOAN NUMBER 3724-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

/■
I

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2018

MYA 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 November 2018 between THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to the Global Agriculture and Food 
Security Program (“GAFSP”) for a grant (“GAFSP Grant”) and GAFSP has agreed to provide 
the Borrower a grant in the amount of twenty-two million Dollars ($22,000,000) to assist in 
financing a part of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “CSA" means climate smart agriculture;



2

(d) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “GAFSP Grant Agreement” means the grant agreement between ADB 
and the Borrower in relation to the GAFSP Grant;

(h) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means (i) Department of Agriculture; (ii) 
Department of Planning; (iii) Department of Rural Development; (iv) 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; (v) 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics, each of 
MOALI; and (vi) Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) 
and Department of Consumer Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which are responsible for the 
implementation of the Project;

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP" means each indigenous peoples 
plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
IPPF;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 



thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

“Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

“Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework” or “LARF” means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

“Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

“MOALi” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

“PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

“Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

"Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

“Project Executing Agency" or “EA" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of the Loan Regulations means MOALi or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of 
the Project;

“Resettlement Plan" or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the LARF and 
cleared by ADB;

“Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS" means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

“Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;



4

(z) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set forth in the PAM; and

(aa) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million five hundred thousand Dollars 
($40,500,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (I) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors1 opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the GAFSP Grant Agreement has been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Union Minister of Planning and Finance of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of 
the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning and Finance
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410-198

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444
+632 636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

By______________________________
DAW SI SI PYONE 

Director General 
Treasury Department, Ministry of 

Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to develop productive and resource efficient
agribusiness value chains.

2. The Project shall comprise Subprojects to achieve the following outputs:

Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and 
made climate resilient - This includes (a) upgrading irrigation, farm roads, 
buildings, farm machinery, post-harvest equipment, seed testing equipment and 
agrometeorologicai stations, in seed farms; (b) rehabilitating tertiary canals and 
community reservoirs, and constructing shallow tube wells with some linked to 
drip and sprinkler technologies; (c) rehabilitating farm roads to climate resilient 
condition; and (d) upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment.

Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted - This 
includes (a) deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (b) strengthening capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and 
regional government staff on CSA technologies and production practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and agribusiness plan 
development, and manufacturing practices; and (c) facilitating access to inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off farm rural livelihood opportunities.

Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness 
enhanced - This includes (a) establishing an agribusiness policy cell within 
MOALl’s Department of Planning; (b) raising awareness and capacity of 
financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusiness; and (c) enhancing 
weather, market and credit information networks, and delivery of land 
administration services.

3. The Project will support Consulting Services to implement the above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1

Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and 
Design, and Project 
Implementation Support

34,490,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Training, Workshops and Studies 2,010,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 620,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consultants 2,020,000 36% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,360,000 100% total amount due

TOTAL 40,500,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement

3. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.

4. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower's national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE/EMP, as relevant, from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject’s detailed design and obtained ADB’s 
clearance of such RP.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on indigenous peoples until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final IPP, as relevant, and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

10. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

11. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Qualification Based Selection for monitoring and evaluation and land 
administration technical services; and

(b) Single Source Selection for variety development and dissemination 
services.

12. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants as needed in accordance
with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.



16
Schedule 4

14. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after 
approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between 
the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EARF, each IEE, EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject 
categorized as Category A under the SPS is financed under the Project.

involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the LARF, RP and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes 
place in connection with the Project until: (a) compensation and other entitlements, as relevant, 
have been provided to affected people in accordance with the RP; and (b) a comprehensive 
income and livelihood restoration program has been established in accordance with the RP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous people; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPPF 
and any IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement any EMP, RP and IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE, 
the EMP, the RP and any IPP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP, and the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan in 
accordance with the SPS; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti corruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Borrower 
becomes aware or has a reasonable suspicion that any member of the Borrower or executing 
agency has engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anticorruption 
Policy) under or in connection with the Project or the loan, the Borrower shall take such timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

12. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency shall make use of 
its existing website or create a Project website within 3 months from Effective Date, accessible 
by the public, to disclose various information concerning the Project including general 
information about the Project, public procurement related to the Project, Project progress and 
contact details in English and Myanmar language. The website shall also provide a link to 
ADB’s Integrity Unit for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations or corrupt practices 
arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the website shall include 
information on, among others, (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) name of the winning 
bidder; (c) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; (d) amount of contract awarded; and 
(e) list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services. The Project Executing Agency shall permit 
any bidder to request an explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project 
Executing Agency shall respond promptly. The website shall be updated regularly. In addition 
to the web-based disclosure, the stakeholders shall be provided by the Project Executing 
Agency with detailed information on procurement on public notice boards in their respective 
areas.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among others, (a) comply with all 
applicable labor laws and regulations of the Borrower; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation on the basis of age, gender, 



20
Schedule 5

ethnicity, religion or caste; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; (f) advertise labor requirements 
in a timely manner prior to recruitment, in a venue that can reasonably be expected to be seen 
by interested men and women; (g) provide workers with written contract, adequate on-the-job 
training and safety training; (h) not restrict freedom of association of workers; and 
(i) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
areas, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender Action Plan

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the (a) GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis, including personnel cost. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising 
from any Works, Goods and Consulting Services contract.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that all completed Subprojects have adequate
counterpart funds for operation and maintenance of infrastructure allocated to them on a yearly 
basis and made available on a timely basis. The Project Executing Agency shall further ensure 
that the farmer water user communities and water user groups collect adequate irrigation 
service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution canals in accordance with 
the Borrower's decree on farmer water user communities.

Subproject selection

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all Subprojects selected for financing under the Project meet the screening and eligibility 
criteria as agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in the PAM.























































LOAN NUMBER 8346-CAM(EF)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
acting as an accredited entity of the 

Green Climate Fund

DATED 6 JULY 2018

CAM 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB"), acting not in its individual capacity, 
but solely in its capacity as an accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (“GCF”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement 
(as defined herein);

(B) ADB has established the ADB Green Climate Fund to receive, hold in 
trust and administer GCF funds;

(C) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(the “Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a 
concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in the amount of 
ninety million Dollars ($90,000,000) for the purposes of the Project (“Ordinary Operations 
Loan”);

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB, ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance with the 
Accreditation Master Agreement dated 17 August 2017 (“AMA”) and the Funded Activity 
Agreement to be entered into between GCF and ADB (“FAA"), has agreed to provide from the 
ADB Green Climate Fund a grant in the amount of thirty million Dollars ($30,000,000) to assist 
in financing a part of the Project; and

(E) ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance 
with the AMA and the FAA, between GCF and ADB, has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower 
from the ADB Green Climate Fund upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1

Standard Terms; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Standard Terms (“Standard Terms") 
attached hereto in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement shall apply to this Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Standard Terms and Section 1.02 of the Ordinary Operations



2

[Concessional] Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from the ADB
Green Climate Fund an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower acknowledges that the Loan is funded out 
of resources made available by the GCF to ADB as an accredited entity of the GCF. In 
accordance with Section 2.02 of the Standard Terms, the Borrower may only withdraw Loan 
proceeds subject to the availability of such resources.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay to ADB a service charge at the 
rate of 0.25% per annum on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and 
outstanding from time to time,

Section 2,04. The service charge on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the service charge shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 



3

provisions of Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been procured 
under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and 
ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 7.02 
of the Standard Terms shall be 31 March 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and 
(v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, 
copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, ail in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower and its financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed by the Borrower pursuant to subsections (a)(iii) and 



4

(b) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to 
participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions 
shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the 
Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. ADB’s obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB’s receipt of a corresponding amount from GCF in accordance 
with the terms of the AMA and the FAA,

Section 4. 04. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 7.01(1) of the Standard Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation or shall have become 
repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have become liable for suspension or 
cancellation.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 7.07 (d) of the Standard Terms: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.01(c) of the Standard 
Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the condition 



5

requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement and GCF Grant 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than the condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 8.02 of the Standard Terms, to be included in the opinion or opinions to 
be furnished to ADB: the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the GCF 
Grant Agreement have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the exceptions referred to in Section 
6.01 (a) and (b) above) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.04 of the 
Standard Terms.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 10.02 of the Standard 
Terms.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 10.01 of the Standard Terms:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+855 23 427-798
+855 23 428-424



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444 
+632 636-2231.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister of Economy and Finance

i 
i

i

|

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Bv
HIDEAKI IWASAKI 

Acting Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Standard Terms

ARTICLE I

Definitions; Interpretation

Section 1.01, Definitions. Except where the context otherwise 
requires, the following terms have the following meanings wherever used in these Standard 
Terms:

(a) "ADB Green Climate Fund” means the trust fund established and 
administered by ADB to receive, hold in trust and administer the GCF 
funds transferred to ADB by GCF;

(b) “assets" includes property, revenues and claims of any kind;

(c) “convertible currency" means any currency so designated by ADB at any 
time;

(d) “currency" of a country or a territory means such currency as at the time 
referred to is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts in 
that country or territory;

(e) “Dollar” or the sign each means the lawful currency of the United 
States of America;

(f) “Effective Date” means the date on which the Loan Agreement shall 
have come into force and effect pursuant to Section 8,03 of this 
Schedule 1;

(g) “foreign currency” means any currency other than currency of the 
member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out;

(h) “Green Climate Fund” or “GCF” means the fund established within the 
framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in 2010, and governed under the Governing Instrument;

(i) "guarantee” includes, as the case requires, any counter-guarantee, 
indemnity or any other arrangement which has the effect of a guarantee, 
counter-guarantee or indemnity, given by a member in favor, or for the 
benefit of ADB;

Q) “lien” includes mortgages, pledges, charges, privileges and priorities of 
any kind;

(k) "Loan" means the loan provided for in this Loan Agreement;



9
Schedule 1

(I) “Loan Account” means the account opened or to be opened by ADB on 
its books in the name of the Borrower to which the amount of the Loan 
has been or will be credited;

(m) “Loan Closing Date" means the date specified by ADB that is not later 
than the first Principal Payment Date shown in the amortization 
schedule to the Loan Agreement, or such other date as may be agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower for such purpose;

(n) “Loan Currency” means the currency in which the principal amount of 
the Loan is denominated from time to time;

(o) “member" means a member of ADB;

(p) “Multilateral Development Bank Fee" means the management fee 
specified in this Loan Agreement;

(q) “Principal Payment Date" means each date specified in the Loan 
Agreement on which all or any portion of the principal amount of the 
Loan is payable;

(r) “Project Executing Agency" means the Borrower’s Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries or any successor thereto;

(s) “service charge" means a charge made on the Loan pursuant to Section 
2.04 to the Loan Agreement; and

(t) “taxes” includes imposts, levies, fees and duties of any nature, whether 
in effect at the date of the Loan Agreement or thereafter imposed.

Section 1.02. Interpretation. Except where the context 
otherwise requires, (a) a reference to the Incurring of debt includes the assumption and 
guarantee of debt; (b) references in these Standard Terms to Articles or Sections are to Articles 
or Sections of these Standard Terms; (c) the headings of the Articles and Sections are inserted 
for convenience of reference only and are not a part of these Standard Terms; (d) singular may 
include plural and vice versa; and (e) a reference to any gender includes any other gender.

ARTICLE II

Loan Account; Service Charge; Multilateral Development Bank Fee; 
Repayment; Place of Payment

Section 2.01. Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan 
shall be credited to the Loan Account in the Loan Currency and may be withdrawn therefrom 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.



10
Schedule 1

Section 2.02. Funding Shortfall. Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Section 2.01, no withdrawals shall be made if, as a result of such withdrawal, the total 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account would exceed the amount available to 
ADB from resources provided to it for purposes of the Loan. Only the resources made available 
to ADB for the purposes of the Loan shall be considered for the enforcement of any obligations, 
claims or liabilities under or in connection with the Loan.

Section 2.03. Service Charge. A service charge at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. The service charge shall 
accrue from the respective dates on which amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. 
ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the 
Borrower, the amounts required to meet service charge payments, when and if due.

Section 2.04. Multilateral Development Bank Fee. 
The Borrower shall pay ADB a Multilateral Development Bank Fee on the Loan at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement. If this Loan Agreement provides for the financing of the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee out of the proceeds of the Loan, ADB shall, on behalf of 
the Borrower, withdraw from the Loan Account on or after the Effective Date and pay to itself 
the amount of the Multilateral Development Bank Fee.

Section 2.05. Computation of Service Charge and Other Charges. 
The service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee, if the Borrower elects to pay 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee not as a lump sum but semiannually at a rate per 
annum calculated on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan from time to time, shall be computed 
on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

Section 2.06. Repayment and Prepayment (a) The Borrower 
shall repay ADB the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the provisions of, and the amortization schedule to, this Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days’ written notice to ADB, the Borrower 
shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a date acceptable to ADB (provided, 
that the Borrower shall have paid all amounts due under this Loan Agreement as of such date) 
(i) all of the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or (ii) all of the principal amount of 
any one or more maturities of the Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount which is 
(i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB under this Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
less than the full amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this Section, 
ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so received in any manner and for 
such purposes under this Loan Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.

Sec tion 2.07. Place of Payment. The principal of, and service 
charge and other charges (including the Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan shall 
be paid at such places as ADB shall reasonably request.



11
Schedule 1

ARTICLE III

Currency Provisions

Section 3.01. Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the 
Loan Account shall be made in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.02. Currency of Payment. The principal of the Loan 
shall be repaid in the Loan Currency and, the service charge on any portion of the Loan and 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee shall be paid in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.03. Purchase of Currencies. If the Borrower shall so 
request, ADB shall, acting as agent of the Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB 
shall determine, purchase the Loan Currency for the purpose of repayment of principal, and 
payment of service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee upon timely payment 
by the Borrower of sufficient funds for that purpose in a currency or currencies acceptable to 
ADB; provided, however, that the Borrower shall be deemed to have made any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement only when and to the extent that ADB has received such 
payment in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.04. Valuation of Currencies. Whenever it shall be 
necessary for the purposes of this Loan Agreement to determine the value of one currency in 
terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 3.05. Manner of Payment. (a) Any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement to be made to ADB in the currency of any country shall 
be made in such manner, and in currency acquired in such manner, as shall be permitted 
under the laws of such country for the purpose of making such payment and effecting the 
deposit of such currency to the account of ADB with a depository of ADB in such country.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the principal of, and the service charge 
and other charges on, the Loan are paid without restrictions of any kind imposed by, or in the 
territory of, the Borrower.

ARTICLE IV

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

Section 4.01. Withdrawal from the Loan Account. (a) Loan 
proceeds shall be used only for the purposes of the Project. Subject to any conditions or 
restrictions specified in this Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall be entitled to withdraw from 
the Loan Account such amounts as shall have been paid, or, if ADB shall so agree, such 
amounts as shall be required to meet payments to be made, for the reasonable cost of goods, 
services and any other expenditures required for the Project and to be financed under this 
Loan Agreement. If at any time ADB determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds 
withdrawn from the Loan Account has been used by the Borrower in a manner inconsistent 



12
Schedule 1

with the provisions of the Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall promptly refund such amount 
to ADB.

(b) Except as ADB and the Borrower shall otherwise agree, no withdrawals 
shall be made on account of expenditures incurred prior to the Effective Date. ADB may refuse 
to finance a contract where goods and services have not been procured in accordance with 
procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or 
where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB. If at any time ADB 
determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds withdrawn from the Loan Account has been 
used by the Borrower to finance such contracts, the Borrower shall promptly refund such 
amount to ADB.

(c) Withdrawals of the proceeds of the Loan from the Loan Account shall 
be made in the Loan Currency. ADB may, at the request and acting as an agent of the 
Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB shall determine, purchase with such 
currency withdrawn from the Loan Account such other currencies as the Borrower shall 
reasonably request to meet payments for items of expenditure to be financed from the Loan. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of this Loan Agreement to determine the value 
of one currency in terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 4.02. Commitment Letters by ADB. Upon the 
Borrower's request, ADB may issue commitment letters to pay amounts in respect of the cost 
of goods and services to be financed under the Loan, notwithstanding any subsequent 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 4.03. Application for Withdrawal. When the Borrower 
shall desire to withdraw any amount from the Loan Account or to request ADB to issue 
commitment letters pursuant to Section 4,02, the Borrower shall promptly deliver to ADB an 
application in such form and containing such statements, representations, warranties and 
agreements, as ADB shall reasonably request. Except as ADB and the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree, applications for withdrawal, with the necessary documentation as hereinafter 
in this Article provided, shall be made promptly in relation to the expenditures for the Project.

Section 4.04. Evidence of Authority to Sign Applications.
The Borrower shall furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person authorized 
to sign applications for withdrawal and the authenticated specimen signature of each person.

Section 4.05. Supporting Evidence. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB such documents and other evidence in support of the application for withdrawal 
as ADB shall reasonably request, whether before or after ADB shall have permitted any 
withdrawal requested in the application.

Section 4.06. Sufficiency of Applications and Documents. 
Each application for withdrawal and the accompanying documents and all other evidence must 
be sufficient in form and substance to satisfy ADB that the Borrower is entitled to withdraw 
from the Loan Account the amount applied for and that the amount to be withdrawn from the 
Loan Account is to be used only for the purposes specified in this Loan Agreement.



13
Schedule 1

Section 4.07. Payment by ADB. Payment by ADB of amounts 
which the Borrower is entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account shall be made to or on the 
order of the Borrower.

ARTICLE V

Particular Covenants

Section 5.01. Cooperation and Information. (a) ADB and 
the Borrower shall cooperate fully to ensure that the purposes of the Loan will be 
accomplished. To that end, ADB and the Borrower shall:

(i) from time to time, at the request of any one of them, exchange 
views with regard to any matters relating to the progress of the 
Project, the purposes of the Loan or the maintenance of the 
service thereof, the performance of their respective obligations 
under this Loan Agreement, [the performance by the Project 
Executing Agency of its obligations,] and furnish to the other 
party all such related information as it shall reasonably request; 
and

(ii) promptly inform each other of any condition which interferes 
with, or threatens to interfere with, the matters referred to in 
paragraph (a)(i) of this Section.

(b) The Borrower shall afford all reasonable opportunity for ADB's 
representatives to visit any part of its territory for purposes related to the Loan.

Section 5.02. Negative Pledge. (a) If the Borrower shall 
create or permit the creation of any lien on any of its assets as security for any foreign currency 
debt, the Borrower undertakes to expressly provide that such lien will ipso facto equally and 
ratably secure the payment of the principal of, and service charge on, the Loan. If any statutory 
lien shall be created on any assets of the Borrower (as hereinafter defined), as security for any 
foreign currency debt, the Borrower shall grant to ADB an equivalent lien satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this Section shall not apply to (i) any 
lien created on property, at the time of purchase thereof, solely as security for payment of the 
purchase price of such property; or (ii) any lien arising in the ordinary course of banking 
transactions and securing a debt maturing not more than one year after its date.

(c) The term “assets of the Borrower" as used in paragraph (a) of this 
Section includes assets of any political subdivision or any agency of the Borrower and assets 
of any agency of such political subdivision, and assets of any entity owned or controlled by, or 
operating for the account or benefit of, the Borrower or any such political subdivision or agency, 
including any other institution performing the functions of a central bank for the Borrower.



14
Schedule 1

Section 5.03. Insurance. (a) The Borrower shall take out 
and maintain with responsible insurers, or make other arrangements satisfactory to ADB for, 
insurance against such risks and in such amounts as shall be consistent with sound practice. 
The Borrower shall be deemed to have opted for self-insurance in the absence of any specific 
insurance for the Project.

(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower undertakes 
to insure, or cause to be insured, the goods to be imported for the Project and to be financed 
out of the proceeds of the Loan against hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and 
delivery thereof to the place of use or installation, and for such insurance any indemnity shall 
be payable in a currency freely usable to replace or repair such goods.

Sec tion 5.04. Records, Financial Statements and Audits.
The Borrower shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records and financial statements 
adequate to Identify the goods, services and other items of expenditure financed under the 
Project; to record the progress of the Project (including the cost thereof and); to reflect, in 
accordance with consistently maintained sound financial reporting principles, the operations 
and financial condition of the Project; and to have the financial statements audited. Related 
requirements shall be specified in the Loan Agreement.

Section 5.05. Reports. (a) The Borrower shall furnish, or 
cause to be furnished, to ADB all such reports as ADB shall reasonably request concerning (i) 
the Loan, and the expenditure of the proceeds and maintenance of the service thereof; (ii) the 
goods, services and other items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan; (iii) 
the Project and the Project Executing Agency; (iv) the administration, operations and financial 
condition of the Borrower; and (v) any other matters relating to the purposes of the Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall promptly inform ADB of any condition which 
interferes with, or threatens to interfere with, the progress of the Project, the performance of 
their respective obligations under the Loan Agreement, the accomplishment of the purposes 
of the Loan, or the maintenance of the service thereof; and the Borrower shall promptly inform 
ADB in advance of any proposed changes in the ownership or control of the Borrower or its 
assets, or any transaction or arrangement which will have or is likely to have such effect.

(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB periodic reports on the execution of the Project, on the accomplishment of the 
targets and actions agreed between ADB and the Borrower, and on the operation and 
management of the Project facilities. Such reports shall be submitted in such form and in such 
detail and within such a period as ADB shall reasonably request, and shall indicate, among 
other things, progress made and problems encountered during the period under review, steps 
taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems, and proposed program of activities 
and expected progress during the following period.

(d) Promptly after completion of the Project, but in any event not later than 
three months thereafter or such later date as may be agreed for this purpose between the 
Borrower and ADB, the Borrower shall prepare and furnish to ADB a report, in such form and 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request, on the execution and initial operation of the 
Project, including its cost, the performance by the Borrower of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement and the accomplishment of the purposes of the Loan.



15
Schedule 1

Section 5.06. Counterpart Obligations and Land Acquisition.
The Borrower shall make available, promptly as and when needed, the funds, facilities, 
services, land, and other resources as shall be necessary or required, in addition to the 
proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project and for the operation and maintenance 
of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall furnish to ADB, promptly at its request, evidence 
satisfactory to ADB that such funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources are available 
for purposes related to the Project.

Section 5.07, Work Schedules, Plans and Design Standards. 
The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance with plans, design 
standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods acceptable to the 
Borrower and ADB, as applicable. When required by ADB, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause 
to be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made therein, 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

Section 5.08. General Undertakings. (a) The Borrower 
shall cause the Project to be carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity 
with sound financial, business and development practices. The Borrower shall in collaboration 
with ADB ensure that the Project adheres to ADB policies on anticorruption, core labor 
standards, environmental and social safeguards, gender, procurement and consulting 
services, disbursement and such other policy specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its departments and 
agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities 
are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative policies and 
procedures.

Section 5. 09. Contractors and Consultants. In the carrying 
out of the Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and 
contractors, acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, to be employed to an extent and upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

Section 5.10. Maintenance. The Borrower shall ensure that 
any facilities relevant to the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with 
sound operational and maintenance practices. The Borrower shall promptly as needed, make 
or cause to be made all necessary repairs and renewals thereof.

ARTICLE VI

Exemption from Taxation

Section 6. 01. Exemption from Taxation. The Borrower shall 
ensure that:

(a) the principal of, and service charge and other charges (including the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan are exempt from, and 



16
Schedule 1

are paid without deduction for, any taxes levied by, or in the territory of, 
the Borrower; and

(b) this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement are exempt from any 
taxes levied by, or in the territory of, the Borrower on or in connection 
with the execution, delivery or registration thereof.

ARTICLE VII

Suspension; Cancellation; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 7.01. Suspension by ADB. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred at any time after the date of this Loan Agreement and be continuing, 
ADB may by notice to the Borrower suspend in whole or in part the right of the Borrower to 
make withdrawals from the Loan Account:

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to make payment (notwithstanding the 
fact that such payment may have been made by any third party) of 
principal, service charge or any other charge (including the Multilateral 
Development Bank Fee) required (i) under the Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB; or 
(iii) in consequence of any guarantee or other financial obligation of any 
kind extended by ADB to any third party with the agreement of the 
Borrower.

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any other of its obligations 
under this Loan Agreement

(c) The Project Executing Agency shall have failed to perform any of its 
obligations under the Project Agreement.

(d) ADB shall have suspended in whole or in part the right of the Borrower 
to make withdrawals under any other loan agreement with ADB because 
of a failure by the Borrower to perform any of its obligations under such 
loan agreement or any related guarantee agreement with ADB.

(e) A situation shall have arisen or developed which in the reasonable 
opinion of ADB will or may make it improbable that (i) the Project can be 
successfully carried out; or (ii) the Borrower or the Project Executing 
Agency will be able to perform any of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement.

(f) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out shall have 
been suspended from membership in, or ceased to be a member of, 
ADB, or shall have delivered a notice to withdraw from ADB.



17
Schedule 1

(g) A representation made by the Borrower in or pursuant to this Loan 
Agreement, or any statement furnished in connection therewith and 
intended to be relied upon by ADB in making the Loan, shall have been 
incorrect in any material respect

(h) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Project Executing Agency, the 
alienation or transfer of any of its aspects other than in the normal 
course of business, or for the suspension of its operations.

(i) The Borrower shall have been unable to pay its debts as they mature or 
any action or proceeding shall have been taken by the Borrower or by 
others whereby any of the assets of the Borrower shall or may be 
distributed among its creditors.

(j) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out or any 
other authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(k) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(I) ADB shall have determined, with respect to any contract to be financed 
in full or in part out of the proceeds of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, 
coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, were engaged in 
by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during 
the procurement of goods and services, consultants’ selection or the 
execution of a contract, without the Borrower having taken timely and 
appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy the situation; or ADB 
shall have determined that the procurement of any goods or services to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the 
relevant procedure set out in this Loan Agreement.

(m) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred.

The right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall 
continue to be suspended in whole or in part, as the case may be, until the event which gave 
rise to such suspension shall have, in the reasonable opinion of ADB, ceased to exist or until 
ADB shall have notified the Borrower that the right to make withdrawals has been restored in 
whole or in part, whichever is the earlier.

Section 7.02. Cancellation by ADB. If (a) the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall have been suspended with respect 
to any amount of the Loan for a continuous period of 30 days; (b) at any time ADB determines, 
after consultation with the Borrower, that any amount of the Loan will not be required for the 



18
Schedule 1

purposes of the Project; (c) by the date specified in this Loan Agreement as the Loan Closing 
Date, an amount of the Loan shall remain unwithdrawn from the Loan Account; (d) at any time 
ADB determines, with respect to any contract to be financed in full or in partout of the proceeds 
of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, 
were engaged in by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during the 
procurement of goods, works, services, consultants’ selection or the execution of a contract, 
without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy 
the situation; or (e) at any time, ADB determines that the procurement of any goods or services 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the relevant procedure set 
out in this Loan Agreement, ADB may by notice to the Borrower terminate the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals with respect to such amount Upon the giving of such notice, 
such amount of the Loan shall be cancelled.

Section 7.03. Cancellation by the Borrower. After consultation 
with ADB, the Borrower may by notice to ADB cancel any amount of the Loan which the 
Borrower shall not have withdrawn prior to the giving of such notice.

Section 7.04. Amounts Subject to Commitment Letters.
No suspension or cancellation shall apply to amounts subject to any commitment letter issued 
by ADB pursuant to Section 4.02 except as expressly provided in such commitment letter.

Section 7.05. Application of Cancellation. Except as ADB and 
the Borrower shall otherwise agree, any cancellation shall be applied pro rata to the remaining 
maturities of the principal amount of the Loan which shall mature after the date of such 
cancellation.

Section 7.06, Effectiveness of Provisions After Suspension or 
Cancellation. Notwithstanding any cancellation or suspension, all the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect except as specifically provided in this 
Article.

Section 7.07. Acceleration of Maturity. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, specified below, then at any 
subsequent time during the continuance thereof ADB may by notice to the Borrower declare 
the principal of the Loan then outstanding, together with all accrued service charge thereon, to 
be due and payable immediately, and upon any such declaration such principal and service 
charge shall become due and payable immediately:

(a) Any event specified in Section 7.01(a) shall have occurred and 
continued for a period of 30 days.

(b) Any event specified in Section 7.01(b) and Section 7.01(c) shall have 
occurred and continued for a period of 60 days after notice thereof shall 
have been given by ADB to the Borrower.

(c) Any event specified in Section 7.01(g), Section 7.01(h), Section 7.01 (i), 
and Section 7.01 (j) shall have occurred.



19
Schedule 1

(d) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, 
specified in this Loan Agreement

ARTICLE VIII

Effectiveness; Termination

Section 8.01. Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness.
The Loan Agreement shall not become effective until evidence satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been furnished to ADB that:

(a) the execution and delivery of this Loan Agreement on behalf of the 
Borrower have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary 
corporate and governmental action;

(b) the execution and delivery of the Project Agreement on behalf of the 
Project Executing Agency have been duly authorized or ratified by all 
necessary corporate and governmental action;

(c) the condition of the Borrower, as represented to ADB at the date of the 
Loan Agreement, has undergone no material adverse change between 
such date and the date agreed upon between the Borrower and ADB for 
the purposes of this Section, provided that ADB shall have requested 
such evidence; and

(d) all other events specified in this Loan Agreement as additional 
conditions to its effectiveness have occurred.

Sec tion 8.02. Legal Opinions. As part of the evidence to be 
furnished pursuant to Section 8.01, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB an opinion or opinions satisfactory to ADB of counsel acceptable to ADB showing:

(a) on behalf of the Borrower, that this Loan Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with 
its terms;

(b) on behalf of the Project Executing Agency, that the Project Agreement 
has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on 
behalf of, the Project Executing Agency and is legally binding upon the 
Project Executing Agency in accordance with its terms; and

(c) such other matters as shall be specified in this Loan Agreement.

Section 8.03. Effective Date. (a) Except as ADB and the
Borrower shall otherwise agree, this Loan Agreement shall come into force and effect on the 



20
Schedule 1

date of ADB’s notice to the Borrower notice of its acceptance of the evidence required by 
Section 8.01.

(b) If, before the Effective Date, any event shall have occurred which would 
have entitled ADB to suspend the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan 
Account if this Loan Agreement had been effective, ADB may postpone the dispatch of the 
notice referred to in paragraph (a) of this Section until such event shall have ceased to exist.

Section 8.04. Termination for Failure to Become Effective.
If this Loan Agreement shall not have come into force and effect by the date specified in this 
Loan Agreement for the purposes of this Section, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of 
the parties thereunder shall terminate, unless ADB, after consideration of the reasons for the 
delay, shall establish a later date for the purposes of this Section. ADB shall promptly notify 
the Borrower of such later date.

Section 8.05. Termination on Full Payment. If and when the 
entire principal amount of this Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and all service charges 
which shall have accrued on the Loan and all other charges (including the Management Fee) 
on the Loan shall have been paid, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of the parties 
thereunder shall forthwith terminate.

ARTICLE IX

Enforceability; Failure to Exercise Rights; Arbitration

Section 9.01. Enforceability. (a) The rights and obligations 
of ADB and the Borrower under this Loan Agreement shall be valid and enforceable in 
accordance with their terms and, where either the Borrower is a member, notwithstanding the 
law of any state or political or administrative subdivision thereof, to the contrary.

(b) Neither ADB nor the Borrower shall be entitled in any proceeding under 
this Article to assert any claim that any provision of this Loan Agreement is invalid or 
unenforceable because of any provision of the Articles of Agreement Establishing the Asian 
Development Bank or for any other reason.

Section 9.02. Failure to Exercise Rights. No delay in 
exercising, or omission to exercise, any right, power or remedy accruing to either party under 
this Loan Agreement upon any default shall impair any such right, power or remedy, or be 
construed to be a waiver thereof or an acquiescence in any such default; nor shall the action 
of such party in respect of any default, or any acquiescence in any default, affect or impair any 
right, power or remedy of such party in respect of any other or subsequent default.

Section 9.03. Arbitration. (a) Any controversy between the 
parties to this Loan Agreement and any claim by any such party against any other such party 
arising under this Loan Agreement which shall not be settled by agreement of the parties shall 
be submitted to arbitration by an Arbitral Tribunal as hereinafter provided.



21
Schedule 1

(b) The parties to such arbitration shall be ADB, on the one side, and the 
Borrower on the other side.

(c) The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators appointed as 
follows: one arbitrator shall be appointed by ADB; a second arbitrator shall be appointed by 
the Borrower; and the third arbitrator (hereinafter sometimes called the Presiding Arbitrator) 
shall be appointed by agreement of the parties or, if they shall not agree, by the President of 
the International Court of Justice or, failing appointment by him, by the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. If either side shall fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Presiding Arbitrator shall 
appoint such arbitrator. In case any arbitrator appointed in accordance with this Section shall 
resign, die or become unable to act, a successor arbitrator shall be appointed in the same 
manner as herein prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and such successor 
shall have all the powers and duties of such original arbitrator.

(d) An arbitration proceeding may be instituted under this Section upon 
notice by the party instituting such proceeding to the other party or parties. Such notice shall 
contain a statement setting forth the nature of the controversy or claim to be submitted to 
arbitration, the nature of the relief sought and the name of the arbitrator appointed by the party 
instituting such proceeding. Within 30 days after the giving of such notice, the other party or 
parties shall notify the party instituting the proceeding of the name of the arbitrator appointed 
by such other party or parties.

(e) If within 60 days after the giving of the notice instituting the arbitration 
proceeding the parties shall not have agreed upon a Presiding Arbitrator, any party may 
request the appointment of a Presiding Arbitrator as provided in paragraph (c) of this Section.

(f) The Arbitral Tribunal shall convene at such time and place as shall be 
fixed by the Presiding Arbitrator. Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal shall determine where and 
when it shall sit

(g) The law to be applied by the Arbitral Tribunal shall be public international 
law, the sources of which shall be taken for these purposes to include:

(i) any relevant treaty obligations that are binding reciprocally on 
the parties;

(ii) the provisions of any international conventions and treaties 
(whether or not binding directly as such on the parties) generally 
recognized as having codified or ripened into binding rules of 
customary law applicable to states and international institutions, 
as appropriate;

(iii) other forms of international custom, including the practice of 
states and international institutions of such generality, 
consistency and duration as to create legal obligations; and

(iv) applicable general principles of law.



22
Schedule 1

(h) Subject to the provisions of this Section and except as the parties shall
otherwise agree, the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide all questions relating to its competence and 
shall determine its procedure. All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be by majority vote.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal shall afford to all parties a fair hearing and shall
render its award in writing. Such award may be rendered by default. An award signed by a 
majority of the Arbitral Tribunal shall constitute the award of such Arbitral Tribunal. A signed 
counterpart of the award shall be transmitted to each party. Any such award rendered in 
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be final and binding upon the parties to 
this Loan Agreement. Each party shall abide by and comply with any such award rendered by 
the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

0) The parties shall fix the amount of the remuneration of the arbitrators
and such other persons as shall be required for the conduct of the arbitration proceedings. If 
the parties shall not agree on such amount before the Arbitral Tribunal shall convene, the 
Arbitral Tribunal shall fix such amount as shall be reasonable under the circumstances. Each 
party shall defray its own expenses in the arbitration proceedings. The costs of the Arbitral 
Tribunal shall be divided between and borne equally by ADB on the one side, and the Borrower 
on the other side. The Arbitral Tribunal shall determine any question concerning the division 
of the costs of the Arbitral Tribunal or the procedure for payment of such costs.

(k) The provisions for arbitration set forth in this Section shall be in lieu of
any other procedure for the settlement of controversies between the parties to this Loan 
Agreement any claim by either party against the other such party arising thereunder.

(I) If within 30 days after the counterparts of the award have been delivered
to the parties the award shall not be complied with, any party may enter judgment upon, or 
institute a proceeding to enforce, the award in any court of competent jurisdiction against any 
other party, and may enforce such judgment by execution or may pursue any other appropriate 
remedy against such other party for the enforcement of the award and the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section shall not authorize any entry of 
judgment or enforcement of the award against any party that is a member except as such 
procedure may be available otherwise than by reason of the provisions of this Section.

(m) Service of any notice or process in connection with any proceeding
under this Section or (to the extent that such remedy shall be available) in connection with any 
proceeding to enforce any award rendered pursuant to this Section may be made in the 
manner provided in Section 9.01. The parties to this Loan Agreement waive any and all other 
requirements for the service of any such notice or process.

ARTICLE X

Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 10.01. Notices and Requests. Any notice or request 
required or permitted to be given or made under this Loan Agreement; and any other 
agreement between any of the parties contemplated by this Loan Agreement shall be in writing.



23
Schedule 1

Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.03, such notice or request shall be deemed to have 
been duly given or made when it shall be delivered by hand or by mail, facsimile or electronic 
mail to the party to which it is required or permitted to be given or made at such party's address 
specified in this Loan Agreement or at such other address as such party shall have designated 
by notice to the party giving such notice or making such request.

Section 10.02. Authority to Take Action. Any action required or 
permitted to be taken, and any documents required or permitted to be executed, under this 
Loan Agreement, on behalf of the Borrower, as the case may be, may be taken or executed 
by the representative of the Borrower designated in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section or any person thereunto authorized in writing by such representative. Any 
modification of the provisions of this Loan may be agreed to on behalf of the Borrower, by 
written instrument executed on behalf of the Borrower by the representative so designated or 
any person authorized in writing by such representative; provided that, in the opinion of such 
representative or other person, such modification is reasonable in the circumstances and will 
not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement. ADB 
may accept the execution by such representative or other person of any such instrument as 
conclusive evidence that in the opinion of such representative or other person any modification 
of the provisions of this Loan Agreement effected by such instrument is reasonable in the 
circumstances and will not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower thereunder.

Section 10.03. Evidence of Authority. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person or persons who will, on behalf 
of the Borrower, take any action or execute any documents required or permitted to be taken 
or executed by the Borrower under this Loan Agreement, and the authenticated specimen 
signature of each such person.

Section 10.04. Withholding of Payments to Member on Shares, 
(a) If the member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out ceases to be a member 
of ADB, any amount due to the member for its shares repurchased by ADB shall be withheld 
so long as the member, its centra! bank or any of its agencies, or political or administrative 
subdivision remain liable to ADB under the Loan Agreement, or under any other loan 
agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB, and such amount may, at the option of ADB, 
be applied on any such liability as its matures.

(b) In the event of a distribution of the assets of ADB, the member in whose
territory the Project is to be carried out shall not be entitled to receive its share in such 
distribution until it has settled all of its obligations to ADB including its obligations under the 
Loan Agreement, or under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB.

Section 10.05. Execution in Counterparts. The Loan
Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original.


26

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table").

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Service Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Service Charge” is for financing the service
charge on the Loan, during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such service charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook and detailed arrangements agreed upon 
between ADB and the Borrower.



27
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. The Loan proceeds shall not be used to finance any commitments or costs
incurred prior to the Effective Date unless approved by GCF in advance in writing.



28
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for GCF Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works - Irrigation and Roads 9,963,900 12.7% of total expenditure claimed

2 Service Charge 36,100 100% of amount due

TOTAL 10,000,000



29

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

1. The Borrower acknowledges and agrees that the Borrower has no right of
action, whether in contract, tort or under statute to the extent permitted by law, against GCF in 
respect of the ADB Green Climate Fund, the Project or any loss or damage arising out of ADB’s 
acts or omissions, or the acts of omissions of its officers, employees, agents or consultants 
under, or in connection with, this Loan Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall fully cooperate with ADB regarding any reviews, ad hoc
checks, verifications or evaluations by GCF.

3. In addition to the audit requirement under Section 4.02 of this Loan Agreement,
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that ADB has the right to conduct financial audits of 
the Project, by an external auditor selected by ADB, if GCF has a concern as to the manner in 
which the Grant proceeds have been used; and shall fully cooperate with such audit. The 
Borrower shall bear the reasonable cost of such audit, if the audit finds that the Loan proceeds 
have not been used according to this Loan Agreement

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all necessary and applicable licenses, approvals
and consents, including those relating to intellectual property, to implement and carry out the 
Project and operate the Project facilities are valid for the duration of the Project.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities related to the Project are
implemented in compliance with the laws of the Borrower and other laws applicable to it, 
including but not limited to intellectual property law, if and to the extent any such laws may be 
applicable to it.

6, The Borrower shall endeavor to acknowledge the visual identity of GCF in
funding the Project (e.g., through use of the GCF logo, in accordance with GCF’s branding 
guidelines, and appropriate references in reports, publications, information given to 
beneficiaries and news media, related publicity materials and any other forms of public 
information and the displaying of the GCF logo on the site of any infrastructure works). Any 
branding activities in support of GCF shall comply with GCF’s branding guidelines and be 
reviewed by the GCF Secretariat.























































LOAN NUMBER 3668-BHU(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Phuentsholing Township Development Project)

between

KINGDOM OF BHUTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 3 JULY 2018

BHU 50165



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 3 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by Druk Holdings and Investments
Limited (“DHI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to DHI the proceeds of 
the loan provided for herein and the grant provided for the Grant Agreement (as hereinafter 
defined) (together, the “Financings") upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith (“Grant Agreement”), ADB
has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred 
sixty thousand Dollars ($24,260,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreements of even date herewith between ADB and each of DHI and Construction 
Development Corporation Limited ("CDCL”);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement" means the project agreements of even date 
herewith between ADB and each of DHI and CDCL, as each such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the terms "DHI” and “CDCL”.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) "Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings aS described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 
to this Loan Agreement;

(c) "Environmental Impact Assessment” or “EIA” means the environmental 
impact assessment for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
theSPS;

(f) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Ngultrum” means the Borrower’s currency;

(h) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(i) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
24 July 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to. time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(j) “Project Administration Manual” or “PAM" means the Project’s 
administration manual for the Project dated 24 July 2017 and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the 
Borrower and ADB;

(k) “Project Advisory Committee” or "PAC” means the Project's advisory 
committee chaired by DHI’s Chief Executive Officer and comprising 
representatives as stated in the PAM;

(I) “Project Implementation Unit" or “PIU" means the Project 
implementation unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;



3

(m) “Project Management Unit” or “PMU” means the Project management 
unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;

(n) "Safeguard Policy Statement" or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(o) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventive actions;

(p) “Strategic Action Plan” or “SAP" means the strategic action plan for 
sustainable township management in form and substance acceptable 
to ADB referred to in paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(q) “Subsidiary Financing Agreement” means the agreement referred to in 
Section 3.01 of this Loan Agreement and Section 3.01 of the Grant 
Agreement;

(r) “Subsidiary Loan" means the loan from the Borrower to CDCL under 
the Subsidiary Financing Agreement; and

. (s) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings, including services such as drilling or 
mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 
single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-eight million seven hundred forty thousand 
Dollars ($28,740,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24. years, and 
additionally, a grace period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.



4

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 1 February and 1 August in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan in Ngultrum to DHI under a Subsidiary Financing Agreement upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB (and DHI shall provide same to CDCL). Except as ADB shall otherwise 
agree, the terms for relending the proceeds of the Loan shall include interest at the rate of 
1% per annum during the grace period and 2.55% per annum thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time, and a term of 
32 years including a grace period of 8 years. The Borrower shall bear the risk associated 
with exchange mismatch between the Loan and the Subsidiary Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Works 
and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Works and Consulting Services which are supplied from such member 
countries of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to 
time as eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable DHI and CDCL to perform their respective obligations under 
the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with 
the performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Financing Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement 
shall be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under 
the Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower or DHI shall have failed to perform any of their respective 
obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following are specified as additional events for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement shall have been fulfilled; and .

(b) the Subsidiary Financing Agreement, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and DHI and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Subsidiary Financing Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of each of the Borrower and 
DHI and is legally binding upon each of them in accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Royal Government of Bhutan
Thimphu, Bhutan



7

Facsimile Number:

+975 2 330-113

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2293.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

LYONPO NAMGAY DORJI 
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

KANOKPAN LAO-ARAYA 
Country Director 

Bhutan Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to sustainably increase the urban area of
Phuentsholing.

2. The Project shall comprise (i) development of climate and flood resilient land;
(ii) construction of municipal infrastructure; and (iii) installation of sustainable township 
management systems.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided in connection with the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2025.



Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to. “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(USD) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 10,360,000 57% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 7,420,000 98% of total expenditure claimed

3 Unallocated 10,960,000

TOTAL 28,740,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to and
governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. , All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Works

4. Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods set forth
below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) Force Account; and

(c) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. CDCL shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) The Borrower’s National Environment Commission has granted the 
final approval of the EIA; and

(b) CDCL has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contract.

Consulting Services

6. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

7. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for independent
environmental monitoring expert, urban management advisor and investment promotion 



15
Schedule 4

advisor in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Works procured (including without
limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or 
incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in subparagraph (a) of this 
paragraph.

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL employ sufficient staff for the
PMU and PIU for the duration of the Project, with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, and 
environmental and social safeguards implementation. The PMU Project Director and PIU 
Project Director shall hold the position not less than the rank of Class 1 engineer, or 
equivalent, Officers, unless otherwise acceptable to.ADB.

3. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) ensure that the majority of counterpart
staff assigned to the PMU and PIU are assigned to the Project on a full-time basis; and (b) 
undertake best efforts to ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of 
time, and that staff replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The 
Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall provide ADB reasonable opportunity to comment on any 
proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMU and PIU, including the Project 
Director for the PMU and the Project Directors for PIU.

4. The Borrower shall remain fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that
all its ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project give 
their full cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project. Specifically, the 
Borrower shall cause DHI and CDCL to give full, timely and efficient cooperation in obtaining 
any licenses, permits or approvals required in connection with infrastructure work. The 
Borrower shall also ensure that Bhutan Power Corporation and Bhutan Telecom will provide 
the necessary connections in the developed areas.

Strategic Action Plan

5. Within 36 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower though DHI shall
develop and finalize, and ensure approval by the relevant government agency and 
implementation of, the SAP, which shall include, among other matters, (i) the required legal, 
policy and operational frameworks for operation of the new township that will establish 
institutional arrangements for sustainable township management, including the required 
approval process, and the allocation of roles and responsibilities between the municipality 
and CDCL; (ii) the allocation of sufficient municipal and CDCL human resources; (iii) a plan 
on the development of the surrounding area adjacent to the newly developed township, 
including plans for raising grounds level for the protection for surface flooding; and (tv) a time 
bound plan for the operation and maintenance of the newly developed township.



17
Schedule 5

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Recipient relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EIA and the EMP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract.

8. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any involuntary
resettlement impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any indigenous
peoples’ impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any such 
impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with 
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set 
forth above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the principles of gender equality aimed at
increasing Project benefits, and impact on women in the Project area are followed during 
implementation of the Project. These include (a) equal pay to men and women for work of 
equal value; (b) enabling working conditions for women workers; and (c) taking necessary 



18
Schedule 5

actions to encourage women living in the Project area to participate in the design and 
implementation of Project activities.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available, or cause DHI and CDCL to make
available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure, that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts or affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that arise during construction, 
implementation or operation of the Project that were not considered in 
the EIA and the EMP;

(d) ■ adequately record the condition, of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall to do the following:

(a) submit bi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the EIA and the EMP, promptly inform ADB 
of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of 
the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than six months of the Effective Date, engage qualified and 
experienced external experts or qualified NGO[sj under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 



19
Schedule 5

information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Financings are used to
finance any activity included in the list of' prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower through DHI will provide all counterpart funds, land and facilities
required for timely and effective implementation of the Project, including without limitation, 
any funds required to (a) to meet any shortfall between cost and revenues for the operation 
and maintenance of the facilities developed under the Project, (b) to mitigate any unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts, and (c) to meet additional costs arising from design 
changes, price escalation in construction costs and/or unforeseen circumstances. The 
Borrower will make the resources thus required available on an annual basis for each fiscal 
year. In addition to the foregoing, the. Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL have 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Corruption

17. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to 
investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

Operation and Maintenance

19. The Borrower shall develop and implement a program for regular and periodic
maintenance of the facilities to be financed by the Project in accordance with international 
best practices acceptable to ADB, and make adequate resources available, through 
budgetary allocations or otherwise, for this purpose.



20
Schedule 5

Exemption of Import Duties

20. The Borrower shall exempt the cost of Works contracts from otherwise
applicable customs duties.





