























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA21451

Project Name Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Lebanon
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (10%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (90%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147854
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Council for Development and Reconstruction
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

22-Jul-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lebanon is an upper-middle-income country, with a population of 4.5 million people and a gross 
domestic product (GDP) of US$9,930 per capita in 2013.  The country is highly urbanized, with 
more than 85 percent of its population living in cities.  It has an open economy in which services 
and trade account for 60 percent of GDP and 73 percent of jobs.  The economy is driven by a 
dynamic private sector and is dependent on financial flows from Arab Gulf countries. The country 
is well-known for the high quality of its education system, ranking 13th out of 122 countries.   
 
The Lebanese economy expanded at a moderate pace (3.6 percent annually) during the past five 
decades. However, political instability, terrorism activities and the spillovers from regional conflicts 
made this growth erratic and unstable. Moreover, the ongoing conflict in Syria has resulted in a 
large inflow of refugees (estimated at 1.4 million  in January 2015), accounting for 30 percent of 
the country’s population. This complex political, social, and security environment put additional 
strain on the economy and public services. In fact, the GDP growth decreased from 8 percent in 
2010 to just 0.9 percent in 2013.   
 
Poverty affects nearly 28 percent of the Lebanese population (living on US$4 per day) and extreme 
poverty touches 8 percent (living on US$2.4 per day).  The highest concentration of poor is found 
in the North, followed by the South and the Beqaa. In addition, most refugees are concentrated in 
the already impoverished area of the Beqaa (35 percent) and North Lebanon (35 percent). The 
Syrian crisis is expected to have increased poverty among 170,000 Lebanese by 2014, with the 
existing poor becoming even poorer.  In light of these challenges, job creation and social protection 
are among the main development priorities in the country.  
 
Lebanon made considerable progress in shaping the legal and institutional framework and restoring 
infrastructure after the civil war (1975-89) and the more recent war with Israel (2006). However, 
the country is still at an early stage of transition to environmental sustainability. The cost of 
environmental degradation in Lebanon has been estimated at 3.2 percent of the country’s GDP in 
2005.  Water pollution stands out as the country’s major environmental problem, costing more than 
1 percent of the GDP per year. This accounts for the damages caused by the discharge of untreated 
sewage, industrial effluent, and agricultural runoff into valleys, rivers, and the Mediterranean Sea.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
THE LITANI RIVER AND LAKE QARAOUN 
 
The Litani River is the principal artery of Lebanon. Rising from the Olleiq springs close to the city 
of Baalbeck, it flows 170 km through the Beqaa valley and the Qaraoun Lake, before it reaches the 
Mediterranean Sea. The upper Litani River catchment extends over an area of 1,500 km2 (10 
percent of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99 towns distributed into 4 administrative districts: 
Baalbeck, Zahlé, West Beqaa, and Rachayya. The major water structure along the Litani River is 
the Qaraoun Dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or resevoir).  
 
POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
Large stretches of the Litani River and of the Qaraoun Lake are polluted due to four sources of 
pollution.   
• Municipal wastewater. In 2013, the volume of wastewater generated in the Beqaa was 
estimated at 63 million m3 with an annual load of 21,300 tons of Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD). Most wastewater is currently discharged untreated into the Litani River.  
• Industrial wastewater. This is estimated at about 4 million m3 in the Beqaa. There are 
factories producing effluents that are conveyed to surface water through nearby tributaries. Out of 
294 industrial establishments in the region, 120 are large-scale industries located within 400 m of 
the Litani River, its tributaries, or the Qaraoun Lake. 
• Municipal solid waste. Waste generated in the upper catchment of the Qaraoun Lake is 
estimated at 650 tons per day. Because of the lack of sanitary landfills, most garbage is dumped in 
open dumps and in the Litani River along the Qaraoun catchment. Water pollution comes from 
littering and surface water runoff of solid waste. This is acute when the waste site is close to surface 
water streams. The main dump sites exerting pressure on the Litani River are Temnin El Tahta, 
Saadnayel old dump, Qabb Elias, Barr Elias, Hawch El Harimi, El Khiyara, Ghazzé, and Jeb 
Jennine.  
• Agriculture. The largest use of land in the Litani River basin is for agriculture. In 2010, 
irrigated agriculture in the Beqaa covered about 54,000 ha, primarily concentrated in three districts: 
Baalbeck (24,000 ha); Zahlé (16,000 ha); and West Beqaa (10,000 ha). Vegetables, fruit trees, and 
industrial crops are the main irrigated crops in these areas.  Agricultural water pollution originates 



mainly from irrigation overflows and seepage. A field survey conducted in 2010  concluded that 
farmers in Beqaa are over-fertilizing their crops and many pesticides are being applied at almost 
twice the recommended rates. As a result, agricultural chemicals and non-degradable pesticides end 
up in waterways with irrigation overflows.  
 
BUSINESS PLAN TO COMBAT POLLUTION IN LAKE QARAOUN   
 
The Ministry of Environment (MoE) commissioned in 2010 a Business Plan to help the government 
of Lebanon (GoL) identify the major sources of pollution in the Qaraoun Lake and to recommend 
appropriate solutions to mitigate them (detailed information is provided in annex 2). The Business 
Plan was completed in 2011 and endorsed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers in 2012. 
The plan includes detailed prioritized investments for each polluting sector, with a financing 
requirement estimated at about US$255 million. In February 2013, the GoL requested World Bank 
assistance to fund priority activities of the Business Plan. 
 
The Business Plan identifies the largest two pressures as agriculture and municipal wastewater. 
Action on agriculture sources of pollution is needed to improve the overall surface water while 
continuing to contribute to the agriculture sector, a key sector, in the Bekaa. On municipal 
wastewater priority actions identified relate to continue to increase the volume of wastewater 
treated in Zahle, Iaat, Temninm El Tahta, Anjar, Jeb Jannine where the population and economic 
activity are most dense. 
 
INSITUTIONAL CONTEXT  
 
The Ministry of Environment. The MoE is empowered to study, propose, and implement national 
environmental policies. It is considered the only regulatory environmental agency in the country. 
The MoE is primarily responsible for environmental policy planning; setting laws, regulations, and 
environmental standards; imposing the application of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
on development projects; monitoring environmental quality; and identifying permitting conditions 
for new industry, agriculture, quarrying, and mining. In relation to the proposed project, the MoE is 
responsible for regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
 
The Ministry of Energy and Water (MoEW) is responsible for the strategic planning and 
management of water resources. Prior to 2000, there were 21 regional water utilities. Water Law 
221 of year 2000 and its amendments merged them into four Water and Wastewater Establishments 
and one pre-existing river authority: North Lebanon, Beirut/Mount Lebanon, Beqaa, South 
Lebanon, and the Litani River Authority (LRA). This was a major step towards consolidating the 
responsibility of these establishmen ts and clarifying their mandate as public agencies empowering 
them to better manage water and wastewater services. The ultimate role of the water establishment 
is to have full administrative and financial autonomy over the service provision of water and 
wastewater services and irrigation. The Beqaa Water and Wastewater Establishment (BWE) is the 
one responsible for the project area. The BWE inherited distribution networks in poor conditions, 
with very high levels of illegal connections and very low collection rates from those legally 
connected. LRA is a public establishment under the MoEW is primarily responsible to (a) exploit 
hydro electrical power plants; (b) construct irrigation scheme, (c) conduct preliminary studies and 
construct dams, and (d) monitor the quality of the Litani River. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The MoA has overall responsibility for the development of the 



agriculture sector. While the MoEW has the overall mandate for water resources, including 
irrigation, the MoA has the prime responsibility for irrigation at the farm level. Sustainable 
management and conservation of natural resources is considered an important pillar of the MoA’s 
strategy for 2010�2014. The strategy gives high priority to enhancing the efficient use of irrigation, 
expanding the use of treated wastewater for irrigation, and reducing water pollution from 
agricultural chemicals. The MoA is also responsible for the regulation of pesticide and fertilizer 
imports, marketing, and use, and it has launched a series of measures to enhance enforcement of 
these regulations and promote awareness about the proper use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
 
The Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR). The CDR, established through Decree 
no.5 of 1977 is responsible for preparing national development plans, implementing infrastructure 
project, and mobilizing external financing to lead the reconstruction and development of the 
country. The CDR is accountable to the Council of Ministers.  
 
The Qaraoun Committee. In June 2012, a committee was established  to study the pollution 
problems of the Litani River and Qaraoun Lake and to propose remedial measures. The committee 
included representation of all key stakeholders and was active in the preparation and review of the 
Business Plan for Combating Pollution of the Qaraoun Lake. Once the Business Plan and 
subsequent roadmap were agreed upon, the study committee was dissolved. In May 2014, the 
Qaraoun Committee was established  to follow up on the implementation of the roadmap to combat 
pollution in Lake Qaraoun. The committee includes 16 members representing key stakeholders and 
has assigned the secretariat responsibility to the Litani River Authority.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The development objectives of the project are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage 
discharged into the Litani river and to improve pollution management around Qaraoun Lake.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improve the collection of municipal sewage
Comments (optional)
This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where wastewater 
treatment plants have been constructed (or planned to be constructed), to maximize the use of these 
investments. The criteria used for the selection of the investments on the expansion of the network 
are the following: (i) network for a currently underserved WWTP; and (ii) network for WWTP 
completed or expected to be completed within the project implementation period.

Component Name
Component 2. Promotion of good agricultural practices including integrated pest management to 
reduce agrochemical pollution in upper Litani basin
Comments (optional)
This component will promote adoption of sustainable production systems among farmers in the 
upper Litani basin, by introducing selected IPM (for example, reduced pesticides application) and 
GAP (for example, reduced fertilizer application and other conservation practices). These practices 
are expected to provide increased quality of agricultural products (without reducing yields); farmers’ 
savings (through decreased cost of production); and reduced pollution of the Litani River.

Component Name



Component 3. Technical Studies in Solid Waste, Water Quality Monitoring, Capacity Building and 
Project ManagementComments (optional)
This component will fund technical, environmental and social studies in solid waste. It will 
strengthen LRA capacity in water quality and water resources modeling and fund awareness /clean 
up campaign around the Litan river. It will improve BWE capacity in the supervision of wastewater 
infrastructure, the improvement in water fee collection and financial administration.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 50.00 Total Bank Financing: 50.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 50.00
Total 50.00

V. Implementation
The Qaraoun Committee -formally established by COM decision 32 of May 2014—already includes 
a representative from each institution involved in pollution management along the Qaraoun.  The 
committee will have an oversight role in the implementation of the proposedproject. Its main role is 
to ensure coherence and consistency between the proposed project and all other ongoing and 
planned investment in the upper Litani watershed area.  
 
Given the multisectoral aspects of the project, the CDR will be the implementing agency. CDR has 
wide experience with Bank operations, and is familiar with fiduciary and safeguards aspects. A 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by a project coordinator under the CDR’s 
responsibility. The PMU will be responsible for contract management, fiduciary and safeguards 
oversight, auditing, monitoring and reporting, coordination, and so on. Line ministries will be 
associated in the preparation and implementation of the project from the onset. As such, technical 
experts will be recruited by the CDR as part of the PMU but will be assigned to the line ministries/
agencies and will report to the PMU project coordinator at the CDR and their respective sectors. 
This arrangement will facilitate and bridge the gap between the CDR and the line ministries. It will 
also contribute to raising capacity in the different sectors involved.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖


Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli
Watershed Development Project

Republic of Turkey

Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Turkey

Executing agency: Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$25 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.4 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$3.85 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.86 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development
Project, as contained in paragraph 32.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Turkey for
the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. Socioeconomic background. Turkey is an upper-middle-income country with a

population of 74.9 million and a GDP of US$822 billion in 2013 (according to the
World Bank). It is a European Union accession candidate and a member of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the G20.
Turkey is an increasingly important donor of bilateral official development
assistance and has a functioning market economy.

2. Poverty has declined in Turkey. In the last decade alone, the poverty rate was
halved, from 44 per cent in 2002 to 21 per cent in 2011; however, regional income
disparities remain. Imbalances persist in socioeconomic structures and income
levels across both rural and urban settlements, and across regions. Since 2000, the
regional development policy of Turkey has evolved to include enhancing the
competitiveness of regions, strengthening economic and social cohesion, and
reducing regional disparities. The Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018) aims at
directing public investments to areas that prioritize reducing regional development
disparities and utilizing their potential for regional development, particularly within
the Anatolia region.

3. Agriculture is no longer Turkey’s main driver of economic growth: in 2012, it
contributed only 9 per cent of the country’s GDP. Yet it is still important for rural
development, employment (particularly for women, who account for 44 per cent of
the labour force), export and manufacturing. In Turkey, farmers fall into two
categories: (i) commercialized farmers who use the latest technologies, have links
to a wide range of domestic and international information sources, are acutely
aware of global trends and consumer preferences, are interested in innovation and
are integrated into national and international markets; and (ii) resource-poor
farmers who practise subsistence or semi-subsistence farming, and are not
business-oriented. The major constraints facing smallholder agriculture are land
fragmentation, a lack of input technology, weak producers’ organizations and
limited access to markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP)

4. Turkey’s transition to upper-middle-income country status has not ended poverty in
the country. In fact, even in relatively prosperous provinces, pockets of poverty
remain, particularly in the uplands. For years, the public and private sectors have
neither been interested nor able to address the constraints facing smallholder
agriculture in upland areas. The proposed project aims to support the Government’s
efforts to reduce degradation in the upland areas of the Göksu sub-catchment and
improve the natural resource base as a means of improving income and livelihoods
in upland villages. The project area has suffered from low investment in all sectors,




2

and continuing low standards of living have resulted in rural outmigration. IFAD’s
focus on poor and vulnerable farmers in less advantaged areas is therefore highly
relevant.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The proposed project will be implemented in selected villages within 9 districts in

the Konya and Karaman provinces of central Anatolia. These districts are located in
the Göksu sub-catchment, one of the four sub-catchment areas in the east
Mediterranean watershed. There are 32,000 households living in the project area’s
202 villages, with a total population of 114,151 situated in the mountainous zones
of these 9 districts. The elevation in this area varies from 600 to 1,800 metres. The
majority of the population is engaged in producing fruit and field crops on
166,536 hectares. On average, these farmers each cultivate about 3.5 hectares of
fragmented cropland and keep goats (between 30 and 50 heads each). Cultivation
is either totally rainfed (the most prevalent) or mostly rainfed, with some irrigated
patches (about 15 per cent).

6. The target group. The project will target 32,000 households consisting of
productive smallholder farming households, poor households and nomadic
households. Productive smallholders include men and women who reside
permanently in the uplands and who practise mixed farming, with a marginal to
adequate surplus for marketing. Poor households consist of youth and women in
search of livelihood opportunities to avoid migration. This group will benefit from
direct targeting mechanisms guided by quotas for livelihood support to women in
participating in farmers’ organizations (FOs) and value chains. The poorest
households are nearly landless, not engaged in agricultural production and rely on
social assistance. The approximately 120 nomadic households in the project area
live on rangelands and engage in small ruminant production and small-scale milk
processing for household consumption and sale.

B. Project development objective
7. The overall goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty by supporting economic

diversification. The development objective is to increase farmers’ incomes through
improved agricultural production and marketing activities, and strengthen resilience
to climate shocks. The project will also improve the living standards of the nomadic
tribes in the Taurus Mountains by improving natural resource management.
Outcomes will include: (i) sustainably increased farm productivity; (ii) higher
product prices received by smallholder producers; and (iii) climate-resilient natural
resource management practices adopted.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components:

(a) Component 1. Agricultural productivity and natural resource
management will improve overall agricultural productivity and profitability by
sustainably managing land and water resources in upland areas through good
agricultural practices and climate-smart investments that reduce external
shocks.

Subcomponent 1.1. Improved agricultural productivity and quality will
focus on promising crops upstream in the value chains to bridge critical gaps
in order to improve the productivity and quality of cherries, grapes,
strawberries and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs). Crop selection is
based on: (i) local production capacities; (ii) comparative advantages; (iii) the
seasonality of supply and demand; (iv) market access and productive
potential in different locations; and (v) indigenous knowledge and traditions.
Project support will include the introduction of: (i) new crop varieties;




3

(ii) modern growing techniques (e.g. production in plastic tunnels and a
high-wire training system for vineyards); (iii) water-saving irrigation
techniques supported by solar energy use (e.g. on-farm drip irrigation); and
(iv) agronomic practices that increase production and improve quality.
On-farm investments will be provided through the matching grant
programme.

Subcomponent 1.2. Natural resource management will promote best
practices and introduce adaptation measures for climate-resilient investments
in agricultural and grazing lands. The project will assist beneficiaries in
developing participatory grazing plans that integrate input from herders. It
will also support investments in overnight shelters to protect shepherds from
wild animals and inclement weather, scratch posts, salt licks and portable
mobile solar panels to provide energy in highland rangelands.

(b) Component 2. Market access enhancement will: increase farmers'
incomes through higher farm-gate prices; improve market knowledge and
linkages; reduce post-harvest losses; and enhance farmers’ ability to meet
market demand for quality, volume, regularity, homogeneity, packaging and
branding.

Subcomponent 2.1. Capacity-building for marketing will improve the
knowledge and skills of small farmers and FOs such as development
cooperatives and producers’ associations, and raise awareness of the
importance of post-harvest activities. Training will be provided on food
hygiene and safety, drying and sorting practices to reduce waste and improve
quality, and accounting and marketing. Producers' access to commercial
extension will be facilitated.

Subcomponent 2.2. Value chain development will finance downstream
investments by beneficiaries to support marketing of improved produce under
component 1 through the matching grant programme. Enterprises that add
value to farm produce and service providers in the value chains will be eligible
for project support. With the participation of the beneficiaries and their
associations, strategic investment plans (SIPs) will be prepared for each value
chain. These plans will serve as an investment framework that guides support
to beneficiaries at different stages in the value chain. The SIPs will be
developed in full collaboration with farmers, FOs and small and
microenterprises for cherries, grapes, strawberries and MAPs. SIPs will guide
investments – on- and off-farm – in the following: (i) post-harvest treatments
for hygiene and food safety of all value chain products; (ii) drying, grading,
sorting and packaging of dried grapes and MAPs; (iii) labelling and branding of
newly introduced value chain crops such strawberries and MAPs; and
(iv) re-cooling for cherries and cooling for strawberries.

(c) Component 3. Project management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will be implemented over seven years. As part of a programmatic
approach, the project will be the first of two phased over two overlapping cycles of
the performance-based allocation system cycles. The approach is also in line with
multi-year government plans and programmes. The value chain approach will be
adopted as a means of strengthening the long-neglected links between productive
poor farmers and markets (given the focus of both the public and the private sector
on more prosperous, resource-endowed and less ecologically challenging areas).
The project will use the SIP approach, which was introduced in the 2005
Sivas-Erzincan Development Project and has since been used in the Diyarbakir,
Batman and Siirt Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development



4

Project. The proposed project will enhance the SIP approach by selecting pro-poor
value chains with strong potential to benefit from upstream and downstream
investments and become replicable and scalable models.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock will be the lead implementing

agency. The overall management responsibility will rest with this ministry’s General
Directorate of Agricultural Reform in Ankara, where a central project management
unit (CPMU) will be established. Two provincial project management units (PPMUs)
will be set up within the ministry’s provincial directorates in Konya and Karaman,
and will be responsible for day-to-day project management and implementation.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

11. The investments will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans and budgets
(AWPBs) prepared in consultation with beneficiaries, with inputs from SIPs for the
identified value chains. Each farmer support team will prepare an annual workplan
in collaboration with project beneficiaries in their villages. The PPMUs will review
implementation and develop consolidated provincial-level AWPBs. The consolidated
provincial AWPBs will be reviewed and incorporated into a project-level AWPB by
the CPMU. The AWPBs will be finalized according to procedures agreed upon with
IFAD and detailed in the project implementation manual. The AWPBs will be
submitted to the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform by the project manager
for review and approval by the steering committee, and presented to IFAD on a
no-objection basis.

12. Continuous learning and knowledge management will be integrated into the project
and mainstreamed into implementation at all levels. The project’s knowledge
management framework will inform the project learning agenda, including the
outputs, outcomes and impacts defined in the logical framework. The Ministry of
Food, Agriculture and Livestock already has a computerized management
information system in place for tracking the inputs, beneficiaries and productivity of
the Government’s agricultural support programme; this system will be linked with
the project’s monitoring and evaluation system. Thematic knowledge products
generated through the project – and knowledge management tools such
as capacity-building activities, communities of practice and South-South
Cooperation initiatives – will be developed and disseminated.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
13. Financial management. The CPMU will be responsible for financial management,

with support from the PPMUs in Konya and Karaman. The project will adopt
accounting procedures and policies consistent with international accounting
standards and with IFAD and government requirements. The Government of
Turkey’s Public Expenditures System, developed by the Ministry of Finance, will be
used to execute all payments from government counterpart contributions and IFAD
loan and grant.

14. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. Separate designated accounts
denominated in euro will be opened at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey
for the IFAD loan and grant with an authorized allocation of approximately
12 months of project expenditure. The designated accounts will be replenished
using the imprest modality. Withdrawal applications will be prepared by the CPMU
every three months or when 30 per cent of the advance has been depleted –
whichever occurs first. Details of the disbursement arrangements, including the
amounts advanced to the designated accounts, will be specified in the project
implementation manual and stated in the letter to the borrower/recipient.

15. Audit. Annual project financial statements will be audited by the Treasury
Controller, who currently carries out external audits for all externally financed




5

projects in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and under terms of
reference cleared by IFAD.

16. Governance and financial management risks. A financial management risk
assessment of the proposed project and its fiduciary arrangements has concluded
that the project’s financial management arrangements and internal control systems
satisfy IFAD’s minimum requirements to: (i) provide accurate and timely
information on the progress of project implementation; and (ii) guarantee the
separation of functions through multiple independent controls. The assessment
rated the residual control risk after the implementation of appropriate risk
mitigation measures as low. Fiduciary risk might arise from an initial lack of
financial management capacity within the CPMU and the geographical spread of
project activities. Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit
function to include reviews of the use of funds at the village level, recruitment of an
experienced senior accountant in the CPMU and finalization of the project
implementation manual. The latter two are conditions for disbursement of project
funds.

17. Grace period. As per the Government’s request, the grace period is five years
instead of the standard three-year grace period for loans on ordinary terms.

SupervisionE.
18. The project will be supervised directly by IFAD. Supervision and implementation

support will be based on IFAD’s operational modalities and practices, including
those for loan and grant administration, and project implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
19. The project cost is estimated at US$25 million, of which US$18.21 million

(or 72.8 per cent of the total) will be used to finance component 1: agricultural
productivity and natural resource management; US$4.74 million (or 18.9 per cent
of the total) will finance component 2: market access enhancement; and
US$2.05 million (or 8.2 per cent) will finance component 3: project management.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Agricultural

productivity and
natural resource
management 12 474.17 68.5 83.62 0.5 2 226.23 12.2 3 427.53 18.9 18 211.55

2. Market access
enhancement 3 962.47 83.7 41.22 0.9 632.64 13.4 100.50 2.1 4 736.83

3. Project
management 1 453.36 70.8 275.16 13.4 323.11 15.7 2 051.62

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

B. Project financing
20. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including physical and price

contingencies, will be financed over a seven-year period as follows: IFAD financing
will comprise a loan amounting to US$17.89 million and a grant of US$400,000.
The Government’s contribution will be in the form of a budgetary allocation of
US$3.24 million and US$0.61 million in foregone taxes. Project beneficiaries will
contribute an estimated US$2.86 million in cash.




6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 977.30 37.8 220.55 8.5 1 386.65 53.6 2 584.49

2. Equipment and
materials 1 067.30 33.5 467.68 14.7 1 653.86 51.9 3 188.84

3. Goods, services and
inputs 7 100.91 79.6 1 538.00 17.2 280.35 3.1 8 919.26

4. Consultancies 397.39 63.8 124.84 34.8 100.50 16.1 622.73

5. Training 3 410.76 92.5 275.16 7.5 3 685.93
6. Workshops 126.85 84.8 22.83 15.3 149.68
7. Grants and subsidies 3 742.78 84.1 632.64 14.2 75.83 1.7 4 451.25

8. Salaries and
allowances 709.40 70.8 292.85 29.2 1 001.90

9. Vehicles 89.79 84.8 16.60 15.3 105.95

10. Other operating Costs 267.87 92.4 22.11 7.6 289.98

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
21. The overall project analysis resulted in an economic internal rate of return of

17 per cent over 20 years. The project’s contribution to economic welfare is derived
from: the increased quantity and quality of market-oriented production; better
market access; and higher prices resulting from investments in branding and
employment along the value chains. The sensitivity analysis shows that the
economic internal rate of return remains robust at 10 per cent in the event of a
10 per cent reduction in benefits or a two-year delay in benefits.

D. Sustainability
22. The project is designed to ensure producers’ sustainable access to markets through

integration into existing and new value chains while maintaining the focus on good
agricultural practices and natural resource management. This includes enhancing
the quantity and quality of target crops, and providing assistance with modern
marketing (including branding) and market information. The introduction of farming
as a business for the producers will result in the optimization of land, water and
labour resources in the project area. Strengthening FOs through training and
capacity-building will enable longer-term and more stable contractual relationships
with collectors, processors and exporters. These impacts are expected to last
beyond the seven-year project period. Partnerships between producers’ groups and
the private sector will also be strengthened as a result of improved knowledge
management.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
23. At the macro level, the main risks relate to a reduced emphasis on poverty in

Turkey and macroeconomic instability. All of the Government’s development
priorities as outlined in the national and regional development plans and its
programmes are aimed at reducing income disparity over the long term. The
project area particularly suffers from such disparities; however as a politically
stable upper-middle-income country, the prospects for continuing economic growth
in the country are sound. Turkey continues to move towards European Union
accession and measures to meet standards for trade are being adopted along with
stringent environmental protection protocols. The project team has mitigated any
risk that the implementing agencies will lack capacity to provide market-oriented
information and build capacity by planning for the long-term contracting of a



7

marketing consultant. The consultant will be tasked with enhancing the
private-sector orientation of all stakeholders, including government staff at the
central and provincial levels.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

24. The project was designed in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework (2011-2015)
and IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender and environment, and natural resource
management. In addition, the 2012 Technical Note on Matching Grants and the
Private-Sector Strategy have been utilized to ensure that the project makes the
best use of all financial, technical and knowledge products available to IFAD.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
25. Turkey is a member of OECD and is chairing the G20 in 2015. The country is an

increasingly important donor of bilateral official development assistance. In a large
upper-middle-income country like Turkey, IFAD’s overall development contribution
could seem marginal, particularly considering the size of its considerable
development assistance as a donor. There has been demand for IFAD to
demonstrate new models, approaches, knowledge products and services, and global
reach to mobilize required expertise. New models and approaches used by previous
IFAD projects are being mainstreamed by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Livestock, including SIPs, which were introduced by the Sivas-Erzincan
Development Project in 2005, and also used in the Diyarbakir, Batman and Siirt
Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development Project. The
matching grant programme, originally developed by the World Bank for the Village
Based Participatory Investments Program in 2004 and mainstreamed by the
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock in 2006, was enhanced by IFAD to make
it a pro-poor instrument. Through its knowledge management agenda, this project’s
CPMU will contribute to better harmonization of donor-funded and government
programmes for rural development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
26. IFAD’s recent focus on value chains is being integrated into the project as a means

to strengthen the links between poor farmers and markets (as a consequence of
both the public and private sectors’ focus on more prosperous, resource-endowed
farmers in less ecologically challenging areas). The project further develops the SIP
approach in rural Turkey with the selection of pro-poor value chains. Given the low
level of investment in the agricultural sector, the project will promote private-sector
investment through the matching grant programme, which facilitates public-private
partnerships though a service provider for marketing. It is expected that the
business models and innovations proven to be successful through this project will
be scaled up with government or other donor support.

27. Producers' climate adaptation capacity will be improved by training in agronomic
practices and awareness-raising on natural resource management geared to
maximize their incomes within the prevailing climate. Innovations such as
integrated pest management, vegetable production under cover, drip irrigation,
solar energy, efficient methods for water harvesting and training in natural resource
management will improve climate resilience.

Policy engagementD.
28. Turkey does not have a significant bilateral donor presence and IFAD’s relatively

limited investment does not entail strong policy engagement at the macro level.
IFAD’s investment has been strategically applied to engage in policy dialogue aimed
at influencing the Government's allocation of resources in impoverished areas.
Greater strategic focus is needed on the links between poverty reduction and the
sustainable management of fragile ecosystems. The establishment of IFAD’s




8

country office in Ankara will be an opportunity to enhance its role in aid
effectiveness.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
29. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Turkey and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

30. The Republic of Turkey is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

31. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
32. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Turkey in an amount equivalent to fifteen million nine hundred
and fifty thousand euros (EUR 15,950,000) (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Turkey in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty thousand euros
(EUR 350,000) (equivalent to approximately US$0.4 million) and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan for the Support to National
Priority Programme 2



Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

Support to National Priority Programme 2

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$54.8 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 34.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$48.5 million)

Cofinancier(s):1 Microfinance Investment Support Facility for
Afghanistan (MISFA)

Amount of cofinancing: US$2.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$1.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 The National Priority Programme 2 is tentatively being financed by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
a group of financiers including the European Union, the World Bank and the Department for International Development of the
United Kingdom.



EB 2015/115/R.10

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Support to National Priority
Programme 2, as contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
for the Support to National Priority Programme 2

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Afghanistan is currently undergoing a major security, political and economic

transition that will fundamentally shape its future. In late 2014 and early 2015,
Afghanistan assumed responsibility for its own security and a new Government was
established. With the transition, development assistance is being transformed from
off-budget operations executed by external service providers to on-budget
operations managed and implemented by national institutions, with capacity-
building support as required. The present programme is fully aligned with these
changes.

2. Afghanistan’s population was estimated at 30.6 million in 2013, with an annual
growth rate of 2.4 per cent. The population is relatively young, with 64 per cent
under 25 years of age, and a median age of 17. Approximately 76 per cent of the
population lives in rural areas. Afghanistan is ethnically diverse, with some 25
distinct ethnic groups.

3. Following almost four decades of conflict, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest
nations in the world. An estimated 36 per cent of the population lives below the
poverty line. The Human Development Report ranked the country 169th out of 187
countries in 2013, with a human development index of 0.468. Its gender inequality
index was 0.712 in 2012, ranking it 147th out of 148 countries.

4. Afghanistan has received a substantial level of development aid since 2003. Public
institutions have been strengthened, health care and education significantly
improved, and road infrastructure constructed. There are indications that these
activities have generated positive development outcomes in terms of life
expectancy, health status, education levels and living conditions. In recent years,
external assistance has fuelled high economic growth, with the annual GDP growth
rate (constant prices) averaging 10.4 per cent for the 2009-2013 period.

5. Despite these improvements, most Afghans continue to endure conditions of
hardship and insecurity. Infrastructure has been ravaged by conflicts and internal
markets remain largely disrupted. Limited arable land per capita, low precipitation
and harsh climate conditions in many areas contribute to the hardship and resource
poverty endured by farmers. Poverty is multidimensional, involving a complex
interplay among a lack of assets, years of conflict and insecurity, disasters,
inadequate infrastructure, weak public services and traditional roles.

6. The agriculture sector contributes 24 per cent of GDP and employs approximately
70 per cent of the rural labour force. Afghanistan produces food and cash crops,
some export and industrial crops, and livestock products. At present, there is
increasing potential to overcome the devastation wrought by years of conflict and
develop the crop and livestock subsectors to increase output, food security and
rural incomes.



EB 2015/115/R.10

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

7. IFAD has historically been responsive to the specific needs of fragile states in terms
of policies, strategies and investments. Indeed, a substantial portion of the 2013-
2015 resource allocation cycle has been allocated to fragile states. This focus is
becoming increasingly structured and articulated, as requested by IFAD's governing
bodies. Two recent documents addressed the scaling up of engagement in fragile
States: A Strategic Vision for IFAD 2016-2025 (IFAD10/2/R.2), which prescribed
increased attention to the specific context and needs of fragile states, with
emphasis on building national capacities; and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation (IFAD10/2/R.3), which outlined ways
to better engage in fragile situations and promoted the capacity-building of
community organizations and public institutions.

8. The present programme builds on this emerging strategic vision and adapts
relevant elements of the business model to the Afghan context. It focuses on
building national capacities and linkages across the agriculture sector – working
with community organizations, public agriculture services and the private sector –
to enhance community resilience and improve food security. It supports national
programmes, in complementarity and synergy with partners, in particular the
European Union. Consistent with the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery of
May 2011, it invests in high-impact crop and livestock activities with comparative
advantages, market demand and growth potential. Consistent with the Afghanistan
country strategic opportunities programme, it provides strategic and programmatic
support to the Government in agricultural sector transformation, rural economic
growth and poverty reduction.

9. The programme is fully aligned with the Government’s request to partners to
progressively align with the newly prepared national priority programmes, moving
from fragmented, project-based support to a sector-wide, programmatic approach
in support of coordinated development. It will enable IFAD to contribute to
sustainable, nationally driven development; to build the capacities of public and
private institutions and community organizations; to modernize the agricultural
sector; and to support the transition of smallholders from subsistence to
commercialized farming. It will also position IFAD to help the Government tackle
systemic sector challenges, particularly policymaking and public investment
programming.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. IFAD’s support for National Priority Programme 2 (NPP2) aims to achieve national

coverage over a three-phase implementation period of 15 years. The Support to
National Priority Programme 2 (SNaPP2) constitutes the first phase of IFAD support.
It will be implemented in three selected pilot provinces, namely Balkh, Herat and
Nangarhar, with planned geographical expansion to additional provinces over the
second and third phases. In the three pilot provinces, the programme will primarily
focus on six districts: Nahri Shahi and Dih Dadai in Balkh; Karukh and Zendhajan in
Herat; Darah e Noor and Khewa/Kuzkunar in Nangarhar. However, it will also invest
in other districts to the extent required by relevant agricultural backward and
forward linkages, value chain linkages, relevance of activities, synergy with other
development operations, and security considerations. Within the six identified
districts, the programme will cover about 589 community development councils
(CDCs) consisting of 57,000 households (427,500 people); it will also cover
additional CDCs and households in the other districts as required. Should security
deteriorate substantially in any selected district or province, the programme will
formally shift to another district or another province subject to consultations
between the Government and IFAD.



EB 2015/115/R.10

3

11. The programme has a three-tier target group: (i) at the subnational institutional
level, it will target provincial and district extension staff of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), community mobilizers of the Ministry of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), and farmers’ resource centres
(FRCs); (ii) at the local institutional level, CDCs, NGOs and relevant private sector
entities will be strengthened and serve as interlocutors; and (iii) at the grass-roots
level, target groups will include poor rural women and men, kuchis (nomadic
herders), small farmers and herders, producers’ groups and women’s groups.
Woman-headed households and rural youth will be the object of specific
programme targeting.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of IFAD financing will be to contribute to improving the food security and

economic status of poor rural households in the three selected provinces. The
programme has two objectives: (i) institutional development and capacity-building
of community organizations, public extension services and relevant private sector
entities; and (ii) sustained increased incomes for small farmers and herders
fostered by improvements in productivity and output, infrastructure and market
linkages.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The programme has two components. Component 1: Institutional

development – approximately US$14.0 million, 26 per cent of total programme
cost.

14. Subcomponent 1.1: Extension services. The programme will strengthen the
extension directorate’s structures by: (i) establishing a women’s extension
department in MAIL to coordinate a cadre of female extension workers across the
target areas; (ii) strengthening the male extension worker cadre at the district
level; (iii) targeting young graduates from local agricultural faculties for recruitment
as extension assistants; and (iv) incorporating updated techniques and approaches
into the agricultural curricula.

15. Subcomponent 1.2: Farmers’ organizations. MAIL and development partners are
establishing a national network of FRCs across Afghanistan. The capacities of FRCs
and other relevant community organizations will be upgraded to enable them to
broker business relationships among stakeholders, bringing together decentralized
MAIL and MRRD services, input suppliers, market integrators and small farmers.

16. Subcomponent 1.3: Private sector. Private sector linkages, contract farming and
value chain upgrading will be integrated with district extension services and
community groups. Market linkages among producers and private companies will be
promoted, as a range of agricultural products can be processed to increase shelf
life, year-round availability and output price. Business service packages will be
developed to address the needs of typical enterprises. The capacities of
entrepreneurs will be upgraded and their links with producers’ groups enhanced.

17. Subcomponent 1.4: Policy and implementation support facility. This facility will
provide technical assistance (TA) to MAIL for agricultural development
programmes; provide TA and capacity-building to other relevant ministries; and
strengthen MAIL and MRRD knowledge management and communication products.

18. Component 2: Strategic investments – approximately US$35.8 million, 65 per
cent of total programme cost.

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Infrastructure. The programme will invest in irrigation
infrastructure and other community productive infrastructure, in line with
government policy and priorities.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Productive investments. The programme will help to improve
the productivity of rainfed wheat, horticulture and livestock production to improve



EB 2015/115/R.10

4

food security and increase household incomes in the target communities. Farmers
and herders will be trained in improved technologies, post-harvest activities and
information sharing.

21. Subcomponent 2.3: Rural financial services. The programme will invest in a range
of financial products and delivery mechanisms to improve target group access to
financial services. These will include: (i) targeting the ultra-poor; (ii) developing
value chain financing products; (iii) promoting sharia-compliant financial products;
(iv) offering TA and incentives to participating financial institutions; and (v) possibly
competitive grant schemes for agribusinesses in due course.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

22. The MAIL will be the lead implementing agency and the MRRD an additional
implementing agency. Relevant programme approaches and activities will be
mainstreamed into their operations. However, in the light of MAIL’s current capacity
gaps at decentralized levels, specific activities will initially be implemented by other
contracted ministries, projects and service providers (national entities, as far as
possible). The capacity-building of relevant national public and private organizations
will be a key responsibility of all contracted service providers, and the programme
will seek full implementation by reputable national institutions as soon as possible.

B. Organizational framework
23. The programme’s governance framework consists of the programme steering

committee (PSC), a provincial coordination committee (PCC) in each province, and
the existing MAIL programme support team (PST).

24. At the national level, the PSC will be responsible for policy and strategic guidance,
overseeing management and implementation, approving annual workplans and
budgets (AWPBs) and reviewing progress. It will consist of senior representatives of
MAIL, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and MRRD.

25. Each PCC will be convened by MRRD’s National Solidarity Programme (NSP)
management and chaired by a MAIL district representative. Their membership will
consist of representatives of provincial entities, contracted service providers and
PST personnel. PCCs will be responsible for coordinating the implementation of
activities and sharing information and knowledge.

26. The PST will be responsible for managing and coordinating the programme. It will
be expanded with the addition of a programme manager and technical specialists to
carry out relevant activities. Programme staff will be recruited on a competitive
basis in line with IFAD guidelines and subject to IFAD prior review.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

27. AWPBs and activity calendars, based on the design report and informed by
operational experiences and supervision missions, will constitute the programme
planning framework. The PST will prepare AWPBs through a consultative approach
involving community organizations, FRCs, MAIL, MRRD and other stakeholders.
Following PCC approval, provincial-level plans and budgets will be consolidated by
the PST into a programme AWPB and submitted to the PSC for approval and to
IFAD for concurrence at least two months prior to the start of each fiscal year. The
consolidated programme AWPB will contain a procurement plan, in compliance with
IFAD requirements. All plans will be disaggregated by gender.

28. The programme’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will collect data and
information to measure performance and progress towards objectives, and serve as
a learning tool by providing information for reflection on programme strategy and
operations. It will support decision-making at various levels and facilitate results-



EB 2015/115/R.10

5

based management. Where feasible, the programme will help to strengthen MAIL
M&E capacity.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The programme will formulate a
knowledge management strategy, in line with IFAD policy. Its website will be
completed within the first year of implementation and used as a knowledge-sharing
tool, hosted on IFADAsia. Information from M&E studies, reviews and study tours,
lessons and best practices will be shared through knowledge products such as
newsletters, publications, case studies and audio-visual reports. Knowledge-sharing
events will be organized at the community level and visits carried out to exchange
knowledge and learning by observing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Financial management. MAIL has extensive experience in managing IFAD-

financed projects. Current arrangements are efficient. Procedures are based on a
solid programme implementation manual (PIM) approved by IFAD in early 2014.
The PST finance unit has qualified and experienced staff confident in applying IFAD
procedures. For SNaPP2, the current PST staffing will be strengthened to enable it
to manage an additional programme. The IFAD contribution to SNaPP2 will be on-
budget and will rely on government systems. The PST will use, in addition to the
MOF public financial management system, its own accounting system to monitor
budget execution, control financial transactions, produce financial reports and
increase staff accountability. To ensure effective financial control, internal control
procedures applied under ongoing IFAD-financed operations, included in the PIM,
will be updated and applied to SNaPP2. An auditor will be contracted to undertake
internal audit activities in support of PST efficiencies.

31. Flow of funds. The flow of funds will be based on standard arrangements
applicable to on-budget externally financed projects. Funds from the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF) grant account will be transferred to a designated
account in United States dollars opened for this purpose in Da Afghanistan Bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated account will be maintained and
operated by the MOF. IFAD will advance funds to the designated account, in
accordance with imprest account modalities.

32. Procurement. Programme works, goods and services will be procured by the PST
in compliance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the IFAD Procurement
Handbook.

33. Audit. Annual external audit of project accounts will be carried out by a
competitively selected, reputable auditor. The audit terms of reference will include
visits to contracted implementing partners and service providers, as well as field
visits, where appropriate. MRRD and all contracted service providers will submit
audited financial statements covering SNaPP2 activities to the PST within four
months following the end of each fiscal year. Where United Nations agencies are
exempt from such a requirement, they will submit unaudited annual financial
statements of expenditures to the PST.

E. Supervision
34. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. The supervision process will

guide the programme towards the achievement of its strategic objectives and broad
poverty reduction outcomes, while ensuring fiduciary compliance. A midterm review
and a programme completion mission will be undertaken, in programme year three
and at closure, respectively.

35. In the light of the prevailing security situation, the country team will assess
alternative methods to complement IFAD supervision and implementation support
processes, such as contracting and/or otherwise involving local organizations.



EB 2015/115/R.10

6

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
36. The total programme cost is estimated at US$54.8 million over a six-year

implementation period. This is inclusive of contingencies, cofinancing, beneficiary
contributions and counterpart funding. Programme costs are organized in three
components: (i) institutional development (26 per cent); (ii) strategic investments
(65 per cent); and (iii) programme management (9 per cent).

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount %

A. Institutional
development 12 862 92 - 0 - 0 1 134 8 13 996 26

B. Strategic and productive
investments 30 838 86 2 500 7 2 123 6 289 1 35 750 65

B. Programme financing
37. The programme is expected to be financed by: (i) an IFAD DSF grant in the amount

of US$48.5 million; (ii) Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan
(MISFA) cofinancing in the amount of US$2.5 million; (iii) a Government
contribution equivalent to US$1.7 million; and (iv) a beneficiary contribution
equivalent to US$2.1 million.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount

1. Civil works 12 752 88 - - 1 417 10 289 2 14 458
2. Vehicles 132 41 - - - - 189 59 321
3. Equipment and materials 181 100 - - - - - - 181
4. Consultancies 538 100 - - - - - - 538
5. Goods, services and inputs 4 934 95 - - 241 5 - - 5 175
6. Grants 2 376 100 - - - - - - 2 376
7. Credit 9 000 78 2 500 22 - - - - 11 500
8. Capacity-building/training 11 872 100 - - - - - - 11 872
9. Salaries and allowances 4 956 94 - - - - 302 6 5 258
10. Operating costs 1 721 55 - - 465 15 922 30 3 108
Total Programme Costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. The programme will provide benefits to approximately 57,000 poor rural households

(427,500 women and men) represented by 589 CDCs. The immediate expected
benefits are increased productivity resulting from improved extension services,
farming and management practices, and access to markets and financial services.
These benefits will be expressed in terms of improved food security and increased
household incomes. In addition, participating households will have access to
training and capacity-building benefits. A number of other beneficiaries, such as
producers accessing rural financial services, woman-headed households adding
value to production, and youth receiving vocational training, have not been
quantified.

C. Programme management 4 762 94 - 0 - 0 279 6 5 041 9

Total programme costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787 100



EB 2015/115/R.10

7

39. Additional benefits will accrue from capacity-building interventions. Participating
farmers will be able to access improved services from their CDCs, which will be
strengthened and supported. Women from the poor and very poor groups will be
empowered to manage their own social and economic development, with better
access to markets and inputs. The improvement of rural markets, rural access
roads and extension services will lead to higher output prices for farmers.

40. The programme’s economic internal rate of return is estimated at 24 per cent.
Sensitivity analysis shows the programme would be robust in the event of increases
in costs, decreases in benefits and delays.

D. Sustainability
41. The programme concept itself – support to a national priority programme rather

than a stand-alone project – directly addresses sustainability. Programme
management will be mainstreamed within existing ministerial structures and
financing will be on-budget rather than off-budget. Programme implementation will
utilize existing structures and arrangements to the maximum extent possible,
without creating new ones. The existing CDCs nurtured by the MRRD/NSP will serve
as the instrument for community engagement at all stages. Existing producers’
groups, such as farmers’ cooperatives and dairy unions, will be supported. District-
level capacities of extension services will be strengthened, with clear benefits for
sustainability. Similarly, FRCs will broker linkages between producers and the
private sector, which may be sustained, depending on the strength of the relevant
business relationships.

42. The programme exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at provincial and
district levels; gradually transfer full implementation responsibilities to ministries
and CDCs; foster profitable business relations between producers and markets; and
improve the capacities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overarching risk relates to the recent political and security transition in

Afghanistan. Three post-transition scenarios, and the implications for the
programme, have been projected: (i) a best-case scenario, with a smooth political
transition, relative security, empowered institutions and economic growth; (ii) an
intermediate scenario, with a fragile political context, conflict confined to remote
areas and moderate economic growth; and (iii) a worst-case scenario, with political
instability, factionalism and continued conflict, and economic stagnation.

44. Many key elements related to the risk scenarios, such as a conflict-sensitive
approach to site selection, are already embedded in programme design. Other
elements, such as the configuration of TA, will be fine-tuned depending on the
prevailing scenario. During the initial stage of implementation, IFAD and the
Government will jointly reassess post-transition developments, update the
opportunities and risks under each scenario, and fine-tune the mitigation measures
and trigger points.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

45. As indicated earlier, the programme is consistent with policies, strategies and
investments relevant to fragile states, in particular A Strategic Vision for IFAD
2016-2025 and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for inclusive and sustainable rural
transformation. It is fully aligned with corporate policies on private sector
engagement, environmental impact and climate change mitigation and adaptation,
and gender mainstreaming. The programme’s environmental impact assessment
places it in category "B".



EB 2015/115/R.10

8

Alignment and harmonizationB.
46. The programme’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and

the Government’s priority to increase agricultural productivity. It is consistent with
national efforts to enhance development impact, reduce the duplication of aid
programmes and introduce programmatic approaches. It is aligned with the multi-
donor framework for agriculture production and market development, and in
particular with the assistance provided by partners such as the European Union,
World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Department
for International Development of the United Kingdom, German Agency for
International Cooperation and United States Agency for International Development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
47. The Government considers the programme a model for partner participation in the

NPP approach, which will be scaled up by MAIL when other partners provide funding
for NPP2. The programme is designed to expand, replicate, adapt and sustain
successful investments. Through its investment tools and forward-looking policy
support, the programme will create the pathways, drivers and spaces for scaling
up. Investments will be unbundled to facilitate operation of the core activities at
scale.

Policy engagementD.
48. The programme will inform agricultural sector policy through its implementation of

key NPP2 components and its structuring of the NPP2 governance and management
framework. The programme design process has already influenced overall
government policy as represented by NPP2. The programme’s policy and
implementation support facility will offer TA to all national institutions involved in
NPP2, in particular MAIL and MRRD.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A programme financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

50. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan in an amount equivalent to thirty-four million four hundred fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 34,450,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





