























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25608 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Honduras P168385  Integrating Innovation 
for Rural 
Competitiveness in 
Honduras - COMRURAL 
II (P168385) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 22, 2019 May 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Honduras Inversion Estrategica - 
Honduras (INVEST-H) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 330.00 

Total Financing 330.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 150.00 

          IDA Credit 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 30.00 


          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 30.00 

     Commercial Financing 150.00 

          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing 150.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. High rates of poverty and inequality remain a persistent development challenge in Honduras. Poverty reduction 
in Honduras over the last decades has been slow compared to regional averages for Central and Latin America. Of 
Honduras’ national population of about 9.1 million people, 70 percent live at or below the national poverty line and about 
1 in 6 of the total population lives in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90 per day). Honduras’ rate of economic inequality 
is among the highest in Latin America, with a Gini Index of .50. World Bank data indicate that about 54 percent of income 
in Honduras is held by the highest-earning 20 percent of the population and only 3 percent of income is held by the 
lowest-earning 20 percent.  Unemployment in 2017 was estimated at 4.5 percent, with unemployment among youth at 
8.2 percent. 
 
2. The absence of a robust economic base for generating more and better jobs remains a central challenge for 
poverty and inequality reduction in Honduras.  Average earnings per worker vary widely across and within sectors in 
Honduras, with self-employment in agriculture as the least remunerative activity of all (average monthly earnings of  
L 2,404 per person in 2016, in contrast to formal wage work at an average of L 9,300). Informal work persists across all 
sectors (agriculture, industry, services) and in both urban and rural settings, and is characterized not only by low earnings 
but also by low quality and productivity, undermining GDP growth. Inclusive approaches to rural growth will require 
promoting diversification of rural incomes through combining formal and informal work, non-farm activities, and the 
intensification of agricultural activities.  
 
3. Honduras is considered significantly vulnerable to climate and weather events, with poorer populations in 
particular having a low capacity to cope and adapt. Honduras is seen as one of the countries most affected by extreme 
weather events and has increasingly felt the impacts of climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events that 
have affected landscapes and infrastructure (communications, housing, public health, etc.). In 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
generated economic damages estimated at around 81 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 2015 drought season affected 1.3 
million people and small-scale farmers had an average loss of agricultural production of about 80 percent. Several 
underlying factors limit capacity to cope with these impacts, including a lack of means to recuperate lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, and lack of basic support services.  
 


Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector continues to be a strong pillar of economic growth in Honduras.  Underpinned by 
favorable agro-ecological conditions, agriculture, forestry, and fishing together the sector grew by 10.7 percent in 2017, 
accounting for 12.9 percent of GDP (primary production only) and representing a 5-year peak in sector growth. This figure 
understates the importance of agriculture in the Honduran economy, however, as it does not reflect the many backward 
and forward linkages between primary agriculture and other sectors, both upstream and downstream. Based on 
experiences from other countries in the region, the contribution to Honduras’ GDP of its broader food and agriculture 
system would be about 1.5 times higher than that of primary agriculture alone. 
 
5. Notwithstanding strong agriculture sector performance in recent years, much more needs to be done given the 
scale of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity in rural areas. In Honduras, more than half of the poor, and two-thirds 
of the extreme poor, live in rural areas. Rural poverty is most heavily concentrated in the western and southern areas of 
the country, known as the “Dry Corridor” (Corredor Seco). The rural poor overwhelmingly rely on agriculture as their 
principal livelihood source, with an estimated 72 percent of agricultural families in Honduras engaged in semi-subsistence 
farming. This type of farming is typically characterized by low productivity and competitiveness, low revenue generation, 
and high vulnerability to shocks.  
 
6. Climate change and the increasingly frequent occurrences of extreme weather events are widely recognized as 
one of the most important risks affecting the Honduran agriculture sector. Honduras’ endowment of water, fertile soils, 
forests, and other natural capital is a central foundation for much of the country’s economic activity. However, the health 
of these resources is highly vulnerable to climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events, as well as to 
environmental mismanagement. These vulnerabilities exacerbate rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity.  
 
7. Investing in rural productivity, resilience, and innovation to boost export competitiveness will be a critical 
component of efforts in Honduras to reduce poverty and inequality. While the 2008 launching of the Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) has increased access to foreign markets, it has also exposed 
rural producers to new and increasingly competitive markets. Honduras benefits from strong comparative advantages in 
the agriculture sector: proximity to major regional and international markets, and agro-ecological conditions favorable 
to diverse agricultural value chains that are capable of meeting market quality demands. 

 
8. The COMRURAL project is currently GoH’s flagship project for promoting agricultural competitiveness and 
exports in Honduras. COMRURAL, approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors in 2008 and extended 
through an Additional Financing in 2017, is widely recognized throughout Honduras for its success in linking smallholder 
farmers to domestic and international markets. This success has been achieved through support to commercial 
production and post-harvest value addition structured under the “productive alliances” model.  

 
9. The decade-long implementation of COMRURAL has shown that Honduras needs to work on several fronts to 
enhance its business-enabling environment and promote agribusiness development.  Regulations and financial services 
that enable and incentivize entrepreneurship in the agriculture sector have not been a subject of sufficient public-sector 
attention. The modernization of critical public services is required for governance and the agricultural business climate 
to be stronger. The National Service for Agri-food Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym) and the Sanitary 
Regulation Agency (ARSA: Spanish acronym) are also in need of modernization. The public sector in Honduras can 
significantly improve its efficiency and the returns of agriculture public expenditures, and there is a general need to 
redefine the spaces for public-private coordination and partnerships in agribusiness, potentially by drawing on the 
concept of “Maximizing Financing for Development” (MFD). 



 
10. Poor agro-logistics has also shown to be a critical barrier to improving agricultural competitiveness in Honduras.  
Lack of adequate agro-logistics, both hard (infrastructure) and soft (services), is a major bottleneck. The 2018 World Bank 
Logistics Performance Index awarded Honduras an aggregate ranking (according to 6 dimensions of logistics over the 
period 2012 to 2018) of 106 out of 167 countries, based on evaluations by its international trading partners. Honduras 
ranked particularly low, including lower than the regional averages for Latin America, in terms of customs regulations 
and timeliness. Investing in the upgrading of agro-logistics infrastructure will be critical for enabling Honduran farmers 
to diversify into higher-value, often perishable agriculture products that cannot thrive under the country’s current agro-
logistics infrastructure. 

 
11. Harnessing recent innovations in technology and data collection will be critical for improving competitiveness 
and creating new employment opportunities. Developing countries around the world are improving the competitiveness 
of their products through well-established research programs as the basis to promote the use of innovation, big data 
analysis and the Internet of Things. Honduras ranks 129 on the information and communications technology (ICT) 
Development Index 2017 (out of 176 countries worldwide). According to the International Food Policy and Research 
Institute (IFPRI), the total agricultural research spending index is US$ 8.0 million and the spending as a share of 
agricultural GDP for Honduras is 0.17 percent, the lowest in LAC. Honduras’ rapidly growing Information Technology 
Services sector may position it well for developing similar agricultural “intelligence” services and other innovative 
platforms to modernize and innovate in the agriculture sector.  

 
12. The Government of Honduras (GoH) through the 2020 Plan has defined a new development strategy to promote 
the transformation and modernization of the agro-industrial and agribusiness sectors, showing a keen appreciation 
for needs on the ground as well as strong commitment to supporting agriculture sector development. A recent GoH 
exercise identified and prioritized value chains based on the commercial potential and the country’s comparative 
advantages, as well as their impact on the generation of new jobs and income for rural families. Primary value chains 
prioritized include: livestock (beef), avocado, soy, cocoa, coffee and specialty coffee, black and red beans, cashew, 
vegetables, pitahaya, tilapia, coconut and agro-forestry initiatives, which all together have a required investment 
program estimated at US$ 1,200 million. The development of these value chains requires a business model guided by 
private public initiatives, and GoH's vision for these value chains includes the generation of up to 120,000 new full-time 
jobs. 

 
13. GoH considers the continuation of the COMRURAL approach to be one of the pillars to support implementation 
of the 2020 Plan. As requested by GoH, the proposed project – informed by valuable lessons learned during 10 years of 
COMRURAL implementation – will help to fulfill the 2020 Plan objectives by expanding the “productive alliance” model 
to agribusiness initiatives in additional regions and value chains and deepening the participation of the private financial 
sector in financing small rural producers.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is in line with GoH’s vision and the with all the focus areas of the World Bank Group's 
Honduras Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF) Report No. 98367-HN, as discussed by the Executive 
Directors on December 15, 2015. The World Bank’s strategic engagement for reducing poverty and inequality in Honduras 
are structured into the following three pillars: (i) fostering inclusion; (ii) bolstering conditions for growth; and (iii) reducing 
vulnerabilities to enhance resilience. The proposed project will contribute to all three of these focus areas by supporting 
financial inclusion, technical assistance, and market access for small rural producers, improving the enabling conditions 



for agribusiness and rural entrepreneurship, and reducing agriculture sector resilience to climate change and other 
weather-related threats. 
 
15. The proposed Project is aligned with the IDA18 overarching theme, “Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, 
Resilience and Opportunity” and with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Project will contribute to 
implementing several themes prioritized by the World Bank Group: (i) Maximizing Finance for Development, (ii) climate 
change; (iii) gender; (iv) jobs and economic transformation; and, (v) governance and institutions, which present specific 
development challenges in the case of Honduras.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The achievement of the project development objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
 

• Number of beneficiaries (farmers and agri-entrepreneurs) adopting climate-smart practices promoted by the 
project, disaggregated by gender, youth, Indigenous, Afro-descendants (“climate-smart” indicator) 

• New jobs created under subprojects financed by the project (“economic inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage increase in the value of gross sales of agricultural enterprises based on implementation of the 
business plans approved in the first 3.5 years of project implementation (“access to markets” and “economic 
inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage of rural producer organizations (RPOs) working under a productive alliance approach 24 months 
after first disbursement (“sustainability” and “access to markets” indicator) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
Description 

 
16. The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA credit of US$ 150 million that 
is expected to leverage an expected additional US$ 150 million in private commercial finance and US$ 30 million in 
Rural Producer Organization (RPO) contributions. The proposed IPF will be implemented over an 8-year period and 
modeled on the well-established success of COMRURAL. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 330 million. 

17. The proposed project aims to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the 
economic inclusion of targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. Innovation, defined as approaches that 
are new and/or different for project beneficiaries, will play an important role in achieving this objective in the form inter 
alia of practices, technologies, and systems. Moving beyond a focus on specific value chain nodes or aspects, the project 
will promote competitive improvements along the full spectrum of backward and forward value chain linkages.  

 
Beneficiaries 
 


18. The proposed project will benefit farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the Honduran agriculture sector directly 
and indirectly. The direct beneficiaries will be: (i) members of the agricultural or agribusiness enterprises (formal groups, 
associations, or cooperatives of small/medium size producers and agri-entrepreneurs) participating in subprojects (about 
100,000 farmers and their families); and (ii) other agricultural enterprises (either other groups/cooperatives or private 
individual firms) participating as partners/allies in the proposed subprojects (as agro-processors, aggregators, 
wholesalers, traders, etc.) or providing essential services for their successful operation (e.g. the rental of agricultural or 
processing specialized equipment etc.) and receiving matching grant funds. The project will also have secondary 
beneficiaries: participating public sector agencies and their staff (the capacities of which will be strengthened and 
modernized by the project) and participating private commercial financiers (who will gain capacity through the project 
for engaging with the agriculture sector). The proposed project will also have indirect benefits for a much broader range 
of stakeholders in the agriculture sector through enhancing the overall agriculture sector business environment and 
through strengthening and modernizing the public entities that provide services to those engaged in the agriculture 
sector (nearly one million Hondurans). 

 
19. The project will be national in scope and will target select GoH-prioritized value chains. The institutional 
strengthening and business climate enhancing activities (as in Component 1) will have a national coverage. For 
Component 2, project interventions will be identified through a geospatial approach to prioritizing value chains and 
agribusiness initiatives by region. 

 

20. The PDO will be achieved through the following Components: 
 

21. Component 1: Support to the Modernization of Honduras’ Agribusiness Environment The purpose of this 
Component will be to contribute to the modernization and strengthening of select public sector services and institutional 
capacity to enable and promote competitiveness in the agriculture sector. This Component will finance works, goods, 
technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs to support: (i) institutional 
modernization of the Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG: Spanish acronym), National Service for Agri-food 
Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym), and Agency of Sanitary Regulation (ARSA: Spanish acronym) for the 
improved provision of public services and governance structures in the agricultural sector; (ii) operation of the National 
Agricultural Council and its technical unit, including for the provision and adoption of ICT and facilitate uptake of other 
innovative solutions for market intelligence, agro-climate systems, agro-finance, and agro-logistics to promote a better-
informed decision-making process for effective policy dialogue; and (iii) increasing the quantity and quality of the 
agricultural man-/woman-power required for enabling the agribusiness environment in project areas by supporting the 
modernization of agricultural technical training facilities, e-learning training programs, innovation labs and incubation 
centers, among others.  
 
22. Component 2: Support to enhance the competitiveness of agribusiness initiatives. The purpose of this 
Component is to support competitive agribusiness initiatives (“subprojects”) in prioritized agricultural value chains. This 
would be achieved through improving and expanding the productive alliances model, increasing complementarity 
between public and private investments, as well as expanding the participation of private commercial banks and micro 
finance institutions in financing small rural producers. Specifically, this Component would finance: (i) works, goods, 
technical assistance, and services for the selection, preparation, and implementation of selected subprojects by 
participating partners; (ii) incentives for the adoption of innovative agribusiness practices and technologies to improve 
productivity, market access, and climate resilience, and (iii) complementary investments in small-scale agro-logistics 
services and infrastructure. These subprojects will contribute to improved management of water resources in project 
activities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to ensure the viability and sustainability of the agribusinesses that they support. 
A minimum threshold for women and youth participation will be determined, and separate procedures to promote the 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 8 of 15  

     

inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities as beneficiaries in more favorable conditions, and adapted to 
their sociocultural reality, will be included. In addition, the proposed project will target a minimum number of small 
farmers with sufficient potential to exit PROSASUR (which focuses on the extreme poor in the Dry Corridor) as well as 
bring in poor farmers beneficiaries from the social protection program mainly known as Vida Mejor. 
 
23. Component 3: Project management support.  This Component will finance the overall project management, 
coordination, and implementation. 

 

24. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (CER). This Component will provide immediate response to 
eligible emergencies. As such, in the event of such an eligible emergency (as defined in the Contingency Emergency 
Response (CER) Operational Manual prepared and adopted by the GoH), this Component would finance emergency 
activities and expenditures through the reallocation of funds from the Project. 

 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be national in scope focusing on rural areas of Honduras. Priority agricultural products have been 

identified as coffee, cattle, cacao, avocado, cashew, leaf vegetables, fruit and non-traditional products, among others. 
The specific locations of the specific subprojects to be financed will not be known during the preparation of the project, 
but it is highly likely that indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities may be present in the area of influence of 
the project, particularly in areas such as La Esperanza and Copan. There is a significant incidence of crime and violence in 
the country. This project will include private sector funds contributing to the co-financed resources for the project. In that 
regard, the environmental and social requirements will apply to all the funds administered under the COMRURAL II. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The main agency involved in the implementation of the project, INVEST-H, has experience implementing safeguards 

policies and World Bank procedures because of their implementation of the COMRURAL I and its additional financing 
project since 2007 (P101209). COMRURAL I has a tracking system for the subprojects, and beneficiary organizations are 
required to have environmental management plans. The environmental and social management capacity of INVEST-H, 
however, will be assessed during project preparation, and it is expected that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
improved based on the results of the due diligence, strengthening their procedures and frameworks for monitoring 
environmental and social sustainability to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards 
instruments that will be developed. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Andrew Francis Drumm, Environmental Specialist 
Rodolfo Tello Abanto, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 


 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The aim of the project is to support the development 
of increased economic benefits for small farmers in 
particular, through the creation of strategic alliances 
with technical service providers, financial institutions 
and markets, and to increase agricultural productivity 
through capacity building and value chain integration. 
Component 1 activities are expected to mostly finance 
the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the 
acquisition of equipment for activities like the 
modernization public agricultural schools and public 
agricultural universities. Component 2 will fund 
agribusiness initiatives across the country, such as 
water harvesting and water storage, construction of 
small-scale irrigation and drainage schemes, on-farm 
irrigation technologies, low-cost pumping systems 
(including solar), the acquisition of agricultural 
machinery and vehicles the construction of modules to 
store agricultural products and the maintenance of 
vehicles, mounting structures, etc. The infrastructure 
to be funded is expected to be small-scale only. The 
overall impact of the project is expected to be positive 
and the foreseen activities are not expected to 
generate significant risk or irreversible adverse 
impacts. As such, based on the available information 
this project has been classified as Category B. 
 
Potential adverse environmental impacts include 
degradation of natural habitat, including forests, 
streams and rivers and health and safety of farmers 
through pesticide mismanagement. The main social 
impacts and risks of the project associated with OP 
4.01 are related to community health and safety, 
particularly in relation to health risks for local 
populations in areas surrounding the agricultural 
projects (including health impacts associated with the 
use of pesticides), as well as labor conditions, 
including those related to the working conditions of 
agricultural employees, including those in the supply 
chains, and the possibility of situations involving child 
and/or forced labor, migrant workers, and potential 
gender exclusion. 
 
To manage the impacts and risks of the project, the 
Borrower will prepare, prior to Appraisal, a Social 



Assessment (SA), with a strategic focus on the 
agricultural sector, with an emphasis on the issues 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and the 
identification of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
populations, with a gender, ethnic, and generationally 
sensitive approach. The SA will include potential risks 
related to threats to human security through the 
escalation of personal, communal or interstate 
conflict, crime or violence. The SA will build upon the 
SA prepared for the COMRURAL I project in 2007 
(P101209) and for its additional financing (2016). The 
SA will also identify and analyze the main social risks 
identified in the COMRURAL I project and its social 
management measures, incorporating the lessons 
learned in that operation. Agribusiness subproject 
allocation will be demand-driven and that subprojects 
will be selected during implementation. Since the 
specific locations and impacts of the subprojects 
cannot be clearly defined during project preparation, 
the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), in consultation with 
stakeholders, to identify, manage and mitigate 
potential adverse impacts during implementation, and 
guide the preparation of specific EAs, SAs, and ESMPs 
for each of the subprojects to be defined during 
project execution. The ESMF will guide the 
strengthening of elements like a Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, gender strategy, labor influx, and the 
system to track the environmental and social aspects 
in the subprojects. The ESMF will include guidelines 
for the development of labor management procedures 
(to prevent forced and child labor) and community 
health and safety plans for the subprojects. The ESMF 
will also include a screening mechanism to assess the 
environmental and social impacts of the subprojects, 
and will exclude from project funding subprojects 
likely to cause irreversible or significant environmental 
or social impacts (Category A), excluding activities that 
would impact protected areas, key biodiversity areas, 
and other terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. 
High-risk agribusiness activities, such as palm oil 
plantations, will be also excluded from the program. 
The ESMF will also incorporate criteria for the use of 
water resources, taking the analysis of watersheds in 
the analysis. The ESMF will also include a table of 
mitigation activities, implementation arrangements, 

     

capacity building plan, and a monitoring and 
evaluation framework as well. The ESMF will also 
include a specific section describing the requirements 
for preparing the safeguard aspects of the CERC 
(Component 4), describing the potential emergencies 
and the types of activities likely to be financed and 
providing a preliminary identification of potential risks 
and mitigation measures associated with them, taking 
into account the Bank Guidance on Contingent 
Emergency Response Components. The ESMF will 
include the WBG EHS General Guidelines, and the 
specific Guidelines on Annual Crop Production 
 
The project will also promote the participation of the 
local communities and other relevant stakeholders, 
preparing and implementing a Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), to guide the stakeholder 
engagement process throughout preparation and 
implementation, strengthening the existing 
Participation Plan. The SEP will build upon the Social 
Participation Plan prepared for COMRURAL I in 2007. 
The ESMF and SEP will be disclosed and consulted 
prior to appraisal. The disclosure arrangements will 
include virtual disclosure and availability of physical 
copies of such instruments in accessible locations. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project will not finance activities that are 
implemented by a private entity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project activities will not involve significant loss or 
degradation of natural habitats. In fact, prioritization 
of investments in organic production will enhance 
positive impacts on aquatic habitats, particularly in 
areas that currently have issues with pesticide and 
fertilizer runoff. 
 
Any investment funded under the project will be 
screened for its potential to cause negative impacts to 
natural habitats under the ESMF procedures, including 
critical natural habitats. Any activity likely to cause 
irreversible or significant damages to habitats will be 
excluded from project funding.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The ESMF will guide assessment of potential impacts 
of the planned productive investments upon forests. It 
will include a negative list of activities/impacts that 
could lead to degradation or conversion of forests to 
exclude them from financing. In general, the project 



promotes use of agroforestry and silvo-pastoral 
practices on already cleared land. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project finances agricultural activities expected to 
involve use of different types, quantities and 
management styles of agrochemicals or natural 
products/measures for pest management. The project 
will emphasize Integrated Pest/Crop Management 
through technical assistance. The ESMF will provide 
the necessary initial guidance for related screening 
and good practices. Procurement will screen any 
proposed purchases of agrochemicals to secure 
exclusion of red or yellow label chemicals and those 
prohibited by national regulations. During 
implementation, proposed business plans will be 
assessed in detail and managed based on good IPM 
practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will outline 
the various elements of and actions needed to be 
taken to adequately address concerns during project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project activities are not expected to involve any 
major civil works. No major movement of earth or 
excavation is anticipated, nor is it expected that 
natural features and landscapes with some level of 
cultural significance might be adversely impacted by 
the project. As such, it is unlikely that known physical 
cultural resources will be impacted. Nevertheless, as a 
precautionary measure, chance finds provisions will be 
included in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples such as 
Lenca, Maya- Chortis, Tolupan, Misquito, Pech, 
Tawakas o Sumos located in specific areas of the 
country, as well as afro-descendant communities, and 
considering that agribusiness subprojects will be 
demand-driven and will be selected during 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
descendants Planning Framework (IPAPF), which will 
be prepared and disclosed as a standalone document, 
will define the guidelines for the development of 
separate procedures to promote the inclusion of 
indigenous communities as beneficiaries of the project 
in more favorable conditions, adapted to their 
sociocultural reality and with provisions to reduce the 
potential impoverishment risks for the indigenous and 
afro-descendant beneficiaries. The IPAPF will build 
upon the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
prepared in 2007 for the COMRURAL I project 




(P101209) and for its additional financing prepared in 
2016. The SA to be prepared will include OP 4.10 
requirements specific for IPs and will to inform project 
design and preparation of the IPAPF. The IPAPF will 
define the criteria and procedures for the preparation 
of specific Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendent 
Plans (IPAP), through open, fair and culturally 
appropriate processes, including free, prior and 
informed consultation processes leading to broad 
community support for the sub-projects. The IPAPs 
will assess the potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples 
and define the necessary mitigation measures, as well 
as provide information on practical ways in which the 
Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendants can become 
project beneficiaries, and to ensure that they do so in 
a culturally appropriate manner. 
 
Gender considerations will also be addressed so that 
indigenous women and men are able to benefit from 
the project. The IPAPF and IPAPs will also identify 
culturally-specific mechanisms that can be adopted to 
address any grievances that may arise through project 
implementation, as part of the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism. The IPAPF will be prepared, 
disclosed and consulted with Indigenous Peoples 
Organizations at the national and regional levels prior 
to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Project activities are not likely to involve involuntary 
resettlement. Subproject allocation will be demand-
driven and that subprojects will be selected during 
implementation. Since project locations are not know 
yet, the project will include a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARAP) to address the cases of 
involuntary resettlement and land acquisition if they 
are identified during project execution. The RPF will be 
disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal as a 
standalone document, along with the ESMF 
consultation process. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Project activities will not involve dams and project 
activities will not rely on the performance of any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The locations of Project activities is not yet known so it 
cannot yet be determined if activities will  take place 
in 
international waterways. 


     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
Project activities will not be located or take place in 
disputed areas. If an area were to be in dispute, it 
would not be eligible for financing under the project. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 15, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Some environmental and social safeguards related studies and management instruments will be prepared during the 

project preparation process (October 2018 - January 2019), while others will be prepared after project approval. The 
safeguards instruments to be prepared alongside the project, and disclosed and consulted before the project’s appraisal 
process has concluded, are the following ones: SA, ESMF, SEP, IPAPF, and RPF. The safeguard instruments to be prepared 
after project appraisal or approval, when the subprojects have been preliminarily defined but before finalizing their 
approval process, are the following ones: SAs and ESMPs for each of the specific subprojects, which will provide the 
necessary information to determine if additional social management instruments, such as PMPs, IPAPs, RAPs or ARAPs, 
will need to be prepared. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25297 

P
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Paraguay P168153  Productive Alliances 
Project (P168153) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jun 03, 2019 Oct 08, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Paraguay Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock Production 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 120.00 

Total Financing 120.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 

          Municipalities of Borrowing Country 1.00 

          Local Farmer Organizations 19.00 

   


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Over the past decade, the expansion of export-oriented agriculture production has significantly contributed to 
GDP growth and poverty alleviation. During the period 2004 and 2016, Paraguay’s average growth was 4.7 percent per 
year, with high volatility. Key drivers of growth were the agriculture and hydroelectric power sectors. Crops alone 
contributed to one-quarter of total growth, with expanded agriculture (comprising backward and forward linkages) 
contributing a higher share to overall GDP growth. Agricultural products constitute the bulk of Paraguay’s exports. There 
is a strong duality in the sector with a significant share comprised of a lagging subsistence farming component, but in 
parallel there is a vibrant and substantial commercially-oriented agricultural industry segment (individuals, cooperatives 
and corporations), which engage in value chains such as soybean and meat. Capitalized agriculture uses about 70 
percent of the country’s productive area. Since 2003, the boom in export-oriented production has contributed to a 
significant fall of national poverty rates: 45 to 20 percent in urban areas, and 58 to 36 percent in rural areas. These 
prosperous years have also resulted in an increase in income for the bottom 40 percent and in the expansion of the 
middle class, which currently comprises 38 percent of Paraguay’s population.    
 
2. However, a large rural population accompanied by extensive rural poverty are among the salient features of 
Paraguay. In 2017 Paraguay’s population was estimated at 7 million inhabitants, with 40 percent of the population –
roughly 2.8 million-- living in rural areas. This represents the highest percentage of rural population of any country in 
South America, and among the highest in all of Latin America. About 97 percent of Paraguay’s population live in the 
Eastern Region, roughly 40 percent of the total territory, whereas only 3 percent of the population reside in the Western 
Region (Chaco). Most of the total poor live in rural areas, with a fair share engaging in agriculture-related activities, with 
informality as the hallmark.   
 
3. To build on the gains during the past decade in terms of growth and poverty alleviation, Paraguay must focus 
on creating sustainable economic opportunities for the poor and vulnerable population. Approximately 60 percent of 
Paraguay’s population are considered either poor or vulnerable, that is, they are at risk of falling back into poverty. 
Indigenous peoples, slightly under 116,000 inhabitants –a 2 percent of the total Paraguayan population, are one of the 
most vulnerable population groups. Indigenous peoples are essentially rural and have very limited access to basic 
infrastructure and services. For instance, not more than 6 percent of indigenous households are connected to a supply 
system of potable water. Among indigenous groups, monolingual Guaraní speakers are particularly disadvantaged. 
Another important vulnerable group is made up of subsistence producers and small or medium-sized producers in 
transition to commercial schemes. This group forms the end of a spectrum of farmers, which as noted above, at the 
other end, includes the highly capitalized farmers and corporations. This group of producers who are primarily poor and 
vulnerable, comprise at least 200,000 households; they are particularly affected by the lack of access to markets, 
finance, technology, land, human capital, and connectivity, and are harshly impacted by extreme weather events and 
the risks posed by climate change. They have not succeeded in keeping up with the pace of modernization of Paraguay’s 
agriculture, led by the large farmers and corporations. A third group that is considered vulnerable is the youth. Half of 
the young people that neither study nor work reside in rural areas, with many of them performing unpaid family labor in 
agriculture-based activities gender. Despite the progress made in Paraguay in recent years, creating economic 
opportunities for these groups is an unfinished agenda. Efforts must focus on improving incomes and reducing 
vulnerability through creating conditions to enable opportunities for self-employment and access to jobs, which are 
indispensable for reducing poverty in Paraguay.    
 
4. Paraguay enjoys many innate advantages which provide it with a great potential for driving pro-poor growth 
through the development of a resilient and responsible agro-industrial sector.  To do so however, it must overcome 
the inter-linked challenges of creating economic opportunities while conserving its natural endowments and 
improving resilience to climate change. Recent growth in Paraguay has taken a toll on its natural resource base. For 
example, logging and clearing land for crops, cattle ranching, and charcoal/biomass have resulted in extensive forest 
degradation and deforestation.  Combined with lack of planning around soil and water resources management, this is 
contributing to increasing the vulnerability to extreme weather events. It is critical that the expansion of agro-industrial 
productive activities and the creation of jobs go hand in hand with sound management of Paraguay’s rich natural capital 
comprising, fertile soils, abundant water, and pastures and forest resources; in addition, the enhancement of its capacity 
to develop and implement a strategy for integrated management of climate change risks are all keys to securing the 
basis of long term growth and development for the generations to come.      
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. The bulk of the rural poor and vulnerable population, a good part of which are indigenous peoples, rely on 
agriculture to make a living. In 2017, 76 percent of households in rural areas were engaged in family farming or small, 
informal agri-based activities, individually or in an organized way. If looking only at indigenous peoples, 71 percent of 
households rely on agriculture along with forestry, hunting and freshwater fishing. The impressive growth of capitalized 
agriculture has not translated into significant benefits for smallholders, who are left far behind in terms of per capita 
income and other socio-economic indicators, even when compared to rural households that do not rely on agriculture.  
Such subsistence and transition producers tend to combine agriculture with multiple sources of income such as off-farm 
labor, migration and remittances as a coping mechanism; but, on-farm production and associate income constitutes a 
key source of income which is critical for overall sustenance of these households. In addition, their capacity to mitigate 
against and adapt to climate risks is extremely limited. In 2011 agricultural households in rural areas were found to be 
more than twice as likely to report a negative shock than non-agricultural households. Exposure to climate or other 
shocks can push vulnerable households back to or further into poverty since the economic gains in years with good sales 
can be drawn down with just one season of severe drought .   
 
6. Global experience demonstrates that building resilience against natural disasters and climate change, 
integrating value addition opportunities and removal of barriers to accessing markets for agriculture creates 
economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable population. Recent evidence in Paraguay confirms that 
vulnerable rural inhabitants can lift themselves out of poverty and begin to prosper when they receive assistance in 
accessing markets and technology. It is the case of about 25,000 households who have benefited from the Sustainable 
Rural Development Project (PRODERS, P088799 ). By selling their surpluses in open-air markets or through farm-gate 


intermediaries, subsistence and transition producers have significantly enhanced their agricultural earnings and half of 
them were able to rise above the poverty threshold, according to the measurement of June 2018 in relation to the 
baseline.   
 
7. There is untapped potential to enhance outcomes through linkages with formal supply chains, to enable 
transition of subsistence and transition producers toward greater value addition. Paraguay’s food system has formal 
supply chains with larger potential, such as organic yerba mate for export, horticulture for supermarket, and nutrition-
rich grains and beans as inputs for processed foods. Empirical experience in Paraguay indicates, however, that multiple 
barriers prevent rural producers from becoming providers in more modern chains, especially due to the lack of critical 
assets, infrastructure, knowhow and/or organization. In this regard, women find it particularly difficult to access 
financial services and technology. Only 30 percent of the credits issued by the Enabling Agricultural Credit Office (in 
Spanish “Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación”) and 5 percent in the case of the Livestock Fund (in Spanish “Fondo 
Ganadero”) are assigned to women . It is almost universally challenging for smallholders to meet demand requirements, 
including supplying consistent quantities of quality goods that comply with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and are 
delivered on time.     
 
8. Fostering sustainable and inclusive value chain integration has become a priority for the current 
administration. The National Development Plan of Paraguay (2014-2030) seeks to shift the overarching orientation of 
the national economy towards a knowledge-based approach, with diversified and competitive sectors, and increased 
technology adoption. Creating opportunities for the most vulnerable population groups and reducing inequalities are 
essential elements of the Plan. Building on the same in 2016, Paraguay submitted its Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Paraguay’s INDC identifies 
agriculture, forestry, land use and land use change as strategic sectors for adaptation and mitigation actions. More 
recently, the administration of President Abdo, who took office in August 2018, has committed to take family farming to 
the next level. To do so, the Government is promoting technology adoption and long-lasting linkages with competitive 
markets, so that producers improve their income in the short and medium-term and acquire economic and climate 
resilience in the long term.   
 
9. The sectoral agenda is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production in partnerships with its 
decentralized institutions. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production (MAL) focuses on producers, for whom 
agriculture represents a critical source of income (see beneficiaries for a more specific classification). It is responsible for 
the sectorial policy and is at the helm of a set of decentralized sectoral institutions such as the Paraguayan Institute for 
Agricultural Technology (IPTA,: in Spanish “Instituto Paraguayo de Tecnología Agraria”), the National Service for Quality 
and Safety in Vegetables and Seeds (SENAVE: in Spanish “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Sanidad Vegetal y de Semillas”), 
and  National Service for Animal Quality and Health (SENACSA, for “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal”), and 
the aforementioned Enabling Agricultural Credit Office. To fulfill its mandate, the MAL not only formulates the national 
policy, but also carries out projects at the grassroot level with finance of the International Fund for Agriculture and the 
Interamerican Bank for Development.   
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
 
10. The Concept Note has been drafted at the time of preparation of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 
the period FY19-23. By appraisal of the project, the CPF will have been approved by the World Bank Board of Directors. 
 
11. The Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) completed in June 2018 flagged the following three structural challenges 
for Paraguay: (i) concentration of inputs, production, exports, income and political influence; (ii) informality of 
production, labor, land and trade; and (iii) inefficient provision of public services. To address them in the CPF, the SCD 
proposed four policy priority areas: (i) accountable institutions, the rule of law, and business environment; (ii) quality of 
public services; (iii) natural wealth management; and (iv) human capital. The proposed project is mainly aligned with 
policy areas (i) and (ii). 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

Increase in the volume of sales of project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, youth, and Indigenous (“access to 
market indicator”); 
 
Percentage of project beneficiaries (producers, cooperatives and agro-enterprises) in operation 1 year after the 
completion of the investment subproject (“sustainable access to market indicator”);  
 
Number of beneficiaries adopting climate smart practices promoted by the project, disaggregated by, among others, 
gender, youth, and ethnicity (“access to climate risk management approaches indicator”). 
 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
12. The project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable 
population by applying a two-fold approach: i) intervene at the grass-roots level via capacity building and subprojects 
(components 1a and 2a/b) focused on improving access to markets and resilience to extreme weather events and 
climate change; and ii) improve critical institutions, systems, and infrastructure (component 1b and 2c). In the short and 
medium term, the project will put into operation an inclusive agribusiness model: productive alliances. Producers will 
enhance their income-generating capacity by becoming more engaged in business activities, while incorporating more 
climate resilient technologies and approaches. In the long term the project will spark the creation of both on-farm and 
off-farms jobs and strengthen resilience.    
 
13. The project will have national coverage. Because Paraguay is a diverse country, activities will be tailored to fit 
the diverse ecological and productive contexts. Prioritization criteria for specific activities will be determined.  
 
14. Project beneficiaries will include the following categories:  
- rural indigenous communities; afro-descendants. Participation by women and youth will also be prioritized 
- organized rural smallholder producers from any of the following categories used for family farming policies in 
Paraguay: subsistence, transitional or capitalized producers, 
- producer cooperatives, small- and medium-sized agro-entrepreneurs, and other partner institutions; 
- and selected public institutions.  
Based on the experience of comparable interventions in Paraguay and other countries and counting a household as a 


single beneficiary once it receives any type of support, the project will benefit over 30,000 poor and vulnerable rural 
households, with the target figures for both women-headed households and young producers to be determined later. 
Beneficiaries of investment support will be selected on a competitive basis (see component 2) and using screening 
mechanisms that ensure that the benefits reach the poor and vulnerable groups. This operation will adopt a customized 
approach to targeting indigenous peoples and afro-descendants, drawing upon the experience of PRODERS. 
Beneficiaries of PRODERS will be eligible for this project, provided they meet the specific criteria for each type of 
support.  
 
15. Four critical changes will distinguish this project from PRODERS: (i) promoting activities that ultimately help the 
beneficiaries profit from business opportunities –this project will take up where PRODERS left off in terms of promoting 
market access ; (ii) including calls for proposals and co-financing schemes (with counterpart contributions mainly in cash) 
for subproject investments to strengthen ‘buy in’ and sustainability of investments; (iii) capitalizing on the capacity and 
engagement of a larger spectrum of partners (alliances at various levels); and (iv) integrating a risk management 
approach across the board in order to minimize the shocks of extreme climate events, while investing in resilience 
against climate change and enhance the sustainability of project outcomes.  
 
16. The project will address the gender gaps that are critical to attaining the PDO, namely (i) increasing women’s 
access to resources and technology; (ii) strengthening the earning-generating capacity of women; and (iii) fostering the 
participation of women in critical institutions.   
 
17. The project will mobilize private capital in multiple ways in line with the Maximizing-Finance-for-
Development Agenda. Besides the inclusion of counterpart co-financing in all types of subprojects, the project will 
promote access to credit for smallholder producers by providing technical assistance to beneficiaries and financial 
institutions. Credit to small agricultural businesses is often considered risky and poorly profitable for financial 
institutions. By linking productive alliances that have been successfully implemented to commercial banks that can 
continue financing their business plans, the project will contribute to reducing the risk exposure of private financial 
institutions. With this experience, conditions can be put in place to removing barriers to crowding in private sector 
finance for small rural entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 1: Capacity building (approximately US$ 20 million IBRD loan) 
 
18. This component will address the need to build both human capital of targeted communities and producer 
organizations (1a), and to improve critical factors (1b), in order to facilitate access to markets and integration with 
formal and lucrative value chains. It will fund workshops, courses, field days, study trips, and public events. In addition, 
the subcomponent will finance the provision of expert assistance, as needed, such as lawyers and the preparation and 
dissemination of printed and audiovisual education material. 
 
1a Strengthening human capital of targeted communities and strengthening producer organizations  
19. This subcomponent will help remove barriers that prevent potential beneficiaries, in particular indigenous 
peoples and Afro-descendants, from taking advantage of investment opportunities. Furthermore, it will strengthen 
organizations that have already made investments, so that they are more sustainable. 
 
20. Assistance will cover areas such as legal issues during the formalization of land titles in indigenous communities 
or pending formal registration of the organization, technical and operational know how around select value chains, as 
well as management capabilities such as financial literacy, with an emphasis on understanding barriers to credit access 
notably for women and women’s organizations; creating and administering revolving funds; and monitoring and 


assessing results of investments.   
 
21. Moreover, under this subcomponent, the project will disseminate calls for proposals among potential 
beneficiaries and provide technical assistance to the organizations for preparing the detailed proposals for investments, 
as described in component 2.    
 
1b Strengthening critical institutions and systems  
 
22. This subcomponent will focus on strengthening the institutions and systems that are pivotal to promoting access 
to markets, including a risk management and sustainability perspective as well as a gender angle. By doing so, the 
project will contribute to creating a conducive environment for improved partnerships between organized producers 
and firms. 
 
23. Attention will be paid to improving the capabilities of the MAL to provide the sector with updated risk-related 
information and services that mitigate and/or transfer risk. This includes existing climate information services, forecast 
models, and weather insurance, which will cover both indemnity-based and parametric/index-based insurance. The 
ministerial Risk Management Unit will lead these activities.   
 
24. Furthermore, the MAL and its dependent institutions will improve their ability to support productive integration 
in strategic value chains; for instance, studies and technical assistance will be undertaken to identify key constraints as 
well as policy and systems reforms and financing requirements to enhance Paraguay’s capabilities in terms of 
strengthened traceability systems and food quality governance for select (prioritized) value chains will be undertaken.  
Actionable roadmaps for implementing the salient recommendations would be developed under the project.   
 
25. In addition, the component will strengthen the existing ministerial centers that serve to collect, store, and sell 
products for associated farmers (CECOPROA: its name in Spanish “Centros de Comercialización para Productores 
Asociados”), and replicate the model in at least two additional locations. In this regard, alternatives for crowding-in 
private financing for building and managing the centers will be analyzed. 
 
26. Finally, the subcomponent will provide support to private firms, with a focus on small- and medium-sized 
enterprises, to put Supplier Development Programs into operation. These efforts will be complemented by advisory 
services provided by the International Finance Corporation to its client firms in selected value chains. The project will 
also examine the possibility to work with select private commercial banks in understanding and where feasible, helping 
address barriers to formal financing by producers (especially, women, subsistence, small or even medium-sized entities).   
 
Component 2: Investments to foster market access (approximately US$ 70 million IBRD loan, US$ 20 million 
counterpart funding from communities, organizations, and municipalities) 
 
27. Component 2 will provide matching grants to beneficiaries (organizations and institutions) to carry out 
investment subprojects (productive partnerships, 2a)) complemented by two sets of investments in innovation 
subprojects and small infrastructure works, 2b and 2c.  
 
28. Investment support under component 2 will be mainly granted on a competitive basis following calls for 
proposals. Special focus will be paid to promoting access to matching grants for afro-descendants, women farmers and 
young people. Clear beneficiary profiles and categories, as well as the criteria and process for selection will be 
elaborated during preparation.  A key consideration will be households and individuals that benefit under component 1 


in terms of capacity building and technical assistance will be able to apply for investments under component 2.  
Different levels of counterpart contribution will be established based on categories of beneficiaries. The experience in 
multiple alliance projects in the region shows that providing counterpart co-financing in cash can help generate buy-in 
and ownership and contribute to more sustainable outcomes.  This finding will be applied appropriately during project 
design.  
29. The project will stimulate the access to financial services that can provide funds for subproject implementation 
and/or continue supporting the alliances once the project ends. To narrow the gender gap regarding access to credit for 
women, the project will include tailored training for women and provide additional support for women-led businesses.  
Similar attention will also be paid to participating afro-descendants and youth.    
 
2a Productive partnerships 
 
30. Indigenous and afro-descendent communities and producer organizations will be supported in establishing 
partnerships with purchasers and preparing business plans that aim to meet the purchasers’ requirements in terms of 
product type, quantity, and quality. These business plans will determine the investments needed either on-farm or off-
farm as collective assets, as well as the technical or administrative assistance.  
 
31. Since the project aims for all subprojects to incorporate climate-smart features to enhance their resilience to 
natural disasters and climate change, beneficiaries will be encouraged to incorporate climate risk management 
practices, such as small-scale water harvesting and irrigation schemes, soil management or other improved on- and off-
farm practices into their business plans, and adopt technologies that, besides boosting yields, are climate-smart and 
environmentally sound.  
 
32. Purchasers will include the following domestic public and private and potentially international actors: public 
institutions, such as schools, the military and hospitals, and businesses, such as supermarkets or agri-processors, with a 
focus on formal supply chains in dynamic markets. 
 
33. The scheme will finance subprojects with agricultural and livestock products, forestry products, such as yerba 
mate, aquaculture, and rural and ecosystem-based services, including agritourism. It will also support partnerships for 
both primary and processed products. The subcomponent will promote the participation of women in the organizations 
and provide customized assistance to women-led alliances. Attention will also be paid to Afro-descendants and youth.  
 
2b Complementary innovation subprojects 
 
34. Indigenous communities and producer organizations will partner with public or private institutions to carry out 
investment subprojects that aim to pilot, disseminate and adopt innovative technologies, and also to move downstream 
along value chains by piloting new processing techniques, products/product development and agro-industry based 
services. These investments seek to stimulate the sector to go beyond traditional agricultural schemes and introduce 
new products, concepts and activities that can translate into better access to lucrative markets and higher economic 
benefits in the medium term. Groups of alliances supported under subcomponent 2a will be eligible to this type of 
support to expand the adoption of technologies such as improved genetic plant varieties at a more regional level.  
 
35. Technologies and practices refer, for instance, to innovative integrated landscape approaches for agricultural 
products, drought-tolerant and disease-resistant plant varieties, integrated agro-forestry or pastoral-forestry systems, 
information and communication technologies, and new (green) business models, all of them with either promising or 
demonstrated benefits. Incentives will be provided for subprojects led by women, afro-descendants and young 
producers.  
 
2c Complementary small infrastructure subprojects 
 
36. Municipalities will partner with the MAL to carry out small infrastructure works that are critical to facilitating 
agro-logistics and access to markets for communities and organizations, such as basic market/fair structures and spaces 
and storage facilities. The project will support analytical work to examine the opportunity to establish more 
sophisticated public-private investments in needed infrastructure such as wholesale markets, cold chains and processing 
plants.  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately US$ 10 million IBRD loan) 
 
37. This component will provide support to the MAL for project coordination and management; monitoring, results 
evaluation, and assessment of project activities; project fiduciary administration, internal controls, and audits; project 
environmental and social risk management following the new Environment and Social Framework; a citizen engagement 
mechanism and a grievance redress mechanism; and project-related studies. In addition, this component will finance the 
strengthening of cross-cutting areas in the MAL, such as financial management and results-based monitoring. It will fund 
consultants, goods and services need to perform the activities. 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

A baseline environmental and social risks and impacts assessment (ESA) will be conducted under ESS1 at a 
framework level to verify the necessary scope of addressing ESS2-8. ESS2-4 and 6 will require close attention, 
given several related and critical challenges that include e.g. securing sound labor conditions and considering 
potential use of child labor, efficient use of living natural resources and all materials, consideration adaptation 
to increased climate variability and change and minimizing GHG emissions, sustained provision of ecosystem 
services, prevention of further expansion of the agricultural frontier, contamination and/or overexploitation 
of water resources, and promotion of biodiversity-friendly productive systems. ESS7 will require careful 
consideration during project preparation and implementation since the prevalence of indigenous and afro-
descendant communities will be a substantial criterion for the selection of subprojects. Based on the lessons 
learned in PRODERS, the project will adopt a customized approach to targeting Indigenous Peoples (IP, see 
ESS7 for more details) and the approach will be broadened to afro-descendant communities. ESS9 is the only 
ESS that is not expected to have relevance for the project, yet the institutional arrangements for matching 
grants/revolving funds remain to be determined. Due implementation of ESS10 will be critical to promote 
broad and transparent participation of project-affected and other interested parties and to prevent elite 
capture. 

 


























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  
CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 

(PR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND), 
Project Team Leader; Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR), Project Team Co-leader; Héctor 
Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González 
(VPC/FMP); Jose Antonio Mejía Guerra (IFD/ICS); Alejandro Quijada (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo 
Tello (VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Carolina Vera 
(CSC/CPR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

PARAGUAY 
PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  

CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 
(PR-L1147) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: Republic of Paraguay, acting through the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital (OC): 15 million 100% 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15 million 100% 

Weighted average life (WAL) 15.25 years(d) 

Currency of approval: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital  

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public and 
private stakeholders. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds:  

(i) The program execution unit has been established on the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, 
to the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (see paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual execution conditions: 

The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions on environmental, social, health, and safety matters identified 
in the legal requirements section of the environmental and social management report (ESMR), including Annex B. 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original WAL of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original WAL may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 
(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Agriculture is a key sector of the Paraguayan economy. In the period 2004-2016, it 
generated an annual average of 25% of GDP, and 30% of jobs. The sector has also 
grown at an average annual rate of 5.7% over that same period. Alongside this 
growth, agricultural exports have risen significantly over the last decade, 
representing 60% of the total value of exports in 2016.1  

1.2 This solid sector performance has occurred in the context of a dual productive 
structure. On the one hand, rapid growth can be observed in some areas, especially 

soybeans, which contributed 57% of agricultural GDP growth between 2004 and 
2016. Based on Paraguay’s last National Agricultural Census in 2008 (CAN 2008), 
the production of soybeans and livestock is concentrated on lands larger than 500 
hectares. By contrast, survey data show that the average annual farm income of 
family farms (under 50 hectares, accounting for 96% of at farms, according to 
CAN 2008) devoted to sesame, cassava, sugarcane, corn, and other crops, fell from 
US$3,121 in 1991 to just US$981 in 2013. (Willi, P., 1991; A-Fines and GIZ, 2014).2 
Recent studies indicate that, to maintain this solid aggregate sector performance 
and improve farming income for rural families living Paraguay, productivity needs to 
improve through actions to promote the use of better technologies among small-
scale farmers, greater diversification of production, and the introduction of 
production systems that help to better manage climate and other risks (Nin-Pratt, A. 
et al., 2016). 

1.3 These recommendations are the result of an analysis of existing official statistics. 
However, decision-makers need robust, up-to-date information that allows them to 
work more precisely when designing and/or implementing instruments for public 
policy and/or private investment. Furthermore, the impact of different interventions 
can only be measured and assessed effectively if appropriate statistics are available. 
For that reason, statistics are needed on land use, agricultural production factors, 
the predominant economic and social conditions faced by farmers, and other areas. 
Additionally, much of the income inequality seen in Latin America and the Caribbean 
can be attributed to factors such as race, place of birth, education level of parents, 
gender, and sexual orientation. Some case studies suggest that the benefits of 
having information are much greater than the costs of generating it. For example, 
Bruce Gardner reviewed the literature that quantifies the value of information on the 
agricultural market for private decision-makers, as well as for decision-makers in the 
public sector working on policy reforms relating to trade and investment in research 
and development in the U.S. (Gardner, 2004). The study confirms that the availability 
of this information has net benefits for decision-makers. 

1.4 Data requirements for the agricultural sector are extensive and include information 
on the structure and management of agricultural holdings, agricultural production 
and inputs, food consumption, household income and expenditure, gender equality, 
the work force, and agricultural prices. There is also a growing demand for basic 
agroenvironmental data on greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, to improve 
national greenhouse gas inventories. All these data could come from agricultural 

                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. 
2  See optional electronic link 7 for a full bibliography. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
censuses and sample surveys, population censuses and surveys, administrative 
records, and other sources.  

1.5 An agricultural census is a statistical operation focused on collecting, processing, 
and disseminating data on the structure of the agricultural sector of an entire country, 
or a significant part of one. The basic objectives of agricultural censuses according 
to the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) (FAO 2015) are: 
(i) to provide data on the structure of agriculture, especially for small administrative 
units, and to enable detailed cross-tabulations; (ii) to provide data to use as 
benchmarks for, and reconciliation of, current agricultural statistics; and (iii) to 
provide frames for agricultural sample surveys. 

1.6 In an integrated agricultural statistics system, an agricultural census provides: (i) an 
integrated set of data on food and agriculture, necessary for decision-making related 
to food, agriculture, and rural development; and (ii) sampling frames for the surveys, 
which are conducted more frequently to collect more detailed and timely data. It 
should also be based on the necessary quality standards and include the 
dissemination of the information, so as to meet the information demand of the public 
and private sectors. 

1.7 The “Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics” (World Bank, 
UNSD, FAO 2010) published after a consultation process that included national 
statistical institutes, agriculture ministries, recommendations from the United 
Nations Security Council, experts and academics, and online forums. In its 
recommendations, the strategy identifies and highlights limitations in the production 
of statistical data for the agricultural sector and suggests that the conceptual 
framework for agricultural and rural statistics needs be expanded, and that the scope 
and coverage of such statistics should be broadened to include, for example, 
aspects of rural populations and households, fisheries, forestry, and other 
dimensions. 

1.8 Some countries of the region, including Paraguay, therefore implemented technical 
cooperation operation ATN/OC-14750-RG, to develop a consensus-based shared 
conceptual and methodological framework for the IDB’s Regional Public Goods 
Initiative based on technical and practical criteria, to promote the production of 
agricultural and rural statistics sustainably over time. This regional public good, 
named “Development of Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural 
Statistics Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean,” began with a diagnostic 
assessment3 of the capacity to produce and disseminate agricultural and rural 
statistics, looking at the legal framework, coordination within the national statistical 
system, financial and human resources, available infrastructure and equipment, and 
the type and quality of data. It also identified national needs, along with procedures 
for generating and/or compiling data and dissemination methods.  

                                                
3  This assessment was based on responses to a self-administered standard questionnaire sent to the 

countries. The questionnaire had 233 items grouped into 23 categories under four dimensions, which 
were used to prepare a baseline country profile. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.9 The findings of the regional public good assessment put Paraguay4 in Group 2 out 

of four groups, with Group 1 being the “weakest countries,” and Group 4 being the 
“strongest countries.” Group 2, “intermediate to weak countries,” also includes 
El Salvador, Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Lucia. According to this 
diagnostic assessment, the main limiting factors for agricultural statistics in 
Paraguay are institutional weakness due to a scarcity of resources, both human 
(core training) and material (physical infrastructure), and weak methods and 
practices. Added to these are poor coordination within the national statistical system 
and unawareness of data quality5 (see details in Table 1). 

 
Table 1. Limiting Factors for Agricultural Statistics in Paraguay 

Dominant 
limitations 

• Transportation equipment for field activities 

• Sound methodology implemented for agricultural surveys 

• Development and updating of sampling frames 

Significant 
limitations 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the main offices 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the field 

• Technical skills of available statistical personnel 

• Up-to-date information technology hardware 

• Up-to-date information technology software 

• Lack of available funds for planned statistical field activities 

• Interagency coordination 

Relevant 
limitations 

• Number of support staff in the field for statistical activities 

• Office equipment (phone, Internet, office furniture) 

• Turnover of professional staff 

• Information sources exhausted 

 

1.10 Paraguay’s current regulatory framework puts responsibility for producing 
agricultural statistics on the Ministry of Agriculture,6 as is the case in other countries 
inside and outside the region such as France, Uruguay, India, and the U.S. The legal 
foundation for statistical activities is based on two main laws: Executive Order 11126 
of 1942, which reorganizes the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) and gives it the authority for “technical direction of all statistical work;” and 
Law 81 of 1992, which designates the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics 
(DCEA) as the executing agency responsible for preparing agricultural statistics and 
keeping them up to date by regularly conducting the CAN. Paraguay has also 
developed the National Strategy for Statistical Development, based on the principles 

                                                
4  On a scale of 0 to 100, Paraguay received 28 points, ahead of only Argentina (21) and Venezuela (14) in 

a group of 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries that averaged 45. The best score was obtained 
by Mexico (82), followed by Brazil (71). Among the items with the lowest score were: (i) coordination 
within the statistical system, strategic vision and planning, and trained human resources, with a score of 
0; (ii) data collection technologies, with 9; and (iii) awareness of quality, with 23. 

5  “Diagnóstico sobre las capacidades instaladas en los países de ALC para la producción y difusión de 
estadísticas agropecuarias rurales” [Diagnostic assessment of installed capacities in the LAC countries 
for the production and dissemination of rural agricultural statistics], Miguel Galmés, technical cooperation 
operation ATN/OC-14750-RG IDB. 

6  Law 81/92 of 22 December 1992 establishing the organizational and functional structure of the Ministry 
of Agricultural and Livestock (MAG). 



 - 4 - 
 
 

 
of the PARIS 21 initiative.7 Nevertheless, the statistical sector is not coordinated as 
a whole, nor is there one institution with the legal mandate to lead and coordinate 
the process of preparing statistics across sectors and institutions. 

1.11 Paraguay’s most recent agricultural census was performed in 2008 and was the fifth 
in the country’s history since 1944. A decade has passed since that census 
(CAN 2008), and the information from it no longer reflects the current conditions in 
the country. It lacks the data to assess quality (omission and nonresponse rates), 
nor is there data on information requests classified by type of user or how that 
information is used. Some users have questioned the reliability of the data, because 
of the way the field work was done, and the data processed. The data are also not 
broken down by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples. Paraguay does not 
have a system of regular, reliable surveys to monitor and follow up on trends 
occurring after the previous intercensal period (1981-2008). Data need to be 
quantified on the expansion of the land area devoted to annual crops, deforestation, 
new operators and the development of technology-based business production 
models, news ways of organizing production, and other developments. 

1.12 The Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) is the unit of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) responsible for “preparing and updating 
agricultural statistics, for which it regularly conducts the National Agricultural 
Census.”8 A preliminary assessment of the current organizational and financial 
structure of the DCEA reveals weaknesses in: (i) technical human resources, in 
terms of both number and knowledge that is sufficiently up to date to work using 
advanced technologies and statistical methods (out of 39 DCEA employees, only 
15 have university degrees, and 50% of those have low levels of training or outdated 
knowledge of census procedures); (ii) equipment and materials (100% of computer 
hardware is obsolete, and the vehicle fleet has been reduced by 80% over the last 
five years); and (iii) strategic planning for data collection based on statistical 
methods. Annual DCEA estimates of agricultural output are derived from data 
provided by authorized data reporters, which is an imprecise and unreliable type of 
information. Consequently, strengthening the DCEA both technically and 
administratively would benefit the decision-making and policy formulation process of 
the MAG, and particularly its Bureau of Planning (DGP)9 responsible for planning, 
monitoring, coordination, and assessment, as well as other public and private 
entities.  

1.13 The assessments mentioned above clearly underscore the need to strengthen 
country systems for agricultural statistics. This means not only having more 
information available, but improving the timeliness and quality of that information in 
a cost-effective manner. Adopting modern information technologies is a key factor 
in meeting these objectives, as their benefits in quality and economic efficiency have 
been proven in other countries. An example is the use of personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to conduct surveys and censuses, known as computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI), instead of pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI). Reliability, 
accuracy, timeliness, accessibility, and consistency are all quality indicators for 

                                                
7  The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS 21), established in 1999, 

promotes the better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. 
8  Law 81/92, Article 8. 
9  A MAG unit: http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias. 

http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias.


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
censuses that show improvements with the use of these new technologies (Baker 
et al, 1995; Caeyers et al., 2011; Seligson and Moreno Morales, 2015; Benstead et 
al., 2017). 

1.14 The Bank’s experience. Since 2007, the Bank has approved a series of investment 
loans to help support censuses and strengthen statistical systems. These include: 
the Program to Support the Economic Census (loan 1918/BL-PR); Program to 
Develop the National Statistical System through the 2012 Population and Housing 
Census (loan 2542/BL-PR); Project to Improve the Agricultural Statistical 
Information System and the Agricultural Information Service for Rural Development 
in Peru (loan 3272/OC-PE); and the Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 
(loan 3798/BL-GY). Public good ATN/OC-14750-RG, Development of a 
Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural Statistics Systems in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is also now in execution.  

1.15 Based on these operations, as well as the recommendations of the FAO’s World 
Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) and IDB technical note 
“Experiencias en el diseño estadístico y realización de censos nacionales del sector 
agropecuario y rural” [Experiences in the statistical design and implementation of 
national censuses of the agricultural and rural sector] (document IDB-TN-366), 
Table 2 presents the main lessons learned and the how these have been 
incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 2. Lesson Learned 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

1. The National Agricultural Census (CAN) 
must be considered part of an integrated 

national statistical system. 

The program includes the generation of integrated 
information (census and surveys) of the national 
agricultural statistics system, as input for the 
national statistical system. 

2. Pilot testing is necessary to prepare a 
high quality census questionnaire. 

The program calls for a pilot to review and adjust 
critical parameters, such as the duration of surveys 
and the data collection and analysis method. 

3. As a project activity, it is important to 
make respondents, producers, and users 
aware of the value of accurate statistical 
information and utilizing that information to 
improve the quality of public policy and 
decision-making. 

The program will finance a communication and 
dissemination plan to raise awareness in the target 
population prior to collecting information, along with 
widespread dissemination of findings through 

various sources. 

4. The extensive involvement of public 
and private sector users in designing the 
census questionnaire ensures that useful 

information is collected. 

To design the census questionnaire, the program 
calls for workshops with the participation of public 
and private sector users. 

5. Political commitment to the census at 
the highest level is important. 

The program includes joint activities with 
Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) to ensure that 
it is a political priority. 

6. Include the gender perspective in the 
design of the questionnaires. 

The program supports the incorporation of 
questions that will generate information on gender 
and diversity in census and survey forms, following 
the guidelines of the FAO’s WCA 2020.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

7. Work with advanced technologies for 
data collection. 

The program incorporates the use of PDAs for 
personal interviews and a Web-based data 
transmission system to enhance data quality and 
reduce the time required for collection and 
analysis. It also includes the use of satellite 
imagery to make land-use and production 
estimates. The use of PDAs will also facilitate the 
implementation and quality control of the census. 

8. Institution-strengthening must be 
prioritized to ensure census continuity and 
the ongoing quality and dissemination of 
statistical information. 

The program includes investments to help 
strengthen the DCEA, so that data collection, 
analysis, and dissemination actions are 
sustainable. A cooperation agreement with the 
DGEEC is also planned. 

9. Synchronized administrative 
management is necessary when 
executing a mass data collection 
operation. 

The program calls for a company or international 
agency with experience in human resource 
management to be engaged for the selection and 
hiring of census takers. 

 

1.16 The country’s sector strategy. The project is linked primarily to the principal points 
and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, as well as the MAG’s 
Agricultural Strategic Framework 2014-2018 and Institutional Strategic Plan 
2014-2018. In terms of the National Development Plan 2030 and its major areas of 
strategic focus—poverty reduction and social development, inclusive economic 
growth, and positioning Paraguay as a global player—the project will provide 
essential input to identify evidence-based actions to support farming families and 
rural populations. The program will also contribute to the MAG’s Agricultural 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018 by supporting public policy design and the adoption 
of sector development measures, as one of the objectives is to make information 
available for such purposes. The program also fits into the MAG’s Institutional 
Strategic Plan 2014-2018 by supporting the establishment of an agricultural 
information system that integrates information on climate, economics, and 
technology, as well as statistical synthesis and studies of current economic 
conditions and sector performance, to provide the different users with data for 
decision-making. 

1.17 The Bank’s country strategy. This operation is aligned with the Bank’s country 
strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the 
strategic objective to “Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008), specifically the crosscutting themes of: 
(i) institutional capacity and rule of law, as it seeks to strengthening the institutions 
that generate agricultural statistics; (ii) gender equality and diversity, as it generates 
differentiated information by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples; and 
(iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it provides reliable 
information for building a national emissions inventory. The program is also aligned 
the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) under the 
indicator, “Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery,” through the outcome 
indicator “Improvement in institutional capacity to collect and process agricultural 
statistics” in the program’s Results Matrix. It is consistent with the Dimension of 



 - 7 - 
 
 

 
Success 1 of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which advocates that agriculture in 
the region achieve high levels of productivity and proposes the modernization of 
statistics systems as an activity under its second line of action. Lastly, it is consistent 
with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document 
GN-2587-2) through support for public sector management through integrated 
information systems. 

1.19 Approximately 6% of the resources of this operation will be invested in climate 
change adaptation activities, based on the joint methodology of the multilateral 
development banks for estimating climate finance. These resources contribute to 
the IDB Group’s goal to increase the financing of climate change-related projects to 
30% of total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 The general objective of this project is to contribute to improving the availability and 
quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public 
and private stakeholders. The program has the following components: 

1.21 Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 
(US$10.32 million). This component will finance the implementation of the 
agricultural census with emphasis on guaranteeing quality, proper thematic 
coverage, and the timely and wide dissemination of the information generated. As 
an innovation, this census will adopt the use of an electronic questionnaire and data 
capture using mobile devices in the field. The census will have a crosscutting gender 
approach, to get women more involved and increase their visibility in their role as 
both producers and workers. All relevant information will also be disaggregated by 
indigenous community and will address issues of environmental conservation. The 
agricultural census process to be financed will have the following stages: 
(i) pre-census: cartographic updates and georeferencing of farms, pre-census 
survey, and development of the data capture system; (ii) census: data collection pilot 
test and field operation; and (iii) post-census: data quality analysis, post-census 
survey, and dissemination of results. To promote the quality of data collection, this 
component also envisages: (i) validations and controls in the electronic form that 
assist census takers in their work; (ii) a pilot test in the field to validate the electronic 
forms; and (iii) dissemination actions to inform and motivate the respondent 
population. An information processing and analysis system will be developed that 
encompasses everything from database consolidation and quality control to the 
generation of the primary tabulations and making the information (including 
microdata) available to users online, in as much detail as permitted by laws and 
regulations on the confidentiality of the information. As an additional layer of quality 
control for the information generated, a post-census survey is planned to validate 
the accuracy of the census itself.  

1.22 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural 
statistics system (US$3.67 million). This component will strengthen the capacity 
of the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) to generate reliable and 
up-to-date agricultural statistics. The strengthening process includes: (i) developing 
IT tools to support the adoption of best practices for agricultural censuses; 
(ii) updating knowledge of census processes in the region by sending DCEA 
technical staff abroad and hiring experts to bring DCEA technical staff up to date on 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
practices used; (iii) renovating buildings; (iv) purchasing computer hardware; 
(v) purchasing vehicles to ensure that the DCEA can operate throughout rural areas; 
(vi) developing a model for the use of satellite imagery to produce agricultural 
statistics that can be validated with census information; (vii) conducting thematic 
studies with the census information; and (viii) conducting two surveys built on the 
census sampling frame to update relevant information on the sector. The topics of 
these surveys will depend on the studies and policy priorities, but may include 
agriculture, livestock, production costs, and family farming. Agricultural statistics are 
also expected to be incorporated into the national statistical system under an 
agreement with the DGEEC. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.23 The program Results Matrix has been agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) and 
contains impact, outcome, and output indicators for the program, as well as its 
baselines and targets. In keeping with the program objective, the impact indicators 
also seek to capture the two dimensions of availability and quality of agricultural 
information. As a substitute for availability, the number of census information 
requests is used as an indicator. The indicator to evaluate the expected changes in 
the quality of information will be user ratings. At the outcome level, indicators are 
included for three different dimensions: (i) the quality of the census will be assessed 
by comparing the census results to the results of the post-census survey, omission 
rate, and nonresponse rate; (ii) the improvement in the timeliness and availability of 
agricultural information will be verified through a shorter time lag between the 
conclusion of field work and publication of the final results, as well as through a 
shorter time devoted to data collection in the field; and (iii) the improvement in 
agricultural statistical capacity will be assessed through the rating of installed 
capacities for the production and dissemination of agricultural and rural statistics.  

1.24 As an added benefit, strengthening the agricultural census makes the source of 
information used to build Paraguay’s national emissions inventory more reliable, 
enabling Paraguay to comply with current requirements under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and transparency guidelines 
under the Paris Agreement.10 It also generates information on land use (pastures, 
forests, crops), livestock, etc., that can be used to assess resilience, design public 
policies on adaptation, and makes it possible to pose specific questions on mitigation 
and/or adaptation. The program will also benefit Paraguayan farmers and ranchers 
(currently estimated at 300,000), public and private institutions, and other links in the 
agrifood chain. 

1.25 The use of mobile devices for data capture and satellite imagery are technological 
innovations that will benefit the country’s statistical capacity in the context of the 
agreement signed with the DGEEC. The program will also receive advisory support 
from the National Secretariat for Information and Communication Technologies 
(SENATICs) on the technical specifications of computer hardware and connectivity. 
These interagency agreements, along with efforts to strengthen the MAG/DCEA, 
aim to make the generation of agricultural statistics sustainable. 

                                                
10  The Paris Agreement (2015) is part of the UNFCCC, which establishes measures to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions through mitigation, adaptation, and resilience of ecosystems to the effects of global 
warming. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40491683
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_mitigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_adaptation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_resilience


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
1.26 Economic viability. The economic analysis of the program was based on the 

economic viability of the 2018 National Agricultural Census (CAN 2018), the costs 
of which represent nearly 80% of total program resources. The analysis of the 
economic viability of the census employed the least-cost methodology (a specific 
instance of cost-effectiveness analysis). This methodology is commonly used in 
interventions of this nature, when it is recognized that the benefits (statistical 
information, in this case) have a very high value, but one that is difficult to quantify. 

1.27 The anticipated costs of the agricultural census indicate that it will be cost-effective 
(See optional electronic link 1). The estimated total cost of CAN 2018 is 
US$11,627,262,11 including all aspects of the preparation, survey, processing, and 
dissemination phases. The estimated number of productive units to be enumerated 
will be around 300,000, yielding a cost per productive unit of US$39.12 This figure is 
higher than was budgeted for the agricultural censuses in Nicaragua (2011, US$23) 
and Honduras (2008, US$27), but lower than was budgeted in Brazil (2018, US$47) 
or the actual figure in Uruguay (2011, US$73). Factoring in the land area (which 
affects the cost of field work), the cost per square kilometer of CAN 2018 in 
Paraguay will be US$29, which is higher than in Uruguay (2011, US$18.5) and 
similar to Brazil (2018, US$29), but lower than in Nicaragua (2011, US$49) and 
Honduras (2008, US$71). The cost of the agricultural census will therefore be within 
the range of costs of other recent agricultural censuses performed in countries of the 
region. 

1.28 Another relevant comparison is the costs budgeted for the census using 
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) (US$11,627,262) versus the costs 
that would be expected using pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI) (US$12,330,855). 
The use of PDAs instead of paper questionnaires will save approximately 
US$700,000. This figure does not reflect the fact that CAPI offers better quality 
control than PAPI, so the financial gains of adopting CAPI are even greater. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 This project is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1) and the specific investment modality. Its total cost is 
US$15 million, to be financed totally by the Bank from the Ordinary Capital 
resources. 

                                                
11  This figure includes the amount of Component 1, plus an amount corresponding to equipment and 

management and evaluation costs for the project. 
12  All figures presented in the economic viability analysis are expressed in 2016 U.S. dollars. The sources 

of this data are the FAO, Uruguay’s Office of Agricultural Statistics (DIEA), and the DCEA (Paraguay). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Program Cost and Financing (in US$000) 

WBS Components IDB % 

1 Component 1: Design and implementation of the 
agricultural census 

10,320 69% 

2 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities 
in the agricultural statistics system 

3,670 24% 

3 Administration, audit, and evaluation 710 5% 

4 Contingencies 300 2% 

 Total: 15,000 100% 

 * These amounts include local taxes. 

2.2 The program disbursement period will be five years, running from the effective date 
of the loan contract. Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds 
(see paragraph 3.7). 

 
Table 4. Disbursement Schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,559,201 11,117,339 895,705 803,553 624,202 15,000,000 

% 10% 74% 6% 6% 4% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social safeguard risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), the Bank has analyzed the potential environmental and 
social risks of this operation and classified it as category “B,” with a moderate level 
of risk. No significant environmental or social risks have been identified in the 
sociocultural analysis prepared for this project. The identified environmental and 
social risks relate primarily to interactions between census takers and the indigenous 
population, risks faced by census takers when travelling to socially complex areas, 
and the risk that the census questionnaire may not be sensitive enough to the 
sociocultural complexity of indigenous peoples and gender issues in agriculture. The 
sociocultural analysis includes recommendations on these issues to promote the 
inclusion of vulnerable population groups like indigenous peoples and small family 
farmers, with a gender approach. 

2.4 In accordance with Operational Policy OP-703, Directive B.6, this project requires at 
least one public consultation. This requirement was met with two consultations 
conducted with key stakeholders: (i) one with public and private sector data users, 
and (ii) another with the National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI). 
Additional consultations with other social actors are also planned as part of the 
census preparation process, especially, once a draft census form is ready. More 
information on this matter is included in the annex, Environmental and social 
management report (ESMR). 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation actions are planned. 

D. Other project risks 

2.6 The following was identified as high risk: a government changeover would affect 
priority or execution time. The planned mitigation measure is to rely on political 
consensus and the sectoral private sector, as well as the mandate contained in 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
Article 8 of Law 81 of 1992, and international commitments (the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development). The following were identified as medium risks: (i) public 
administration fails to keep pace with census operation needs; (ii) no decree issued 
to conduct the census; (iii) refusal to provide information to census takers; 
(iv) political decisions not to disseminate census results; and (v) loan contract fails 
to enter into effect in 2018. The following mitigation activities were identified and 
agreed upon, supported particularly by the Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) for 
the census, made up of prominent individuals from the public and private sector, to 
back up policy-level actions at the key entities identified: (i) the CAA will take steps 
to comply with administrative time frames; (ii) work will be done directly with the 
Office of the President; (iii) an efficient communication campaign will be launched 
(local authorities and civil society); (iv) the CAA will take steps to raise awareness 
among public sector stakeholders, with IDB support; and (v) the MAG, CAA, and 
project team will work with Congress for it to take up this law for consideration. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be the 
borrower, acting through the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), which will 
be fully responsible for administration and supervision of the program. 

3.2 The program will be implemented under the direct supervision of the MAG, acting 
through the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and the National 
Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The DCEA, supported 
by a program execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving 
as principal liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will 
perform administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and 
contracting, in coordination with the PEU. 

3.3 The key positions identified for the PEU for program execution are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) Component 1 coordinator; (iii) Component 2 coordinator; 
(iv) financial and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; and 
(vi) planning and monitoring specialist. 

3.4 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan 
proceeds: (i) the program execution unit has been established on the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, to 
the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered 
into force. These conditions must be satisfied for implementation to begin. The 
program Operating Regulations establish the basic rules for the execution of the loan 
(e.g., field work, supervision, and regional coordination, information processing and 
analysis, and fiduciary considerations), as well as the responsibilities of PEU 
members.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Procurements 
financed in whole or part with IDB funds will be conducted pursuant to the Policies 
for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(document GN-2350-9). The procurement plan contains detailed information on the 
procurements to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures 
followed by the Bank for their review. Numerous low- and medium-skilled operational 
staff will be hired (approximately 5,300 people) to collect CAN information in the 
field. To do so, an international competitive bidding process will be held to engage 
a firm with experience in human resources management, or an international agency 
with such experience will be contracted. No selection processes involving single-
source selection are planned, with the exception of fuel purchases, since this product 
can be obtained from only one source13 under the fuel provision agreement between 
Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR) and the executing agency,14 and other cases 
where it is justified under policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
applicable to program execution for financial management and planning, as well as 
procurement supervision and execution. An intervention of this nature entails 
significant travel expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees 
of the MAG or other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of 
the census, as well as process and disseminate the information generated. The 
estimated expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down 
as follows: per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional 
compensation (45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line 
with expense items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of 
employees that take on additional work.15 

3.7 Disbursements. The disbursement modality will be as established in the Financial 
Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6). 
Advances will be made preferably on a six-monthly basis, once justification has been 
provided for at least 80% of the advanced amount. Accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet must be submitted as documentation.  

3.8 Audits. The PEU will deliver the audited financial statements for the program on an 
annual basis during execution on the terms required by the Bank. The project will 
require the selection of a Plus-level independent auditing firm. The audited financial 
statements will be delivered within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, and 
the closing final statement will be delivered within 120 days following the scheduled 
date for the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan agreed upon with the 
MAG. The DCEA, acting through the PEU, will be responsible for generating and 
sharing the necessary information with the Bank to track the Results Matrix 
indicators. 

3.10 Monitoring. Throughout project execution, the PEU will prepare and deliver status 
reports to the Bank within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. These 

                                                
13  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6(c). 

14  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 

15  The program does not call for counterpart support to be factored into the calculation. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40468605
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
reports will provide a detailed account of physical and financial execution of the 
project, as well as progress on all Results Matrix indicators. The reports will also 
provide a detailed account of issues encountered during project execution, and 
corrective measures taken, as well as explain any deviation from the project 
management instruments (multiyear execution plan, annual work plan (AWP), and 
procurement plan). No later than the last quarter of each year of project execution, 
the PEU will deliver the AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction, as 
well as the maintenance plan for equipment purchased with the loan proceeds and 
the plan for meeting the environmental and social requirements established in the 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). Bank staff will conduct regular 
inspection missions and meet with PEU personnel to discuss the progress of 
activities identified in the AWP, compliance with the Results Matrix indicators, the 
AWP for the following year, and the procurement plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 In addition to overall monitoring of execution, the project will incorporate several 
different measures to oversee data gathering and ensure the quality of information 
in CAN 2018 and the agricultural surveys in the two subsequent years. Firstly, a 
cartographic update will be done, to minimize the likelihood of omissions or 
duplications during data collection. Secondly, the PDAs used to collect information 
will have a built-in, automatic verification program. This way, any inconsistency in 
responses, whether contradictions or mistakes on the part of the respondent or 
errors on the part of the census taker when entering the information into the PDA, 
will be detected and corrected immediately. Thirdly, CAN 2018 will have a Web-
based data transmission system for the immediate and simultaneous application of 
controls on progress and coverage in the field, and the data registered by census 
takers. 

3.12 As established in the monitoring and evaluation plan, the project will have a midterm 
and a final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the 
date on which 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, or 50% of the 
execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first. The objective of the midterm 
evaluation will be to review the progress of all activities, examine the causes of any 
potential deviation from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. 
The final evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the date on which 95% of the 
loan proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial 
execution by subcomponent and the source of financing; (ii) progress on outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts included in the Results Matrix; (iii) compliance with the 
ESMP; (iv) summary of financial statements, procurements, disbursements, and 
internal control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. Both the 
midterm and final evaluation will be conducted by external consultants independent 
of the PEU. 

3.13 Impact assessment. The project will have a “before and after” evaluation of the 
impact indicators included in the Results Matrix, conducted as part of the final 
evaluation described above and the project completion report (PCR). 

3.14 Additionally, CAN 2018 will include a post-census survey to measure omission and 
nonresponse rates, as well as the accuracy of certain key variables included in the 
census. This will make it possible to get an exact final value for the outcome 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Significantly, there is no known experience 
with post-census surveys in the case of agricultural censuses, so this will be the only 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 14 - 
 
 


