






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Sierra Leone P160295  Sierra Leone Agro-
Processing 
Competitiveness 
Project (P160295) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 18, 2017 Feb 08, 2018 Trade & 
Competitiveness 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Sierra Leone Ministry of Trade and 
Industry 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted agro-processing firms in 
Sierra Leone. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   10.00  

Total Project Cost   10.00  

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
Sierra Leone, a low-income country with a population of 7.1 million people, has made good progress towards political 
stability and economic growth. The country has had three relatively peaceful national elections since the end of the 10 
year civil war in 2002 and recorded average annual growth of 7.8 percent from 2003-2014. Post-war economic growth 
continued to be robust, bolstered by the resumption of iron ore exports, increased inflows of foreign direct investment 
(FDI), and rising government revenues. These developments led to a surge in economic activity, manifested in GDP 
growth of 15.2 percent in 2012 and 13 percent in 2013. In spite of the impressive growth, 2015 GDP per capita was 
US$653.1, well below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of US$1588.5. Poverty levels remain high, even though the 
poverty headcount declined from 66.4 percent in 2003 to 52.9 percent in 2011.

1
 Strong growth in rural areas, where 

poverty declined from 78.7 percent in 2003 to 66.1 percent in 2011, explains much of overall reductions in poverty. 
However, rural poverty level is still higher than urban poverty. While about 62 percent of the working age-population is 
formally or informally employed, there is a dearth of good quality jobs, particularly among urban youth and in rural 
areas.

2
 The lack of sufficient technical and vocational skills needed for the labor market compounds the unemployment 

problem despite the potential offered by a growing workforce that is dominated by young people 
 
Sierra Leone has vast natural resources and the economy is heavily dependent on its land endowments; mineral 
resources including rutile, diamonds, gold, chromite and iron ore; water and tourism. Agriculture including forestry and 
fisheries still accounts for the largest GDP share but that share declined from 57percent in 2012 to 41percent in 2013. 
The mining sector’s contribution to GDP increased substantially from 8.5 percent in 2011 to 16.8 percent in 2012 and 
on to 27.2 percent in 2013 due to the expansion of large-scale iron ore operations. The service sector, led by banking, 
retail, transport and tourism, accounted for 28.8 percent of GDP in 2013, down from 35.5 percent in 2011, while the 
manufacturing sector, dominated by cement and light manufacturing, accounts for only 2percent of GDP.

3
  

 
 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The promotion of value addition and private sector-led growth in agriculture are essential elements in achieving its 
vision and goal of the AfP. The National Sustainable Agriculture Development Plan (NSADP) serves as the overarching 
sector strategy with a focus on: (i) Commodity Commercialization, (ii) Agriculture Infrastructure Development, (iii) 
Private Sector Promotion and (iv) Sector Coordination and Management. Through the NSDAP, The Smallholder 
Commercialization Program (SCP) 2010 -2015, helped organize smallholder farmers by establishing Farmer Based 
Organizations (FBOs) and Agribusiness Centers (ABCs), involving about 122,500 farmers, of which 30 percent were 
female-headed households. The ABCs were designed as farmer-owned multi-purpose facilities delivering a broad range 
of services, including micro-credit, sales of inputs and tools, rental of labour-saving equipment, storage of seeds and 
farm products, processing, transport, information on new technologies and markets and group marketing. The 
successor of the SCP, the Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Program (ICADEP), 2016-2020 focuses on 
private sector-led commercialization and agribusiness development as a basis for inclusive growth. Key tenets of the 
strategy emphasizes reduced government intervention with an emphasis on implementing evidence-based private 

                                            
1
 World Bank and Statistics Sierra Leone, A Poverty Profile for Sierra Leone, June 2013 

2
 Statistics Sierra Leone, World Bank, ILO, Sierra Leone 2014 Labor Force Survey 

3
 Statistics Sierra Leone: Report on 2013 Real GDP Figures, October, 2014 



sector support policies and projects.  
 
Strengthening economic diversification is a policy priority for achieving strong and sustainable growth and reducing 
poverty in Sierra Leone. Currently, the economy is dominated by mining and agriculture but there is huge potential to 
diversify into other sectors such as fisheries, light manufacturing, and tourism. While mining has dimmed, there are 
bright prospects for agribusiness investments. The Sierra Leone Investment and Export Promotion Agency (SLIEPA), has 
prioritized increased investment inflows in agribusiness as a key objective in its Strategic Plan, 2016 – 2018. This strategy 
aims to attract domestic and foreign direct investments and to develop and diversify exports, particularly in the 
agricultural sector, given the sector’s contribution to GDP and livelihoods. In addition, SLIEPA supports SMEs to enhance 
their competitiveness and participation in trade. Both the investment Promotion and Export Development and 
Promotion Departments have developed strategies and activities that focus on enhancing competitiveness of 
agribusiness, SMEs and other segments in agribusiness value chains that have strong potential for creating jobs and 
income opportunities. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed project is aligned to Pillar 1 of the Bank’s Strategy for Africa, competitiveness and employment and 
consistent with the pillars on diversified economic growth and international competitiveness in GoSL’s Agenda for 
Prosperity, the Third Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy, 2013-2018. The AfP prioritizes agriculture and 
agribusiness as a key sector for promoting economic diversification because of its long term potential for inclusive 
sustainable growth and value addition. In addition, the proposed project is aligned to components 2 and 3 of the 
Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Project (ICADEP) that focus on commercialization and agribusiness 
development. Project interventions are also consistent with the Private Sector Recovery Priorities relating to creating 
jobs and supporting MSMEs to increase their competitiveness in key agricultural value chains.  
 

The proposed project will directly contribute to the Joint Country Assistance Strategy (JCAS) 2010-2013. Pillar 1 on 
promoting inclusive growth. The 2012 Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) recognized the potential of 
agriculture, agricultural value addition, and supporting services in driving an inclusive growth strategy. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
The project objective is to improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted 
agro-processing firms in Sierra Leone. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

 Lower unit cost of production for local agro-processing firms 
 

 Increased agro processing investment (from existing and new agro-processing firms) 
 

 Improved institutional framework for coordination of agro processing investments  
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
D. Concept Description 
In Sierra Leone, productivity and growth of agro-processing firms is held back by key market failures and constraints, 
characterized by limited knowledge of FDI linkages and market opportunities, coordination externalities, weak supply 
chain linkages, lack of access to finance and technology, policy failures, and skills gap. Consequently, most local and 
foreign-owned agro-processing firms have installed modern plants and utilize state of the art technology but have low 
productivity and operate at less than 30 percent utilization 
 
The proposed project focuses on enhancing domestic value addition in agro-processing through strengthening vertical 
(forward and backward) linkages between local companies and foreign investors. Such linkages provide important 
channels for enhancing competitiveness of the sub-sector through flow of new technology, know-how, innovation, and 
skills. Interventions supporting domestic value addition in agro-processing will involve local and foreign actors that are 
operating in the sub-sector as well as those that provide goods and services to the industry. Project interventions will 
emphasize upgrading of local large enterprises and SMEs, enabling them to be competitive in domestic, regional, and 
international markets.  

 
Project interventions will address key market failures and constraints that limit competitiveness of agro-processing firms 
in domestic and international markets (see annex 1). Modalities for project support will include financing and technical 
assistance for targeted investment promotion and retention and connecting local companies to foreign investors in ways 
that enhance the benefits of agglomeration economies and networking effects 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project location is collocated with the catchment area of the SCADeP Project. The specific sub-project sites are yet to 

be determined. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry being the burrower for the project will work in close collaboration with the Ministry 

of Agriculture Forestry and Food Security through the Worldbank Funded Smallholder Commercialization and 
Agribusiness Development Project (SCADeP). The project coordinating unit for the implementation of the project will 
recruit a safeguards specialist and will work in close collaboration with the safeguards specialist of the SCADeP project 
who are already in place. It is expected that through the close collaboration with the SCADeP project, the needed capacity 
building for the client will take place throughout implementation. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Gloria Malia Mahama, Anita Bimunka Takura Tingbani 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project categorization is B (partial 
assessment). The project will fund agro-processing 
equipment and other value chain enhancement 
activities, the impacts associated with these activities 
are expected to be site-specific and reversible in 
nature. An environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared and disclosed 
prior to appraisal. The ESMF will outline measures for 
screening of sub-projects to determine any further 
environmental assessment that might be required 
during implementation. The ESMF will also provide a 
template for the preparation of an EMP based on the 
screening results of sub-projects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project is not expected to impact on any natural 
habitats because the proposed activities will be limited 
to existing agro processing firms. The project is also 
not expected to fund any expansions in agriculture 
production areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Forests will not be impacted by the project 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 
The project activities do not involve any pest 
management activities. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
It is not expected that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
indigenous people (as per definition) in the project 
area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Triggering OP4.12 will be determined during appraisal. 
The project will provide matching grant to support 
domestic value addition in agro-processing. The 
project still needs to clarify whether or not the 
activities funded under the matching grant will lead to 
construction of warehouses, agro-processing units or 
any activities that may require land acquisition. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not involve construction or 
rehabilitation / maintenance of dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The Project does not involve International Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The Project does not involve Disputed Areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 22, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The need for safeguards related studies will be determined during preparation missions. An Environmental Assessment 

and any other required safeguards studies will be prepared prior to appraisal. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA21768
Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Lesotho Project ID: P162397

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P119432

Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project Additional 
Financing (P162397)

Parent Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (P119432)

Region: AFRICA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 15-Sep-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Financing Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 10.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 10.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? No
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small mountainous country characterized by extensive land degradation 
and erratic climatic conditions. It has a population of 2.1 million people of whom around 57% live 


below the poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty line (CPF, 2016). The country is 
also beset with high unemployment rates and a high incidence of HIV/AIDS. This interaction of socio-
economic factors and environmental constraints results in low agricultural productivity with maize 
yields averaging only 800 kg/ha leading to food and nutrition insecurity.

Variations in the Kingdom’s topography and micro-climate shape its ecological zones—the lowlands, 
the foothills, the highlands, and the Senqu (Orange) River Valley. Annual precipitation is highly 
variable, both temporally and spatially, ranging from 500 mm to 760 mm. Temperatures are also 
highly variable, ranging from –10°C to 30°C. Agriculture accounts for less than 10 percent of the 
country’s gross domestic product, but it provides employment for as many as 63 percent of the 
country's population. The crop sector’s contribution to agriculture GDP declined by 17.2% in 2015, 
with the main crops of maize, sorghum, and wheat planted on more than 85 percent of the cultivated 
area.  Livestock contributes 30 percent of total agricultural output, including domestic production of 
pigs and poultry and extensive production of wool and mohair on rangelands in the hill and highland 
areas.
The IPCC categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics, having four distinct 
seasons, and experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds.  
Frequent droughts result in poor harvests and large livestock losses to rural farmers. Dry spells also 
create food shortages and can lead to an increase in invasive plants and destructive insects. Strong 
winds and floods also pose devastating threats to Lesotho’s agricultural sector; as a result, there are 
large swings in output, with maize yields ranging from a high of more than 1.5 t/ha in 1977 to only 
170 kg/ha in 2011.

The impact of climate change on crop and livestock production systems, and consequently livelihoods, 
may be severe if existing cropping and land use systems remain unchanged.  Lesotho is over-reliant on 
rain-fed agriculture for food production and has a large rural population engaged in undiversified 
subsistence farming. Climate change and increasing climate variability may be reflected in reduced 
crop yields and increased incidence of crop failure. There is also likely to be a decrease in forage 
production and a decline in the carrying capacity of the rangelands, which will have negative impacts 
on livestock production resulting from reduced animal vigor and fertility. As animal condition 
deteriorates, the quality of animal products, especially wool may decline. Furthermore, there may be a 
higher incidence of livestock pests and diseases which will have negative implications for animal 
production.

Less than 1 percent of crop production in Lesotho is under irrigation and almost all subsistence and 
smallholder farming is rain-fed. The development of medium to larger irrigation schemes is expensive 
and may not be suitable due to the demanding topography and geology, and lack of local scheme 
management skills and experience is a serious limitation. The fragile soils also demand very careful 
irrigation management. Thus, while water is available, it is being allocated for other purposes and 
farmers have yet to productively exploit their country’s water resources. Small-scale water harvesting 
schemes are seriously lacking and yet these remain viable adaption options for smallholders in the face 
of expected climate change impacts on water resources.

The commercial farming sector in Lesotho  remains underdeveloped. Full-time commercial farmers 
are still few in number, and specialized agribusiness firms are equally scarce. Lesotho stands in stark 
contrast with neighboring South Africa, where production, processing, and distribution of food is 
carried out by commercial producers and agribusiness firms.

Opportunities continue to exist in Lesotho for developing commercially viable smallholder agriculture. 



Demographic changes, compounded by rising incomes and accelerating urbanization, and improved 
access to South African markets, are fueling changes in consumption patterns that are creating new 
opportunities for agricultural producers and processors. Local and regional demand is projected to 
continue to strengthen in the coming years for fresh fruits and vegetables; for meat and processed 
livestock products (sold through local market stalls, small and medium-scale butcheries, and large-
scale meat wholesalers); for milk and dairy products; and, for processed foods and products (dried 
fruits, processed meat and animal feed).

Continued support to smallholders and close coordination at the national, district and community 
levels is still needed.  Strategies for strengthening smallholder capacity must take into account the 
communities’ stated needs and aspirations and align them with targeted innovations to create resilience 
and sustainability.  However, guidance is needed to help farmers gradually re-orientate their farming 
approaches to produce for markets and to be resilient to the imminent impacts of climate change in 
fragile and highly vulnerable production systems.

Two options for scaling-up the SADP were considered: (i) increase counterpart funding; and (ii) seek 
additional IDA 17 financing. Given fiscal restrictions, the Government of Lesotho is unable to 
increase counterpart funding for the SADP. Therefore, additional IDA 17 financing was identified as 
the most appropriate mechanism to enable expansion of the SADP’s activities to new districts. With 
the AF, the SADP’s objectives, which include increasing marketed output among project beneficiaries 
in Lesotho’s smallholder agriculture sector, can be expanded in more districts in the country, 
contributing to government efforts to develop smallholder agriculture. The proposed scale-up can be 
completed by February 28, 2020 – representing a cumulative implementation period of less than ten 
years. The original closing date is March 31, 2018.

The AF for the Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP II) will continue to support 
smallholder farmers in targeted areas of Lesotho – Botha-Bothe, Leribe, Berea, and Mafeteng, rural 
Maseru, Mohale's Hoek, and Quthing – with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to increase 
their productivity in a changing climate and diversify into market-oriented agriculture, and to improve 
the enabling environment for agribusiness activities.  Project support will continue to be driven by 
market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of enterprises and products.  These three 
additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, have a rural population of 
almost 500,000 people (about 100,000 households); a cropped area of about 80,000 ha; and ready 
access to Maseru and South African markets due to their location along the border.  The addition of 
these three districts will result in all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included 
in the project.  It is expected that at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in 
addition to the 55,000 already reached under SADP.

The overall zones of intervention for this project have been identified and prioritized to complement 
current activities supported under the Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) and to 
consolidate and support the achievements under SADP.  SADP supports smallholder farmers in 
targeted areas of Lesotho, with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to diversify into market-
oriented agriculture. SADP is driven by market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of 
enterprises. The proposed Additional Financing will focus on continuing to increase the capacity of 
farmers in Lesotho, smallholder and commercial, to build more productive climate resilient 
commercial agricultural systems.

The incremental benefits of this AF are expected to be extensive. For example, by initiating the 
process of discussing food quality and safety standards in Lesotho, the GoL and the international 
community can begin to finance and provide the focused expertise and funds needed to undertake 



actions in setting standards and strengthen capacity to enforce them.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Rural and agricultural sector. Manufacturing and mining contribute the largest shares to GDP in 
Lesotho, but agriculture remains important as a major provider of employment and source of food.  
About 70-80 percent of Lesotho’s people live in rural areas, and more than three-quarters of these are 
engaged in agriculture – mostly traditional, low input, low output, rain-fed cereal production and 
extensive animal grazing.  In the past, remittances from mineworkers were a major source of rural 
livelihoods, providing vital cash needed to purchase agricultural inputs and productive assets or to 
invest in household assets and housing, but remittances have declined steadily over the past decade as 
the number of Basotho employed in the South African mining sector has declined substantially from 
more than 100,000 20 years ago to less than 30,000 at present. Despite the economic growth that has 
been achieved in recent years, income-generating opportunities remain limited and are generally 
confined to urban areas and wage employment in the industrial sector especially in garment 
production.

Because the urban economy has limited ability to absorb new labor market entrants, the rural economy 
in general and agriculture in particular will continue to play a major role in Lesotho’s development 
strategy for the foreseeable future. Agricultural development faces a number of challenges; however, 
most significant are difficult agro-climatic conditions and limited availability of irrigable arable land. 
The country’s limited production potential is not fully exploited due to poor farming practices, limited 
use of quality seeds, inappropriate crop selection and lack of diversification. Agricultural productivity 
is further undermined by unsustainable land management practices that in many cases have led to 
declining soil fertility and severe soil erosion. If agriculture were commercially viable, these 
constraints could likely be overcome through well-targeted investments, but the development of 
market-oriented crop and livestock production enterprises faces a number of constraints such as 
limited small-scale irrigation, lack of access to finance, and limited supply of produce of the required 
quality.

Institutional Context:
The successful transformation of Lesotho’s smallholder agricultural sector will continue to depend on 
sustained support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment 
capital, among other factors. This support has come from three main sources: (i) public service 
providers, (ii) producer organizations, trade associations, and other industry groups; (iii) NGOs and 
donor-funded programs. SADP II will continue to benefit from the current institutional arrangement of 
having the PMU embedded within the main service provider in this sector - MAFS, which has proven 
efficient as an implementation and communication strategy. The Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil 
Conservation continue to be implementing partners in NRM projects along with the Ministry of Water 
Affairs.  Producer groups such as piggery and poultry associations, as well as wool and mohair 
grower’s associations are also important partners and can prove instrumental in setting standards, 
prices and spreading knowledge towards increasing marketed output; however, much still needs to be 
done for this to be realized.  NGOs and donors provide services in support of agricultural 
development.  Most technological innovations continue to be introduced by both national and 
international NGOs, donor-funded projects and programs, and by private entrepreneurs in some cases.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent



Increase in marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector 
and, in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to 
said Eligible Crisis.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Key Results 

.

D. Project Description

The proposed AF offers a well performing vehicle to scale up smallholder agricultural productivity to 
other districts in Lesotho – reinforcing a key component of the CPF pillar on private sector jobs, in 
line with Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan.  The AF provides combined multi-faceted 
support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment capital that 
are key to meeting the government’s goals in the new districts. The AF will be allocated to expand 
project activities to three additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, 
namely rural Maseru, Mohale's Hoek and Quthing.  The addition of these three districts will result in 
all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included in the project.  It is expected that 
at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in addition to the 55,000 already 
reached under SADP.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 1: Increasing Agricultural Market Opportunities.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 2: Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder Production- Climate Smart Packages for 
Smallholders.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 3: Project Management.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Comments ( optional)

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics            relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known)
The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or community 
groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), cultivation of high value 
crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and horticulture, processing and 
storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully reclamation and catchment 



conservation. Although a list of potential sub-projects is known, the specific sub-project locations are 
not yet known. The project is designed as demand driven and, therefore, the exact locations will only 
be known at the time when the applications are received by the PMU through the Competitive Grants 
Programme. This will take place during the implementation phase of the project.

The Additional Financing will be scaled up in three (3) additional districts which have been identified 
as suitable for agriculture and have good potential for accessing markets, namely (i) rural Maseru, (ii) 
Mohale's Hoek, and (iii) Quthing located in the southern lowlands agro-ecological zone. ..

Topographically, Lesotho is predominantly mountainous, with the mountain zone covering 
approximately 65% of the total land area. The land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile 
soil formations which are extensively degraded. Only 9% of Lesotho’s land is arable and over 80% of 
this is found in the lowlands, where it is not only used for agriculture, but rather for other purposes 
such as housing. They typically have rich black soils or sandy loams in the valleys where the major 
agricultural activities occur. The southern lowlands, where the new districts are located, are 
characterized by poor soils and low rainfall and cover the western part of the country, occupying about 
2,700 km2 which is 9% of the total surface area. Generally, the lowland soils are the duplex type 
which are prone to erosion, and have poor moisture retention capacity. They are thus liable to rapid 
loss of top soil. The region forms the main livestock grazing area in the country. Although the soils are 
much less susceptible to erosion, inadequate grass cover combined with the steep slopes, and torrential 
rains result in massive erosion in this zone. It will be important to include sub-projects that will control 
runoff and control soil erosion such as sustainable landscape management, gully reclamation, 
catchment management and small-scale infrastructure such as gabions and check dams.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kisa Mfalila, Social Safeguards Specialist

Majbritt Fiil-Flynn, Social Safeguards Specialist

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under Parent Project which 
established a Project Management Unit (PMU) However, the capacity of the existing Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to implement, monitor and report on environmental and social 
safeguard issues during the implementation of the Parent Project was inadequate. With the 
guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a dedicated 
environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects to determine 
the level and degree of risk and impacts, ensure that site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Lesotho 
Smallholder Agriculture Development 
Program will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent 



Project. Environmental risks and impacts 
inherent to the agriculture and agribusiness 
industry are largely related to effluent 
discharges from use of pesticides/herbicides in 
controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer 
to increase crop productivity, pollution of soil 
and water resources from runoff, occupational 
health and safety of workers, efficient use of 
water and energy resources, and solid waste 
disposal. The review of the ESMF of the 
Parent Project indicates that the instrument is 
adequate for the Additional Financing in terms 
of identifying potential environmental impacts 
that will likely occur from implementing the 
project activities, the proposed measures to 
mitigate the impacts and monitor the 
implementation, the pest management 
approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The 
ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to 
guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and 
reporting of environmental issues for the sub-
projects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support sub-projects that 
have the potential to adversely alter or impact 
natural or critical habitats as defined under OP 
4.04. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support sub-projects 
located within forested areas or plantations as 
defined under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy 
is not triggered.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy is triggered to 
allow for the use of agrochemicals, as needed, 
using licensed professions and in a manner 
described in the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan (IPMP). The initial screening of the 
potential sub-projects to be funded under the 
AF, indicates that the risk of pesticides use is 
minor to moderate due to the small amounts of 
pesticides currently being used in the sub-
projects of the Parent Project. The ESMF 
prepared for the Parent Project, incorporates 
an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
which provides guidance on the sustainable 
application of fertilizers and pesticides taking 
into consideration the soil type and slope to 



ensure protection of watershed and 
groundwater. The use or purchase of 
significant amounts of pesticides will be 
excluded in the screening process described in 
the ESMF.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The AF will not support physical cultural 
resources but in some of the districts that the 
project will be implemented, artifacts from 
historical cultural resources have been found. 
The ESMF of the Parent Project have included 
Physical Cultural Resources Chance Find 
procedures for handling chance finds that 
might occur during the implementation of the 
sub-projects.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no 
indigenous people within the project area of 
influence.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes It is not anticipated that there will be any land 
acquisitions as a direct result of the project. 
However, communities are expected to 
continue to pool their land or provide 
voluntary land donations of communal land. 
This potentially impact livelihood through 
affecting access, for example for grazing and 
water. The existing RPF will be applied to 
screen and guide implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not 
finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, 
nor will it rely on the performance of an 
existing dam or a dam under construction, as 
defined in the policy.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

No The project is not expected to affect 
international waterways and, therefore, OP 
7.50 is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project will not finance any activities 
located in any known areas under territorial 
dispute as defined in OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or 
community groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), 



cultivation of high value crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and 
horticulture, processing and storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully 
reclamation and catchment conservation. The sub-projects are similar to those that are already 
being financed under the Parent Project, and therefore the AF will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent Project. Environmental risks and impacts inherent to 
the agriculture and agribusiness industry are largely related to effluent discharges from use of 
pesticides/herbicides in controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer to increase crop 
productivity, pollution of soil and water resources from runoff, occupational health and safety 
of workers, efficient use of water and energy resources, and solid waste disposal. The 
anticipated risks and impacts are expected to be small-scale in nature and scope, limited to the 
project sites and can be addressed with known mitigation measures. Overall, there are no large 
scale, significant or irreversible impacts that have been identified.

The PMU will use the ESMF of the Parent Project – which describes the screening, 
reviewing, implementing and monitoring procedures – to assess the risks and impacts and 
prepare the appropriate mitigation measures during the implementation phase.  Review of the 
ESMF of the Parent Project indicates that the instrument is adequate for the Additional 
Financing in terms of identifying potential environmental impacts that will likely occur from 
implementing the project activities, the proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and 
monitor the implementation, the pest management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and community health and safety issues. The ESMF also 
contains adequate and very clear screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in 
the screening, assessment, review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental 
issues for the sub-projects.

Review of the environmental performance of the Parent Project:

The team has been continuously reviewing the environmental performance the Parent Project 
through regular missions to the sub-project sites, and the overall environmental performance 
of the Parent Project is moderately unsatisfactory. Some of the issues identified under the 
parent project relate to, for example, improper handling of solid and liquid waste, insufficient 
monitoring of water access, improper handling of agrochemicals. A detailed time bound 
action plan has been agreed with the Borrower to remedy any environmental issues and avoid 
them reoccurring in the future

Climate Vulnerability
There is a need for climate vulnerability to be considered particularly during the siting of 
subprojects.  One poultry subproject is located on a mountainside exposed to severe wind and 
cold, and consequently many of the chickens died. Recently, a number of horticulture tunnels 
were damaged due to strong winds, hail and rain, and although these conditions were 
reportedly a one-off event, tunnels that were located in less sheltered terrain were more 
severely damaged than those that were somewhat sheltered.   The siting of subprojects taking 
into account climatic factors is therefore important in ensuring sustainability of the 
investments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:



The sub-projects to be supported under the AF will not generate indirect and/or long term 
impacts in the sub-project areas. It is, however, anticipated that some of the sub-projects that 
entail landscape restoration and management, will result into long term positive and beneficial 
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

In accordance with the RPF, voluntary land contributions will only be permitted where the 
land is communal land. If private use the communal land contributed under the project exists, 
then the private users must either benefit directly from project activities or be provided 
suitable alternatives. Such arrangements must be fully documented and are subject to 
informed consent procedures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Parent 
Project by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security will serve as the key environmental 
safeguard instrument for the project. Review of the ESMF by the project team indicate that 
the instrument is adequate for the Additional Financing in terms of identifying potential 
environmental impacts that will likely occur from implementing the project activities, the 
proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and monitor the implementation, the pest 
management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental issues for the sub-projects

With the guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a 
dedicated environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects 
to determine the level and degree of risk and impacts, site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained. The first task to be carried out by the PMU environmental specialist will 
be to undertake an environmental audit for all ongoing sub-projects to assess the extent to 
which the World Bank Safeguard Polices are complied with and make recommendations on 
how environmental risks and impacts will be mitigated.

All other institutions that will be involved in implementing the AF have previously 
implemented World Bank funded projects or are currently involved in implementation of 
other World Bank programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank safeguard policies 
and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) were subject to discussions with various groups 
of stakeholders at district and national level, including relevant government agencies, national 
and international NGOs, and farmer associations during appraisal of the original project in 



2011. In addition, beneficiary farmers and communities will receive appropriate training, as 
they will participate in screening, verification and mitigation measures (as relevant).

.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 03-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::

.

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 12

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20600

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Lesotho Project ID: P160964
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P144933

Project Name: Second Private Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification - AF 
(P160964)

Parent Project 
Name:

Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Prj 
(P144933)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

30-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Trade & Competitiveness Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Development Planning
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Trade and Industry

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 13.40
Total Project Cost 13.40

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, landlocked, lower-middle-income country with a per capita 
GNI of US$1,350. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in Southern Africa, and has one of the 
highest income inequality in the world. Home to about 2 million people, Lesotho is surrounded by 
South Africa, the second largest and most industrialized economy in Africa. Lesotho generates 
income mainly by exporting textiles, water, and diamonds, and is a member of the Southern 
African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and 
the Common Monetary Area (CMA). The national currency➢❨  the loti➢❨ is pegged to the South 
African rand. Lesotho➢❨ s main trading partners are South Africa and the United States. 
 
Several factors are concerning for Lesotho➢❨ s fiscal and economic outlook: in the short term, a 
projected sharp decline in SACU revenues and higher food prices caused by drought; in the 
medium term, insecurity in textile manufacturing given uncertainty of continued renewal of the 
African Growth and Opportunity Act, and risks caused by the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Lesotho 
now faces large fiscal and current account deficits, which will require substantial fiscal 
adjustment to restore macroeconomic stability and avert erosion of the exchange rate peg to the 
South African rand.  
 
The signs of fragility are exacerbated by other vulnerabilities, such as political instability, climatic 
vulnerability, including El NiÃ±o, and high rates of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and maternal 
and infant mortality. The 2015/16 El NiÃ±o induced drought prompted authorities to declare a 
state of emergency in December 2015, with a high share of the rural population now expected to 
be food insecure through the March 2017 harvest. For Lesotho➢❨ s small and highly dependent 
subsistence farming economy, El NiÃ±o related stress factors risks further depressing household 
incomes, which had already dropped due to declining migrant remittances from South Africa➢❨ s 
mining sector. Lesotho➢❨ s poor historical record in addressing climatic vulnerabilities adds to 
the capacity risks. The burden of disease is disproportionately higher among HIV/AIDS affected 
households.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Several factors hinder Lesotho➢❨ s private-sector growth, affecting both Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) and the growth of the local micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). The 
Trans-Pacific partnership could cause FDI in textile manufacturing to fall over the medium term. 
All quantitative measures ➢❨  including the Global Trade Reports, Doing Business Indicators, 
and Enterprise Surveys ➢❨  suggest that business regulations seriously constrain growth. Despite 
making progress in streamlining business and property registration and in establishing and 
operating a credit bureau, Lesotho ranks low on key Doing Business Indicators ➢❨  such as 
dealing with construction permits, accessing finance, and the cost of capital. These are constraints 
on domestic entrepreneurship, suggesting that the domestic private sector remains dependent on 
the state and non-tradable sectors. Over the last two decades, Lesotho shifted its growth drivers 
from export-led development towards dependency on government spending. 
 
Increased public spending has further crowded out private sector investment. Limited job 
opportunities in the private sector have exacerbated poverty and inequality and led to a situation 
in which the public sector has become a de facto social safety by absorbing employment which 
has led to a bloated public sector and oversized public spending. This has led to a vicious cycle 
that simultaneously crowds out investment in the country.



Page 3 of 12

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the development of selected 
non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth and job creation.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To improve the business environment for firms, strengthen select government institutions, and 
further diversify the economy.

Key Results 
The Additional Financing (AF) would seek to ensure that: (i) legislation supported by the Project 
is passed and implemented, (ii) automated systems supported by the Project are widely used, (iii) 
institutional changes supported by the Project are completed and institutional entities are fully 
operational, and (iv) deciduous fruit production, piloted by the Project, is supported by an 
enabling environment that facilitates investment in the sector. A new activity would include 
support for issues of trade facilitation and logistics given their cross-cutting importance to the 
economy.

D.  Project Description

The AF will provide additional support to the three original components, as well as support a new 
subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics. Activities have been chosen for the following 
reasons: (i) those which can be completed during the time available for implementation of the AF; 
(ii) those with overall positive results during the current project; (iii) those where implementation 
needs to continue in order for benefits for firms to be realized and sustained; (iv) those with 
significant stakeholder buy-in and clear alignment with the country➢❨ s economic needs and 
policies, including the Vision 2020 and the NSDP for 2012➢❨ 2017; and (v) those 
complementary with other private sector development projects.  
 
Component 1: 
 
Project activities under this component will continue to support efforts to reduce the time and cost 
associated with doing business, and increase access to finance. Subcomponent 1A would be 
divided into two subcomponents, in order to properly reflect anticipated results against Doing 
Business indicators. A new subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics aims to make trading 
across borders faster and cheaper for firms. 
 
In Subcomponent 1A, support would continue under the AF for the enactment of the business 
registration and licensing bill, and the implementation of automated business licensing and e-
payment gateway services at the One Stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC). The AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Strengthening of the OBFC, which would include developing OBFC➢❨ s legal framework; 
integrating the Business Registration system with LRA➢❨ s system to issue tax identifier 
numbers; supporting OBFC management; designing and implementing a capacity building 
program; completing necessary technology upgrades; developing and deploying a reform 
communication strategy; and creating public access sites in various districts for OBFC and other 



Page 4 of 12

government-to-business services. 
 
(ii) Improving business inspections reform, through a careful review of the legal and regulatory 
framework, the training of inspectors, and the development of a business inspections policy and 
associated manuals, risk-assessment tools, and training modules for its implementation. 
 
In Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) support would continue for the automation of the 
construction permit system. The AF would additionally support the implementation of an e-
payment system, and system support and maintenance for two years.  
 
In Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B), support would continue under the AF for access to finance 
activities. 
With regards to the establishment of the credit information bureau (CIB), the AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Expanding CIB coverage to include businesses, which would require legal reforms since the 
current law only allows for collection of consumer (individual) data. 
  
(ii) Training to enable credit providers associations and microfinance institutions to upgrade 
systems and processes and use various new credit information tools being developed by the 
project. 
With regards to the establishment of a movable assets collateral registry, the AF would 
additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to raise public awareness; (ii) development of a 
mobile application; (iii) development and implementation of a capacity building program for 
credit providers; (iv) continuous alignment and harmonization of associated laws. 
 
With regards to the establishment of a leasing industry, the AF would support technical assistance 
on financial leasing for credit providers.  
 
With regards to insolvency reform, the AF would additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to 
raise public awareness; (ii) intensive training to prepare for the implementation of the new Bill, 
focused on the Office of the Master of the High Court, the judiciary, and insolvency practitioners; 
and (iii) the design and implementation of ICT systems to ensure efficiency in insolvency 
proceedings and for the Master of the High Court. 
 
Finally, in order to ensure the sustainability of ongoing reforms and to entrench capacity within 
Lesotho to generate further reforms as needed, an institutional assessment of the Office of 
Parliamentary Counsel (OPC) will be undertaken under the AF in the areas of technology, skills, 
and human resources, and a training and capacity building plan will be developed and deployed. 
 
Subcomponent 1D would be new, and it would support two trade facilitation and logistics 
activities. Importantly, the majority of the related technical assistance and training would be 
funded by the LICP. 
 
(i) Support for Customs operations. This would cover the upgrading of ASYCUDAWorld, 
including additional modules, and the provision of redundancy for the system: a disaster recovery 
site to secure and sustain the customs operation, a back-up server, a stand by generator and other 
equipment as required. 



Page 5 of 12

 
(ii) Support for preparing and developing a single window that would connect selected 
government agencies involved in trade. This would enable Lesotho to move towards a paperless 
environment for import/export related procedures and processes.  
 
This component would finance technical assistance, training, goods, works, and equipment. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 1A would be US$ 1.3M, Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) 
would be US$ 0.03M, Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B) would be US$ 1.7M, and Subcomponent 
1D would be US$ 2.3M. 
 
Component 2: 
 
This component will continue to support economic diversification activities. 
 
In Subcomponent 2A, support would continue under the AF for investment promotion and 
fostering increased linkages to the local economy. The AF would additionally support: (i) the 
reorganization of the LNDC, including implementation support for the resulting entity(ies); (ii) 
the development of a Private Sector Development Strategy; and (iii) the scaling up of a linkages 
program currently being piloted, including capacity building in the government to sustain the 
program.   
 
Subcomponent 2B will continue supporting the tourism sector, albeit in a different capacity given 
the complementarity with the AFDB project. Under the AF, support would be provided for: (i) the 
construction and management of the Tourism & Handicraft Information Center, which would 
provide information to tourists, offer retail space for fashion accessories and home decor 
products, and offer leisure and entertainment; and (ii) the development and implementation of a 
business plan for the handicrafts sector.  
Subcomponent 2C will continue supporting commercial horticulture by building out the value 
chain for fresh fruit produce and leveraging the private sector to scale-up production. The AF 
would additionally support:  
  
(i) Support for the existing commercial horticulture plots in order to render them commercially 
sustainable. 
 This includes upgrading the irrigation system; and developing and implementing a marketing and 
distribution strategy; among others.  
 
(ii) Development of a research and training center, to conduct applied research, including variety 
testing, and yield and performance monitoring, and to provide training on good farm practices, 
retail standards, and business skills to farmers in Lesotho. If adequately funded and governed, the 
research and training Center could take over many horticulture- related activities, currently 
managed by the PMU, when the Project ends. 
 
(iii) Development and implementation of a capacity building program for quality and standards, 
directed at farmers, trainers, auditors and GoL Officials.  
 
(iv) Integrate horticulture suitability maps with the master irrigation plans that are being 
developed for Lesotho.  
 



Page 6 of 12

(v) Support for financial institutions, to strengthen their capacity to effectively assess business 
plans, conduct due diligence, and gauge risks in the fresh fruit sector. After the initial assessment, 
support could be provided through LEAP. 
 
(vi) Support for a targeted investor attraction program, that clarifies at which levels of the value 
chain investors may seek to engage or invest, what the GoL expects from investors, and what 
potential investors can expect in return. This would include support for road shows in selected 
target markets, including South Africa and Kenya, among others. 
 
(vii) Support for agri-logistics, including a feasibility study for a packhouse, among others. LICP 
is embarking on an in-depth agri-logistics survey to identify technical and regulatory constraints 
from the field to domestic and international retailers, with a special emphasis on cross-border 
logistics and cold chains (storage and transport). The AF would consider supporting some of the 
recommendations, subject to financing availability. 
 
Subcomponent 2D will continue to support the management of the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance 
Program (LEAP) Program. A review of the systems and processes of LEAP will be carried out 
under the current project such that under the AF, the scope of the LEAP matching grants program 
can be expanded to include machinery and equipment. 
 
This component would primarily finance technical assistance, training, goods and works. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 2A would be US$ 1.4M, Subcomponent 2B would be US$ 1.7M, 
Subcomponent 2C would be US$ 2.4M, and Subcomponent 2D would be US$ 0.5M. 
  
Component 3: 
 
This component will continue supporting the costs of the Project Management Unit, including the 
Monitoring and Evaluation system, and the management and implementation of the Environment 
and Social Management Plans (ESMP). To accommodate the larger scope of the PSCED-II 
Project under the AF, it is proposed that the PMU hire a Horticulture Coordinator, an Investment 
Climate / Business Environment officer, and a Communications Specialist. While the first of 
these is contemplated under the current project but has never been filled, the latter two positions 
would be new. A review of salaries is proposed to ensure PMU staff are paid competitively and 
according to their experience and performance.

Component Name
Improving the Business Environment
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Supporting Economic Diversification
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Implementation



Page 7 of 12

Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Under Component 2, the construction of a Tourism Handicraft Centre will take place in Maseru, 
while horticulture related activities will be implemented in Mahobong and Likhetlane in the 
Leribe District located approximately 215km from Maseru.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)
Nneka Okereke (OPSPF)
Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Reflecting the multi-sector nature of the project, implementation arrangements are intended to offer a 
balance between the effective overall supervision and monitoring of the activities at the project level, 
as well as reinforcing the management and institutional responsibilities of individual sub-
components.  
 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC consists of members representing the agencies 
responsible for the project implementation i.e. the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, 
MAFS, MFLR, MoF, MDP, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank, Town Clerk of the MCC, the 
Parliamentary Counsel, Master of High Court and the CEOs from LNDC and LTDC. The committee 
meets every semester to monitor the implementation progress of the project and help to resolve 
technical and implementation problems affecting project progress. Meetings are chaired by the 
Principal Secretary of MTICM. 
 
Project Management Unit (PMU): The day-to-day operations of the project are overseen by a Project 
Management Unit that is headed by a qualified Project Manager. In addition, the PMU includes a 
Financial Manager and a Procurement Manager who oversee the Financial Management and 
Procurement issues respectively. The PMU provides for overall fiduciary management, monitoring 
and evaluation, project oversight, and coordination. The role and functions of the PMU have been 
detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The Project Manager is responsible for: (i) 
overall day-today management of the project, including coordination of procurement, financial 
management and M&E; (ii) coordination with all the implementing agencies responsible for the 
implementation of the various sub-components; and (iii) coordination with other donors and relevant 
programs/projects. The Project Manager reports to the Project Steering Committee chaired by the 
Principal Secretary, MTICM. The project covers the operating costs of the PMU, necessary 
equipment purchase, training of staff and the costs of annual audits of project accounts.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



Page 8 of 12

Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Second Private 
Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification 
Project will maintain the Category B classification of 
the original loan. The environmental impacts of the 
AF are expected to derive mainly from the 
horticulture activities and the small-scale 
construction works related to the Tourism Handicraft 
Center which were assessed in the original loan. 
Potential minor to moderate adverse impacts are 
being managed and monitored through Global GAP 
certification for the horticulture sub-component, and 
through the provisions of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared 
for the horticulture sub-component and the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). Both instruments where prepared in 
anticipation that the project will scale up horticulture 
production in Lesotho, and was therefore designed 
for the Government of Lesotho to use post PSCED-II 
Project. Given the nature and scale of the project, the 
environmental impacts are expected to be generally 
limited to the sites and can be addressed with known 
mitigation measures included in the ESMF 
 
Environmental safeguard implementation 
arrangements will follow the arrangements that are 
already in place for the parent project. Activities to 
be carried out under the proposed Additional 
Financing (establishment of nurseries and a research 
center) are derived from continuity of the current 
project, and therefore the Additional Financing will 
not trigger additional safeguards policy.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support activities that will affect 
natural or critical habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The projects will not support activities located within 
forested areas or plantations as defined under OP 
4.36.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes While the total land under the project is not 
substantial (only 30-35 hectares) and the risk of 
pesticides is minor to moderate due to the small 
amounts of pesticides being used, the ESMF 
incorporates an integrated pest management plan 
(IPMP). The application of fertilizers and pesticides 
will consider soil type and slope to ensure protection 
of watershed and groundwater. Application of 
pesticides and fertilizers will follow sustainable 



Page 9 of 12

approaches described in the Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) for the parent project and 
monitored under the Global Gap framework. The 
subscription to Global Gap ensures that the project is 
compliant with international norms in the use and 
handling of agrochemicals. The horticulture 
coordinator will monitor erosion, water quality and 
soil nutrition, but with the 
Global Gap the project has enhanced inspection with 
an independent monitoring regime.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No While the project will finance minor construction 
works related to the Tourism Handicraft Center that 
will provide information on tourism sites, including 
physical cultural resources, the AF will not have 
direct impacts on physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no Indigenous Peoples identified in the 
project areas.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The Tourism Information & Handicraft Center will 
be built on land on which there are no encroachers or 
squatters. A shortlist of potential sites has been 
developed for the tourism center and all shortlisted 
sites are held by public entities. Activities under the 
project will avoid any potential involuntary 
resettlement impacts and will ensure that if land 
acquisition is necessary, it will be carried out in a 
fully voluntary nature. Given that risk of involuntary 
resettlement impacts is low, the ESMP will include 
land acquisition screening criteria in order to ensure 
that involuntary resettlement impacts are avoided.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance construction or 
rehabilitation of dams, nor will it rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under 
construction, as defined in the policy.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project will not affect international waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities located in 
any known areas under territorial dispute as defined 
in OP 7.60.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated from the project since 
the project will mainly be providing technical assistance to the GoL in Maseru, and only sub-
components 2B and 2C will support the tourism sector and horticulture, respectively. Potential 



Page 10 of 12

minor to moderate potential adverse impacts are being managed through Global GAP certification 
for the horticulture subcomponent, and through the provisions of the ESMP and ESMF prepared 
for the sub-components, respectively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under PSCED II Project. In 
anticipation of potential adverse impacts that could arise from construction of the Tourism 
Handicraft Centre, an ESMP has been prepared, and for implementation of the horticulture 
subcomponent, an ESMF has been prepared.  
 
All institutions that will be involved have implemented bank projects previously or are currently 
involved in implementation of other programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank 
safeguards and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include: (i) the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which provides guidance to 
the PMU; (ii) The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, which provides support to the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; (iii) The Ministry of Forestry, which provides guidance to the 
project on matters related to technical on-farm activities; (iv) The Project Steering Committee, 
which consists of the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, MAFS, MFLS, the Central 
Bank, Registrar General and CEOs from LNDC and LTDC; (v) The National Environmental 
Secretariat (NES), the environmental agency responsible for reviewing and clearing all safeguards 
documentation for the project; (vi) operators in the handicraft sector in Lesotho who were 
consulted during the preparation of the ESMP for the Tourism Handicraft Center to be constructed 
in Maseru; (vii) the current participating farmers in the horticulture industry who have been 
consulted during the preparation of PSCEDP II as well as ESMF preparation; and (viii) the 
Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA), which will be the beneficiary of activities relating to the 
Project's new trade facilitation & logistics subcomponent.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 23-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Lesotho 22-Dec-2016
Comments: Disclosed here: http://www.psc.org.ls/viewNewsletter.aspx


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 
 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA20573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Zambia P161490 Zambia Integrated Forest 
Landscape Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 16-Jan-2017 04-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Interim Climate Change 
Secretariat 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits for targeted rural 
communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency. 
 
Components 

1. Enabling environment 
2. Livelihood investments 
3. Project management 
4. Contingent emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund    8.00  

Borrower    0.00  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    8.05  

International Development Association (IDA)   17.00  

Total Project Cost   33.05  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 



 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Zambia is a lower-middle-income country with close to 16 million inhabitants. It had a Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of US$27.1 billion in 2015, equating to a per capita income of about US$1,300. Zambia 
has made significant socio-economic progress over the past two decades and achieved average growth 
of 7.4 percent between 2004 and 2014. However, since mid-2015 economic growth has slowed down 
considerably to 2.9% in 2015 and a forecasted 3.0 percent in 2016, as external headwinds and domestic 
pressures have intensified.  

2. In 2015, global economic conditions for growth deteriorated and the price of copper (typically 77 
percent of Zambia’s exports) fell further from its 2011 peak. This has put downward pressure on 
revenues, widening the fiscal deficit and reduced the value of exports, opening up a trade deficit. In 
addition, Zambia experienced domestic pressures in the form of: (i) repeat fiscal deficits (reducing 
confidence in the economy); (ii) reduced and delayed rainfall in 2015 (undermining agricultural incomes 
and lowering the water level in reservoirs); and (iii) increased power outages. Further, the strengthening 
of the US$ in 2015 put pressure on the Zambian Kwacha that combined with lower confidence so that 
the local currency lost 41% of its value against the US$. 

3. Close to the end of 2015 the government acted vigorously to contain the impact of ebbing confidence 
with monetary policy measures. These measures restored stability of the Kwacha, which appreciated by 
11.2 percent in the first 9 months of 2016, and helped curb inflation from its peak of 22.9 percent in 
February 2016 to 8.8 percent in November 2016. However, fiscal policy remained loose in 2016 and 
monetary policy has had to remain very tight, reducing liquidity, putting pressure on the financial sector, 
and causing a drag on growth.  

4. The August 2016 elections went in favor of the incumbent President and political party. After five 
elections in ten years the constitutional changes mean that a full five-year term is expected to be served, 
raising cautious optimism about the political space for reform in 2017 and over the medium-term. The 
Government has presented its economic recovery plan: “Zambia Plus” that provides a framework for 
restoring fiscal sustainability, closing the twin deficits and ensuring that structural reforms are carried 
out to boost the non-copper economy. The Government has requested the support of the World Bank, 
IMF and other partners to make it a success. Accordingly, GDP growth is forecast to rise to 4.0 percent in 
2017 and 4.2 percent in 2018. The forecasts are subject to upside and downside risks, but the return of 
investor confidence in the fourth quarter of 2016 (evidenced by over-subscribed bond auctions), bold 
measures by government (including the removal of fuel subsidies), and a rally in copper prices 
(November 2016), suggest that economic circumstances are improving.  

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 


5. The rapid and sustained growth achieved from the early 2000s to 2014 was insufficiently inclusive and 
despite the economy doubling in size, poverty remains widespread. As based on the 2015 Living 
Conditions Monitoring Survey Report of the Government’s Central Statistical Office, an estimated 54.4 
percent of Zambians live in extreme poverty (below US$1.90 per day, purchasing power parity terms) 
and poverty is higher among women. Rural poverty (at 76.6 percent) is more than three times the 23.4 
percent rate of urban poverty. The benefits of growth have accrued mainly to those already above the 
poverty line, inequality has remained high, and efforts are needed not only to restore the economy to 
faster growth, but ensure planned pro-poor policies are implemented and more inclusive growth 
follows. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. In Zambia’s Eastern Province (EP), the majority of the province’s 1.7 million people live in rural areas 
with livelihoods dependent on natural resources. As in Zambia as a whole, this rural population is 
characterized by high levels of poverty and addressing this challenge is the highest priority of the 
provincial administration. According to the World Bank’s Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia report, 
the Eastern Province is one of three poorest provinces in Zambia

1
. In addition, according to the Living 

Conditions and Monitoring Survey (2015), at 70 percent, the Eastern Province had the fourth highest 
proportion of population that was poor. The Zambian diet is mainly composed of cereals, predominantly 
maize, starchy roots and, to a lesser extent, fruit and vegetables. Cereals provide almost two-thirds of 
the dietary energy supply. According to the 2013-14 Zambia Demographic and Health Survey, the 
nutrition indicators for Eastern province stand at 43 percent for children under five who are stunted and 
20 percent of the women are overweight or obese (ZDHS, 2013-14).  Women and children are the most 
vulnerable to the problems related to nutrition because of their socioeconomic characteristics.  

7. Compounding the challenges of rural development in the EP is a changing climate, which models suggest 
will continue to change dramatically over the coming decades. The country is already experiencing 
climate-induced hazards. Droughts and floods have increased in frequency and intensity over the past 
few decades and have adversely impacted food and water security, water quality, energy generation, 
and livelihoods of people, especially in rural communities. Recent climate trends based on records from 
1960 to 2003 indicate that the mean annual temperature increased by 1.3 degrees Celsius, an average 
rate of 0.34 degrees Celsius per decade. Mean rainfall in Zambia has decreased by an average rate of 1.9 
mm/month (2.3 percent) per decade since 1960. The future trends in the country are towards a higher 
average temperature, a possible decrease in total rainfall, and some indication of more intense rainfall 
events. Zambia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) report to the UNFCCC has estimated 
national GDP loss due to climate change over a 10-20 year mid-term planning horizon will be in the 
range of US$4,330-5,440 million with the following sector GDP losses: agriculture (US$2,200 – 3,130), 
energy-related (US$270 – 450), health (US$460), and natural resources (US$1,400).  
 

8. In addition to being subject to the impacts of climate change, Zambia contributes to global carbon 
emissions. According to the Second National Communication (SNC), the latest data available from the 
UNFCCC, annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Zambia have increased by 6.2 percent from 51.52 
million tons carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 1994 to 54.72 million tons CO2e in 2000. The largest 
contribution to GHG emissions in 2000 came from land use change and forestry, which accounted for 

                                                           
1
 World Bank Group (2015), Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia. 

7 percent followed by agriculture at 18.9 percent. 
 

9. Addressing rural poverty and improving livelihoods, helping rural communities adapt to major impacts 
to be expected from climate change, and reducing national carbon emissions from the forest and land 
sector all require a carefully integrated landscape approach. Major sources of rural livelihoods in the EP 
are in agriculture, forestry, and wildlife, but all of these are inter-dependent and all are intertwined with 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. 

 
10. The Government of the Eastern Province is in the process of preparing a development vision in 

consultation with provincial stakeholders. The vision statement is “to improve rural livelihoods in Eastern 
Province by reducing deforestation and forest degradation using a low emission pathway through local 
community participation by 2030”. In order to address the challenges associated with the drivers of 
deforestation, local communities’ participation and commitments as well as private sector involvement 
will be critical in optimizing natural resources management at both communal and individual farmer 
levels. According to the vision, the targets for reducing drivers of deforestation include reducing the 
total annual area burnt from 16.7 percent to 5.0 percent by 2036 through forest fire management; 
establishment of a minimum of 3,000 hectares of plantations on deforested land by 2037; promoting 
ecotourism with community participation to combat poaching; and promoting soil fertility 
improvement, good agricultural practices, and land use planning among 40 percent of the farmers in the 
province to tackle food security and poverty at local level. The estimated financing investment to 
achieve these goals is US$140 million, part of which will be leveraging private sector investments and a 
significant part of which will be mobilization of additional financing for institutional strengthening and 
implementation of activities. The ZIFLP will contribute towards supporting activities for addressing the 
drivers of deforestation as stated in the vision. 
 

11. Institutionally, responsibilities for coordination of the national climate agenda falls to the Interim 
Climate Change Secretariat (ICCS), under the Ministry of National Development Planning (MNDP). The 
ICCS ensures coordination with the many other ministries and organizations which need to be engaged 
in a landscape-level livelihoods/climate change initiative such as this project. Responsibility for 
implementing projects is often with the line ministries. At the provincial level, the provincial 
administration of the Eastern Province exercises considerable control over activities in its jurisdiction, 
consistent with the recently adopted decentralization law of Zambia. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective  
 

 
 
Development Objective 
 

12. The PDO is “to improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits 
for targeted rural communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective 
response to an eligible crisis or emergency”.  

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 


Key Results 
 

13. The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following indicators i) Forest area brought 
under sustainable management practices as a result of the project (ha); ii) Land area under climate-
smart agricultural practices (ha); iii) Yield change for selected crops (%); and iv) People in targeted 
communities with increased monetary and non-monetary benefits (% share of which women). The 
project outcome and intermediate indicators are presented below in the Results Framework. 

 
D. Project Description  
 

14. The project aims to provide support to rural communities in the EP to allow them to better manage the 
resources of their landscapes so as to reduce deforestation and unsustainable agricultural expansion; 
enhance benefits they receive from forestry, agriculture, and wildlife; and reduce their vulnerability to 
climate change. The project must also invest in ensuring that enabling conditions are in place for these 
changes to happen – conditions such as tenure security, planning at different spatial scales, and capacity 
development. Simultaneously the project will create the enabling environment for emission reduction 
purchases to be made in a subsequent project. 

 
15. ZIFLP will promote the adoption of sustainable landscape management practices and climate-smart 

agriculture (CSA) as an alternative. Community empowerment, strengthening local and traditional 
governance and land use planning are the key to integrating, optimizing multiple land uses within the 
landscape. However, collective action is unlikely in the absence of rights to use, benefit from, and 
protect natural resources. Leverage for transforming the system will include village land use plans, 
improved governance, matching land use with land characteristics, and poverty reduction outcomes 
including emission reduction payments. This will require strong monitoring systems for 
livelihoods/economics, governance, the implementation of land use plans, and resources monitoring 
and protection. 

 
16. ZIFLP would finance activities under four components over a five-year period using funds from the 

BioCFplus-ISFL (US$8.0 million), GEF (US$8.05 million) and IDA (US$17.0 million). The project 
components include 1) Enabling Environment, 2) Livelihood and Low Carbon Investments, and 3) Project 
Management. A fourth component, with a zero budget, is included in the event funds need to be 
reallocated for an emergency response. 
 

17. Component 1: Enabling Environment. This first component is intended to help create conditions that 
will allow the livelihood investment of Component 2 to be successfully implemented. This entails 
supporting plans, partnerships, and regulatory conditions to help rural communities in the project area 
to have the capacity to adopt sustainable and low-carbon land management practices. The component 
would include support for (i) Developing integrated district development and local planning; and (ii) 
Establishing emissions reduction framework leading to an Emission Reduction Payment Agreement 
(ERPA) (for future results-based emissions reduction payments). Enabling environment interventions will 
be financed through grant support from the BioCarbon Fundplus-ISFL. 
 

18. Component 2: Livelihood and Low-Carbon Investments. Component 2 will finance on-the-ground 
activities that improve rural livelihoods, conserve ecosystems and reduce GHG emissions. It has 2 



subcomponents: Agriculture and forestry management and Wildlife management. These activities will 
be financed by IDA, BioCFplus-ISFL and GEF resources. Although the subcomponents are sectoral in 
nature, the cross-sectoral and landscape approach of the planning activities that will underlie the 
activities will ensure a landscape approach is retained.  

 
19. Agriculture and forestry management. The objective of this subcomponent is to provide financing for 

interventions that increase agricultural productivity, enhance agro- and forest ecosystem resilience, 
reduce GHG emissions, and sequester carbon using a landscape approach. This subcomponent will cover 
the following activities: (i) scaling up of climate-smart agricultural practices; (ii) community forestry 
management; and (iii) land tenure and resource rights regularization, a pre-condition for the adoption of 
improved agriculture and forestry management. 

 
20. Climate smart agriculture. Interventions under climate smart agriculture will apply a train the trainers 

approach to introduce (i) conservation agriculture (CA) practices and integrated soil fertility 
management, (ii) agroforestry, and (iii) enhanced market access for smallholders and private sector 
engagement. In addition, the project supports community matching grants which can support livelihood 
interventions including climate-smart agriculture interventions, introducing small ruminants or poultry, 
supporting market access through agro-processing. Interventions will aim at enhancing the income and 
livelihood of the communities and farmer families through income generating and value added activities 
in the Eastern Province.  

 
21. Community forestry management. The objective of forestry management is to assist local communities 

and their organizations to improve the management and conservation of their natural resources, create 
income opportunities, and generate carbon benefits. This will be accomplished by developing and 
implementing participatory land and resource use planning and management–including fire control and 
prevention–and providing specialized technical assistance and training to identify viable investments 
from the sustainable production of timber and not-timber forest products. Activities to be supported 
will be consistent with the land and resource use plans developed at the village and district levels. The 
sub-component would finance specialized technical and extensions services, small works and 
equipment, operational costs and non-consultant services (e.g. workshops and study tours).  
 

22. Land tenure and resource rights regularization. The sub-component will provide analytical and 
technical assistance support to expand past and ongoing efforts at documenting land rights that could 
underpin adoption of sustainable low-carbon land management practices and private sector 
engagement.  Activities will feed into the National Land Titling Program, and will comprise (i) developing 
cost-effective systems to sustainably manage information on land rights and linking it to land use; (ii) 
identifying new possibilities of private sector engagement based on an assessment of the extent and 
impact of existing arrangements; (iii) documenting different types of land rights in ways that are 
supported by local stakeholders, and provide incentives for adoption of CSA, sustainable land use and 
intensification; and (iv) linking land rights to key parameters of land use (crop cover, soil moisture, soil 
carbon) using remotely sensed imagery.  

 
23. Wildlife management. This sub-component will have two major focus areas: i) improved management of 

the complex of protected areas centered on Lukusuzi National Park in the Eastern Province; and ii) 
adoption of improved management practices of wildlife at the community level, which can contribute to 

improved livelihoods of targeted communities. The project will support (i) preparation of park 
management plans; (ii) investments in infrastructure such as guard houses or other park buildings, 
upgrading of existing roads and tracks to facilitate park management and ecotourism, provision of water 
holes, fencing (only in limited areas where judged necessary to minimize human-wildlife conflict, HWC); 
(iii) purchase of equipment such as radios for communication, park guard equipment, patrol equipment, 
etc.; and (iv) support to park patrols, with a particular focus on management of poaching. 

 
24. Component 3: Project management. This third component will finance activities related to national and 

provincial-level project coordination and management, including annual work planning and budgeting; 
fiduciary aspects (financial management and procurement); human resource management; safeguards 
compliance monitoring; M&E and impact assessment studies; and communication strategy and citizen 
engagement).   

 
25. Component 4: Contingent emergency response. This is a zero budget component which is included to 

facilitate the use of IDA funds in the event of a disaster and to be able to respond quickly to a potential 
government request to reallocate some funding from existing World Bank projects to provide 
emergency relief.  

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

26. The major investments of the ZIFLP will take place in the Eastern Province. However, there are activities 
such as those related to REDD+ policy, MRV, safeguards, etc. which are national in scope. 
Implementation of ZIFLP will therefore be at both the national and at the Eastern Province level. A 
National Project Unit (NPU) will be responsible for activities at the national level, and will be located 
within the Ministry of National Development Planning. At the provincial level, the Provincial 
Administration of the Eastern Province will be the executing agency of the project. This implementation 
arrangement aims to: (a) ensure sectoral mainstreaming of investment; (b) lessen the approval layers 
for faster decision-making, enabling more efficient project implementation; and (c) respect the 
constitutionally mandated decentralization process and governance structures at the national and 
provincial levels, to the extent possible.  

 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project location is the Eastern Province of Zambia. Wildlife conservation activities will focus on improved 
management of Lukusuzi National Park (and surrounding areas). The land planning, agriculture, and forestry 
investments will take place throughout the Province. 

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kenneth M. Green,Majbritt Fiil-Flynn,Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as this is an integrated forest 
landscape project that will involve afforestation, 
reforestation, promotion of sustainable conservation 
farming methods as well as preservation of wildlife 
habitat in national parks and adjacent GMAs, all of 
which could have environmental or social impacts 
which must be assessed and managed. As a 
landscape management project its impacts are 
nonetheless expected to be overwhelmingly 
positive. 
 
The positive impacts of the program will be a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions with 
improved forest cover, rural livelihoods 
improvement, and wildlife conservation. The 
potential negative environmental impacts will be 
known with more specificity as project activities are 
identified during project implementation but are 
expected to be limited, localized, small-scale and not 
significant given that many of the on-the-ground 
project activities will be from community-driven 
development initiatives. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared to assess and guide the screening and 
mitigation of any negative impacts of the program. 
The project will monitor possible cumulative 
negative impacts and take action as needed. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the potential impacts on 
natural habitats either directly or indirectly, through 
REDD+ activities, conservation farming, and the 
management of wildlife habitats. The expected 
impact on habitats is overall positive. Changes in 
livelihoods of rural farmers, due to increased 
agriculture activities and the introduction of new 


agricultural technologies, are likely to have limited 
negative impacts on natural habitats. The proposed 
avoidance and mitigation measures for these 
impacts are included in the project's ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered as the project forestry 
management activities seek to assist local 
communities and their organizations to improve the 
management and conservation of their forests. The 
project will have impacts on the health and quality 
of forests, will affect the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon and interaction 
with forests, and aims to bring about changes in the 
management, protection, and utilization of natural 
forests. However, the project will not lead to 
significant conversion or degradation of critical 
forest areas or related critical natural habitats. There 
may be continuing intrusion of smallholder farming 
into natural forests in the project area but the 
overall purpose of the project investments is to limit 
such intrusions and never to promote them. The 
project's Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and Process Framework (PF) 
address the potential impact of the project on 
forests and/or the rights and welfare of local 
communities. 
Since the project potentially finances harvesting 
activities carried out by local communities under 
community or even possibly joint forest 
management, such communities will adhere to a 
time-bound phased action plan to achieve a 
standard of forest management developed with the 
meaningful participation of locally affected 
communities, consistent with the principles and 
criteria of responsible forest management as 
outlined in paragraph 10 of OP 4.36. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as increased agriculture 
activities and the adoption of new climate smart 
agriculture technologies could conceivably result in 
increased usage of agrochemicals by farmer 
beneficiaries. The project additionally will procure 
supplies and equipment for nurseries which may 
include pesticides. While a stand-alone Pest 
Management Plan (PMP) is not required for this 
project, the ESMF contains an abbreviated PMP to 
avoid usage of restricted pesticides, promote use of 



personal protective equipment (PPE), training of 
producers in proper handling of agrochemicals, and 
to promote integrated pest management. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a preventative measure in 
the event of potential impacts on the known and 
currently unknown physical cultural resources (PCR) 
of the area. The ESMF contains measures for 
avoiding and managing impacts on known PCR in the 
project area as well as chance-find procedures in the 
event new resources are discovered in the course of 
project implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy is not triggered as the proposed program 
activities in the Eastern Province of Zambia are in 
areas that do not include indigenous groups as 
defined by the policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered and applies mainly to certain 
activities relating to project interventions in 
protected areas. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) was prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders, consulted, and publicly disclosed. A 
Process Framework (PF) will also be required given 
that the project will support improved management 
of Lukusuzi National Park, adjacent GMAs and 
possibly other protected areas, thus potentially 
limiting access to resources. 
 
The PF is intended to avoid or minimize any adverse 
impacts upon local livelihoods and to support the 
development of alternative livelihoods as needed, 
on the lands already available to the affected 
households or communities. The project will support 
the preparation and implementation of follow-up 
action plans to provide livelihoods support where 
needed, following the criteria and procedures 
specified in the PF.  
 
The Zambian Government has recently resettled 
communities who encroached into Lukusuzi National 
park in the recent past. The Government has 
prepared and sent to the Bank a review of how the 
resettlements were carried out and an action plan to 
cover any remaining gaps that might remain. 
 
During the project, the Government could be 
required to continue to deal with those who have 

dy encroached into the park, or with new 
encroachers. If the project will in any way be 
associated with new resettlements, this would have 
to be done in strict accordance with the RFP. 
Additionally, the PF outlines the process of dealing 
with such situations following the Zambian laws, the 
provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices.  
 
The Land tenure and resource rights regularization 
activities will be informed by and will be 
complementary to the PF and RPF as appropriate. 
 
All project-supported civil works (such as 
construction of office space, staff accommodations, 
and ranger posts) will be on government, public, or 
voluntarily donated community lands. This will be 
verified through the environmental and social 
screening mechanism specified in the ESMF, before 
any civil works commence. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The policy on the Safety of Dams is not triggered as 
the project will not involve the construction of water 
retention structures that are likely to pose potential 
hazards to human or animal health and safety. The 
project will not fund any dams as defined in OP 4.37 
that would trigger the requirements of the policy. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy for Projects on International Waterways is 
not triggered as the proposed activities will not 
potentially impact any shared international 
waterway. Any conceivable increase in water use 
and direct abstraction of water resources in the 
Luangwa watershed will be of low significance and of 
local impact only. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Bank policy on Projects in Disputed Areas is not 
triggered by the project, as it is not located in any 
disputed territory of the country. 


KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While there are environmental and social safeguard issues associated with the proposed project, no large-scale, 
significant, or irreversible negative impacts are foreseen. In general, the project is expected to generate positive, 
environmentally friendly land management practices including climate-smart agriculture and implementation of 
national park management plans. However, the project takes place in and could conceivably negatively impact natural 
habitats, protected areas, and forests. Additionally, as a project with an agricultural component, there are safeguard 
issues related to pesticide use. In all these cases, activities are largely community and demand-driven, and potential 
impacts are small-scale and localized. There may be cumulative impacts from these small-scale activities which will 
need monitoring. 
 
Zambia in the past has resettled persons illegally encroaching into national parks, including from Lukusuzi National 
Park, to be supported under the project. There could be possibilities of dealing with encroachment in the life of this 
project. The Government has conducted a review of how resettlement was carried out in the past in Lukusuzi NP as 
well as a gap analysis to identify any additional measures that may be needed to ensure compliance with both 
Zambian law and World Bank requirements. Any resettlement carried out during the project will be subject to the 
project's Resettlement Policy Framework. Additionally, the Process Framework (PF) outlines the process of dealing 
with limiting access to resources, following Zambian laws and the provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are expected. As mentioned, a potentially indirect impact due to increased or new 
agricultural practices may be increased pesticide use but since such activities are largely community and demand-
driven, these issues are small scale and localized. The project will also support livelihood restoration activities and 
sustainable community forestry, which in turn is expected to be beneficial to the local communities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In order to achieve the project objectives of promoting landscape management in the Eastern Province, in agricultural, 
forestry, and wildlife sectors, no project alternatives were identified that would further minimize environmental or 
social impacts and still allow for achievement of project objectives. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), and a Process Framework (PF) in order to address safeguard policy issues. Specifically for issues 
related to the resettlement of encroachers out of Lukusuzi National Park, the Government has prepared a review and 
action plan. Although not related to potential impacts of the project activities, it should also be noted that the project 
includes significant funding to support the preparation of the safeguard instruments that will be needed to advance 
toward signature of an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement, in the context of REDD+. 
 
The Interim Climate Change Secretariat, under the Ministry of National Development Planning is currently 


implementing the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in the Western Province of Zambia. Hence, the 
implementation unit has good knowledge of safeguards and of implementation requirements. At present there is a 
knowledgeable Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer with proven experience with implementing management 
measures in line with World Bank safeguard policies. Safeguards capacity is much more limited or absent in the 
provincial administration unit; staff will need to be hired or training will need to be provided. Safeguards training 
needs have been identified in the ESMF, which would be provided through the technical assistance component of this 
project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Citizen engagement and participation for the project’s implementation will build on the various multi-stakeholder 
consultations that have taken place in the Eastern province during project preparation, and will take account of 
existing communication structures.  
 
Specifically, the project collaborates with stakeholders regularly through the following channels: project preparation 
missions, Monthly REDD+ Working Group meetings organized by the Interim Climate Change Secretariat and Forestry 
Department and Chipata Round Table meetings. The Chipata Roundtable was established to provide a forum for 
government and non-governmental stakeholders to discuss major environmental threats to the Luangwa Valley 
ecosystem, and is chaired by the Permanent Secretary, with active participation of chiefs and civil society. The 
Roundtable will likely be expanded to cover the entire Eastern Province. The ICCS will also develop a clear consultation 
and participation plan and protocols to be operationalized during implementation of this project, to ensure that all 
relevant stakeholders are targeted by the project.  
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 15-Feb-2017 
 

   
























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 26, 2017 

Report No.: 120537  
 

Operation Name Benin - First Fiscal Reform and Growth Operation 

Region AFRICA 

Country Benin 

Sector Central government administration (40%); General energy sector 
(30%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%) 

Operation ID P160700 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) Government of Benin 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Date PID Prepared September 26, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 11, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval November 28, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 
1. Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of 
approximately US$820 in 2016. Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate of at about 50 
percent ($1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 PPP) in 2015.  With an average per capita GDP growth rate of 
1.3 percent (2005-2015) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, 
highlighting the need to ensure a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-
headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-headed households.  
 
2. Benin’s economic growth has been satisfactory over the past decade (averaging about 4 percent) 
but the country’s economic performance has been hampered by low competitiveness and high 
informality.  Following the temporary slowdown experienced in 2015, economy activity rebounded 
driven by the recovery of private consumption. Economic performance was supported by increased 
cotton production, strong activity at the Port of Cotonou, and rising telecommunications and transport 
sector activity. Despite the satisfactory growth rates, economic performance in Benin is hampered by a 
weak business enabling environment. The high cost and unpredictable supply of electricity is a key 
constraint for private sector development. Agriculture’s export is concentrated in the cotton sector, and 
agriculture suffers from supply chain deficiencies, including in the provision and distribution of inputs as 
well as on the marketing side. Approximately 90 percent of the labor force is engaged in the informal 
sector – agriculture, informal commerce and other services activities. 
 
3. The first pillar of the Fiscal Reform and Growth series on fiscal consolidation is justified given the 
Government’s effort to create fiscal space and improve the efficiency of public spending. In the run-up 
to 2016 Presidential elections, increases in the wage bill and out-of-budget expenses led to significant 
increases in public debt (up by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (up from 2.1 percent of 
GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015). The Government contained expenditures in 2016 to face the drop of 
tax revenues and managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6 percent of 

GDP in 2016.  The DPO series will support the authorities’ effort to create fiscal space by improving 
revenue collection and managing more efficiently public expenditure, with an emphasis on wages and 
transfers.  In addition to the DPOs, the Government program is supported by an ECF program with the 
IMF approved by the IMF Board on April 7, 2017, providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that will 
support the implementation of the reforms. The first review of the Program, carried out in September 
2017, confirmed that the authorities are committed to responsible fiscal management. 

 
4. The second pillar aims at promoting agricultural productivity and strengthening the power sector 
which is a Government’s priority to create productive formal jobs and support inclusive growth. 
Agriculture employs over 50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector 
foreign exchange earner. The country has a large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate 
water resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in agriculture remains largely unexploited as 
the governance structure and relatively low food-safety standards had a negative impact on the sector’s 
competitiveness. Also, the inconsistent supply of electricity is frequently noted as a leading constraint to 
private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors. 
Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector and promote private sector participation is 
essential to increase electricity production capacity in a sustainable way. Focusing on these important 
real sectors will help improve productivity, create higher paying jobs and livelihoods, and enhance the 
country’s effort to reach the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. 
 

 Proposed Objective(s) 
 
5. The overarching goal of the proposed FRGC series is to boost real economic growth, reduce poverty 
and increase opportunities for the poorest in the population. The program development objectives of 
this FRGC series are to: a) support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal management; and b) 
promote economic growth by increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity.  
 

 Preliminary Description 
 
6. The first pillar of the DPO series will focus on supporting macroeconomic stability by strengthening 
fiscal management. Not only is adequacy of the macroeconomic and fiscal framework a prerequisite for 
sustainable economic growth but budgetary and debt sustainability is necessary to the delivery of 
effective public services that maximize the impact of available revenues on beneficiaries, including the 
poorest segments of the populations. In addition, increasing fiscal space will help relax fiscal constraints 
to accommodate the financing of needed infrastructure projects.  
 
7. The second pillar will seek to promote economic growth by increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural sector and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. 
This series focuses on measures aimed at increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector by 
supporting a policy, regulatory, and institutional framework that strengthens agriculture value chains 
and enhances diversification, promotes higher quality standards for agricultural products and supports 
greater access to credit in the primary sector. Moreover, the measures supported by the operation 
strengthen the financial viability of the power sector that is necessary to attract private sector 
participation and, thus, increase electricity production capacity, including in renewables, and access to 
electricity in a sustainable way. 

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 



 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
8. The FRGC series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction. Measures to increase 
revenue and to strengthen public expenditure efficiency are expected to ensure ongoing fiscal space for 
the delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive 
to economic growth and private sector employment creation.  
 
9. The supported measures aimed at increasing agricultural productivity and diversification are 
important in achieving the Government’s stated poverty reduction and equitable growth goals. 
Results from the Poverty Assessment indicate that while agricultural growth has contributed strongly to 
overall growth, the impact on poverty reduction has been limited. Diversifying production into more 
valuable crops, focusing more resources on export-oriented crops, and raising productivity should boost 
incomes among the large share of the population, especially the poor population, involved in 
agriculture. 
 
10. Initial results from the 2014 Poverty Assessment note the strong link between unemployment, 
underemployment and poverty. Gender-specific results and recommendations from the assessment 
have informed the policy dialogue with the Government. Gender disparities are especially pronounced 
in the credit market, where improving access to credit has had an important impact on women’s 
economic empowerment. Support for reforms designed to improve credit to agriculture sector and, 
enhance private-sector competitiveness and build a more diversified and resilient economy will have 
positive effects on employment creation and poverty reduction. 
 
11. Supported electricity sector reforms, should they meet their objective of encouraging increased 
access to electricity and more cost-effective provision of electricity, should have a direct and positive 
impact on the poor. Increased and more reliable access at affordable prices should also have a 
significant impact on firm creation, firm growth and resultant employment opportunities, particularly in 
the higher productivity formal sector. 
 
12. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) has been carried out to assess the potential impact 
of electricity pricing reforms in Benin. The PSIA concluded that improving the financial situation of the 
SBEE and thus reducing the gap between SBEE’s service unit cost and revenues per kWh are 
prerequisites for the expansion of SBEE operations throughout the country and greater access for poor 
households to electricity. The PSIA study also concluded that the current social policy of subsidizing the 
tariff for the poor is not effective and suggested some possible options to strengthen the policy 
including adopting a tariff policy based on usage and eliminating fixed costs for small customers. 
 
Environment Aspects  
 
13. The policies supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the 
country’s natural assets. All the actions supported throughout the first operation are policy-oriented; 
they do not support direct investment in environmentally impactful investments or involve policy 
actions with significant environmental consequences.  The measures supporting domestic resource 
mobilization and efficient management of public expenditure pose no risk to the environment. 
Measures designed to strengthen economic competitiveness are also largely environmentally neutral.  
 



14. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector will support increased access to electricity 
and is expected to have a positive environmental impact. Households in Benin, particularly rural 
households, are highly dependent on biomass for their daily energy requirements. The reform program 
supported under the energy sector is likely to have positive environmental impacts and would help in 
the reduction of greenhouse gases occasioned by the predominance of fuel biomass (fuelwood, charcoal 
and plant wastes). The prior action of strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to 
produce climate change mitigation co-benefit, since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is 
likely to promote the development of new energy efficient production capacities.  In the agricultural 
sector, measures intended to diversify agriculture away from a reliance on cotton could have a 
potentially positive environmental effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and 
increasingly diversified. 
 
15. Over the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming 
environmental sustainability in projects. EIA is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all 
developmental projects.  Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to 
implement any development project. It has been set up in the Law N° 98-30 relating to the 
environmental framework and in the Decree N° 2001-235 relating to the environmental assessment 
procedures. The national environmental protection agency (ABE) has the capacity to implement, 
monitor, and report on mitigating measures and/or environmental and social management plans; and 
have been working in direct collaborations with the environmental and social specialists of the Bank 
funded projects. 
 
 
 

 Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 
Borrower/Recipient  
IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 40.00 
 


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA21270

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Benin Project ID: P160029
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P115886

Project Name: Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Additional Financing (P160029)
Parent Project 
Name:

Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (P115886)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

07-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

08-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): MInstry of Economy and Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Minist#re de L Agriculture de L Elevage de la P#che (MAEP)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 45.00
Total Project Cost 45.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Benin is a low-income country of about ten million people (2013 population census) with a per 
capita income of US$820 in 2014.  The economy is driven by agriculture and services, 
particularly import/export activities through the Port of Cotonou. Agriculture accounts for 25 
percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 47 percent of the country's employment. Cotton is 
the primary export commodity. The informal sector, including subsistence agriculture, contributes 
up to 56 percent of GDP and engages over 90 percent of the labor force. Informal re-export to 
Nigeria contribute Â¼ of the government revenue (a part of that activity goes through formal 
channels for it to be able to generate so much of the government revenue). The country was able 
to maintain macroeconomic stability, which laid the foundation for accelerating growth. Real 
GDP grew by 4.6 percent in 2012; 6.9 percent in 2013; 6.5 percent in 2014; is estimated at 5.0 
percent in 2015; and is projected at 4.5 percent in 2016; which is higher than the previous 5-year 
average of 3.7 percent. Steady gross domestic product (GDP) growth of about 5 percent during 
the period (2012-2015) was partially offset by rapid population growth averaging 3.5 percent per 
year, which led to a modest and unequal increase in household consumption.  As a result, poverty 
levels grew from 36.2 percent in 2011 to 40.1 percent in 2015 . Growth was particularly modest 
in agriculture, which employs almost half the labor force. The economy remains poorly 
diversified and vulnerable to external shocks. This vulnerability underscores the need to promote 
economic diversification (including exports) as recommended in the 2013 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for Benin. Poverty reduction has been enshrined in successive poverty reduction 
strategies, but results have proven erratic and difficult to sustain. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates, and while female-headed households have typically experienced 
lower poverty levels, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity, are 
underrepresented in politics and in other decision making positions, and are more susceptible to 
falling into poverty (Table 1). 
 
The disconnect between economic growth and poverty reduction during the last five years has 
been reinforced by the fact that higher growth stemmed mainly from more capital-intensive 
sectors like banking, telecommunications and the port. In contrast, agriculture, which employs 
half of the labor force, only grew at 4 percent per annum, with its growth derived from more land 
and more labor, but with modest increase in productivity. In addition, population growth has 
limited per capita growth and its impact on poverty reduction. Furthermore, Nigeria➢❨ s 
economic slowdown and policy changes have led to decreased opportunities for informal trade, 
both in the gas sector, where gas flows informally from Nigeria to Benin, and in the broader 
consumer goods sector, where rice, chicken, edible oil, used cars, used clothing etc., flow from 
Benin to Nigeria. For instance, the suppression of subsidies in Nigeria➢❨ s oil sector affected 
negatively the informal Beninese gas trade in areas adjacent to Benin➢❨ s border with Nigeria 
(Adjarra), where poverty increased from 34.8 percent in 2011 to 50.4 percent in 2015.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector in Benin is subject to the vagaries of climate and price fluctuations. 
Increase in productivity for major crops, including cotton has remained modest over time. Overall 
agricultural growth is around 4 percent, which is often offset by the relatively high population 
growth (3.5 percent). Yet, agriculture will remain one of the main source of growth and 
employment for the near future in the country. This will require higher and faster growth.  The 
past performance of 4% was insufficient to drive meaningful poverty reduction, due to the very 
high population growth. The agricultural production systems rely on an extension of cropped area 
and family labor, with no or limited use of improved inputs, production methods, and farm 



Page 3 of 11

equipment. Access to financing is limited outside the cotton system. The country➢❨ s agricultural 
trade performance is generally weak, with a persistently negative agricultural trade balance. 
Agricultural exports are concentrated on three groups of products: cotton, fruits (pineapple), and 
nuts and oilseed (cashew, soy and cottonseed). To meet the needs for a growing urban population, 
Benin continues to import a large share of horticultural products from neighboring countries (such 
as Burkina Faso and Nigeria), rice from Asia, wheat, frozen meat and milk from Europe, and 
frozen poultry products from Brazil. The sector faces the triple challenges of diversifying exports 
(consolidating cotton exports and increasing export volume for pineapple and cashew nut), 
increasing food production, and sustainably increasing farm and post-harvest productivity. These 
challenges must be addressed by taking into account the structural vulnerability of the 
country➢❨ s agricultural production system to floods and occasional droughts.  
 
Improving productivity and strengthening diversification are on the top of the agenda of the 
agricultural and overall development strategy in Benin. The agriculture sector strategy in Benin is 
defined within the broader framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development 
Program (CAADP) by which the country commits to achieve a 6 percent growth in agriculture 
and to allocate at least 10 percent of the national budget to agriculture as recommended in the 
Maputo declaration . The country➢❨ s long-term development strategy (Benin 2025 - Alafia) 
establishes the long-term vision of the country and gives clear directions in relation to the 
promotion of agricultural value chains. The vision is that the country must move towards a greater 
diversification of agricultural production in order to become a major exporter of agricultural 
products by 2025. The achievement of this vision would require a sound public and private 
financing of agriculture and financial sector reforms that would support the promotion and 
implementation of specialized financing instruments for accelerated productivity growth and 
sustainable diversification in the agriculture sector.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The Project Development Objective of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project 
(PADA) is to restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in the 
Recipient's territory.

Key Results 
The key performance indicators will remain unchanged, although targets will need to be adjusted 
where necessary and new indicators will be introduced to account for the new activities and 
changes in corporate indicators. These new indicators include: (i) Number of farmers reached 
with assets or services  of whom 40 percent are women; (ii) Farmers adopting improved 
agricultural technology; (iii) Number of micro projects transformed into SMEs. The end date for 
all targets will also be extended to February 28,2021, in line with the proposed revised Closing 
Date of the original project. .

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will be used to support the government of Benin in 
consolidating and scaling-up the achievements of the initial project, and to strengthen the project 
focus on income generating activities for poor households as well as improving their nutritional 
status.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
Component 1. Adoption of Improved Technologies
Comments (optional)
Like for the initial project, the objective of this component is to improve productivity and quality 
standards along the promoted value chains.  The component will continue supporting adoption of 
improved technologies for the development of the food security (aquaculture, rice, poultry, sheep 
and goat,) and export-oriented value chains (cashew and pineapple) to boost productivity and 
improve producers➢❨  incomes.

Component Name
Component 2 Development/rehabilitation of Production and Market Infrastructures
Comments (optional)
This component focuses: on (i) promoting small-scale irrigation systems for pineapple and 
cashew plantations to improve productivity; (ii) further supporting small-scale irrigation of rice 
production to maintain and expand productivity gains; and (iii) supporting the construction of 
market infrastructure (warehouses, drying areas, cold chambers, etc.) to reduce post-harvest losses 
and facilitate access to markets

Component Name
Component 3. Value Chain Coordination and Access to Finance for Private Initiatives
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) value chain coordination and (ii) facilitation of 
access to finance in support of private initiatives.

Component Name
Component 4. Sector Program Coordination and Project Management
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) capacity building of value chain coordination 
institutions, including strengthening the capacities of civil society and producers➢❨  
organizations as well as of MAEP in coordinating the implementation of the new agriculture 
sector program, and (ii) supporting Project management and monitoring and evaluation.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is nationwide and will be implemented in the 12 Departements (Atacora, Donga, 
Atlantique, Littoral,  Borgou, Alibori, Mono, Couffo, Oueme, Plateaux, Zou, Collines).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
There will be no major change to the implementation arrangements. The Project Coordination Unit 



Page 5 of 11

(PCU) is currently composed of staff who have been recruited based on the skills needed for the 
various positions. Given the nature of the scaling up and new activities, the PCU will include an 
additional animal production specialist. In addition, given the strategic orientation of the Programme 
Cadre-ProCAD  that hosts the PCU, some additional staff will be recruited with cost sharing between 
PADA and WAAPP: (i) an operations officer; (ii) a finance controller; (iii) a computer and 
information management specialist; (v) a logistics management specialist; (iv) an accountant; and (v) 
two administrative assistants.  
 
Financial Management (FM). The proposed AF will build on the existing institutional and fiduciary 
arrangements of the Project Coordination Unit of PADA under oversight of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. The overall performance of the PADA in financial management is Satisfactory. Staffing 
is adequate but needs to be strengthened with a Financial Controller and proper books of accounts 
and supporting documents have been kept in respect of all expenditures. The PCU is familiar with 
the Bank FM requirements and has demonstrated solid technical and fiduciary capacities to manage 
Bank-financed Projects. The audit for the year ended December 31, 2015 for the PADA was 
submitted on time, and was unqualified. The interim un-audited financial reports (IFR) are prepared 
every quarter and regularly submitted to the Bank on time.  
 
The overall FM risk of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project including the 
proposed additional financing is rated Moderate. It is considered that the financial management 
satisfies the Bank➢❨ s minimum requirements under OP/BP 10.00, and therefore is adequate to 
provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely financial management information on the 
status of the project required by the Bank.  
 
Procurement. The New Procurement Framework (including Procurement Regulations for Borrowers) 
that apply to projects with PCN held after July 1st, 2016 will normally apply. Given the fact that 
waiver has been obtained from CPO to apply the old procurement Guidelines, procurement 
arrangements of the original project will remain largely the same under the proposed Additional 
Financing in accordance with: (a) the World Bank➢❨ s ➢❨ Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, 
Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants➢❨  dated 
January 2011; revised July 2014, and (b) ➢❨ Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants 
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers➢❨  dated January 2011, 
revised July 2014.  Although procurement on PADA has been quite challenging, the PCU has 
conducted procurement activities for the original project in a satisfactory manner.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards. The AF triggers: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; 
OP4.09 on Pest Management; OP/PB4.11 On Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement. The original project was rated as environmental assessment Category 
➢❨ B➢❨  so as the proposed AF. The environmental and social impacts of the Project are expected to 
be moderate, site specific, and manageable. The Project is expected to have a positive environmental 
impact through its support for agricultural technologies that promote the better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, 
and other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works. The parent 
project➢❨ s safeguards documents (Environmental and Social Management Framework-ESMF, Pest 
Management Plan-PMP and Resettlement Policy Framework-RPF) have been adapted and updated to 
include activities planned under the AF. Thereafter, all the three safeguard instruments have been 
consulted upon and disclosed in-country on February 03, 2017 and at the Infoshop on February 03, 



Page 6 of 11

2017. The latest implementation support mission (December, 2016) rated the safeguard compliance 
Satisfactory, based on review of progress reports and project site visits. The Project Management 
Unit has an extensive experience in Bank➢❨ s safeguards policies and a dedicated team has been 
appointed to follow up on environmental and social issues; especially the implementation of the 
safeguards instruments. In addition, the national body in charge of environmental and social 
management plans (ESMPs) implementation monitoring (ABE Agence Beninoise pour 
l➢❨ Environnement) will ensure the compliance with national legislation while Bank➢❨ s safeguards 
specialists guide and provide guidance to the PIU through regular supervision missions.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The ongoing Additional Financing intends to finance small 
equipment to ensure proper use of irrigation facilities (sub-
component 2-1). More specifically, the project under sub-
component 2-2, will also fund the construction and 
rehabilitation of critical market and storage infrastructures: (i) 
cold chamber for pineapple packaging and storage before 
export; (ii) construction of centers of bulking up in pineapple 
production areas and distribution centers of pineapple to 
expand domestic marketing of pineapple; (iii) construction of 
25 warehouses to support the bulk marketing of cashew nuts; 
(iv) construction and equipment of 10 cashew apple juice 
processing units to support income-generating activities for 
women based on good results of the initial phase; (v) 
construction of 100 threshing and drying areas for rice to 
improve quality and marketability of the final product; and (vi) 
construction and equipment of fresh fish distribution centers. 
These several civil works will potentially impact 
environmental and social components. However, the exact 
locations of these investments were not determined with 
certainty an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been developed, reviewed, consulted upon and 
disclosed within the Benin on February 03,2017 and at the 
World Bank➢❨ s Website on February 03, 2017

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no potential impact 
on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is not expected to have any impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes The Additional Financing of PADA aims also at increasing the 
agricultural productivity. By this way, it is expected that 
farmers use fertilizers to improve soil fertility and pesticides to 
fight against pests and predators. To handle in a proper manner 
the potential use of these chemical products, the borrower has 
prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP). After its preparation, 
PMP has been reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon and 
disclosed within Benin on February 03, 2017 and on the 
Bank➢❨ s website on February 03, 2017.



Page 7 of 11

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes The civil works associated with activities will unquestionably 
involve excavations within the framework of the construction 
of new infrastructures with the probability to discover cultural 
resources. However, no specific safeguard instrument is 
required. The ESMFthat has been prepared includes a chapter 
in order to provide guidance in case of such discoveries.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no indigenous people as defined by the Bank within 
the Benin

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes The project could involve land take. To be in full compliance 
with the policy, the borrower has prepared a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that has  also been reviewed, 
consulted upon, disclosed in-country on February XXX, 2017 
and at the World Bank➢❨ s Website February XXX, 2017.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance any dam construction.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No The project will not finance any activities with impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation 
of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social 
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific.  Hence, they will 
be manageable at an acceptable level. 
 
The project remains EA category B and triggers four safeguards policies namely OP/PB 4.01; 
OP4.09;OP/PB4.11 and OP/PB 4.12.  Safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have all 
been updated and will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the 
Additional Financing phase.  
 
During the parent project➢❨ s implementation, Overall safeguard compliance (OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment; OP4.09 on Pest Management and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement) is rated Moderately Satisfactory.  All safeguard documents have been prepared and 
disclosed in accordance with national legislation and Bank policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee long-term 
impacts associated to this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 



Page 8 of 11

impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are diversified, 
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). That 
safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities 
whose location, number, and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and 
social issues.  It includes procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and 
operation of the irrigation schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential 
environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for participatory screening of 
proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) procedures for 
assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d) 
institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) 
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the 
course of project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation 
measures; and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning and 
monitoring of project activities. 
 
To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by the 
implementation of activities and other sub-projects, the client has developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  That safeguard instrument clarifies the principles, organizational 
arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to investments/sub-projects to be prepared during 
project implementation. Investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as 
necessary, in line with the RPF and submitted to the Bank for approval.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against 
agriculture predators. In addition to that, It sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect 
population health and environment integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of 
chemical products. 
 
All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability 
and compliance with Benin➢❨ s regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank 
environmental and social safeguard policies. 
 
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the 
tools developed under the original project.  ESIA including ESMPs will be prepared as needed for 
the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF.  For works with negligible impacts 
environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will apply. 
 
The PIU includes currently an environmental specialist who is responsible for safeguards 
implementation. Moving forward, under this AF, the same staff will continue to oversee the 
implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the national level. 
Moreover, the PIU staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any safeguard 
issues with the assistance of the ABE(Agence Beninoise de l➢❨ Environnement) involved since 
the beginning of the parent project in ESMPs implementation monitoring. Lastly, the Bank➢❨ s 
implementing support missions will also continue to include environmental and social safeguard 
specialists.



Page 9 of 11

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by the AF are constituted by farmers, breeders, fishermen, NGOs, and 
ministries in charge of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, Forestry, Environment and land 
management. During the safeguard instruments preparation, these various stakeholder groups have 
been consulted. During the updating of the safeguards documentation, new series of consultations 
were held where all of these stakeholders have been consulted and their recommendations, 
comments and suggestions taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The latest 
consultation in the process of safeguard instruments preparation was the workshop held in 
Bohicon from December 13 to 16, 2016 at Hotel Fifatin.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 23-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 1 of 17  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P160418  Digital Solutions for 
Sustainable 
Development 
(P160418) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 02, 2017 Feb 12, 2018 Transport & ICT 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cote d'Ivoire Ministry of Digital Economy 
and Post 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  

    
 
 

 
 
     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Côte d’Ivoire is a lower-middle-income economy with a widening urban/rural gap that hinders the 
achievement of shared prosperity and poverty elimination – With a population of 22.7m, the Gross National 
Income per capita (Atlas method) was US$ 1,420 in 2015, which is 13% lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) 
regional average (US$ 1,637). Around 54% of its population lives in urban areas, and the population and the 
economy are highly concentrated around the economic capital Abidjan. Rural population in Cote d’Ivoire has 
increasingly suffered from poverty during the last 25 years

1
. Rural poverty has significantly increased since the 

end of the 1980s, and the rural/urban gap has widened. 57% of the rural population is below the national 
poverty line, whereas this rate is 21 percentage points lower for the urban population (36%) and the Northern 
regions are the most afflicted. The widening gap between the North and South of the country help explain why 
Côte d’Ivoire still stands at the 172

nd
 place in the world in the most recent global UNDP-HDI ranking (2016). The 

rural population suffered and still suffers from political crises, deterioration of governance and social services, 
and unstable revenues. At least three main challenges explain the increase in rural poverty over the past 25 
years: (a) political crises; (b) deterioration of governance and social services; and (c) unstable revenues. 

2. The country suffered from a period of civil war from 2002-2004, and a post-election crisis and armed conflict 
from late 2010 to April 2011, that disrupted the economic, social and political cohesion of the country – Côte 
d’Ivoire enjoyed decades of strong economic growth, but the country underwent a series of violent political 
and economic crises during 1999 to 2011 that led to a significant deterioration of living standards. The dismal 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rates during this period reflect the impact of the crises: on average -1.2% 
during 1999-2003 compared to 3.9% for SSA, 2.0% during 2003-2010 compared to 5.2% for SSA, and -4.4% for 
2011. However, since mid-2011, the country has made significant progress in consolidating political stability 
and post-crisis economic recovery has proceeded at a rapid and sustained speed. Sound macroeconomic 
management combined with public and private investments have underpinned improved economic growth: 
GDP growth rate is on average 9.5% during 2011-2015 (4.3% for SSA). 

3. The rural population has suffered from deterioration of governance and cuts in expenditures in social 
services as well as poor infrastructure – Since the political crises of the year 2000s, the rural population has 
suffered from a combined deterioration in: (i) the governance structure;

2
 and (ii) cuts in health and education 

expenditure under structural adjustment programs that aimed at reestablishing macroeconomic stability.
3
 The 

infrastructure gap between the more affluent urban areas and the poor rural areas is compelling: 33% of the 
urban population has access to improved sanitation facilities compared to 10% of the rural population; 88% of 
the urban population has access to electricity compared to 29% of the rural population.

4
 For ICT, 16% of 

households in urban areas has access to the internet compared to only 2% in rural areas.
5
 

4. Unstable revenues and poor productivity of the rural economy, especially for agriculture, hinders poverty 
reduction – The agriculture sector is an important driver of Côte d’Ivoire’s economy, accounting for 22% of GDP 
and more than 75% of exports. Three out of four working adults living in rural areas are employed by the 

agriculture sector
6
. Despite its critical importance to the economy, the sector has had only a modest impact on 

income growth and poverty reduction in rural areas. The agriculture sector – and especially primary products – 
are highly sensitive to fluctuations in international prices which in turn have an adverse and volatile impact on 
revenues for rural households. 

5. To tackle these challenges, the country has implemented reforms that have significantly contributed to an 
overall improvement in governance and the business environment, making the country more attractive to 
private investment – The country has been a relatively weak performer on the World Bank Ease of Doing 
Business Index DBI (global rank at 142

nd
 out of 189 countries in 2016

7
). Nevertheless, the business environment 

has improved significantly during the last five years – from 177
th

 in 2013 to 142
nd

 in 2016 based on DBI – 
making Cote d’Ivoire one of the ten fastest reforming countries two years in a row (2014 and 2015). The World 
Economic Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index also capture this improvement, whereby Côte d’Ivoire 
rose from 131

st
 in 2012 to 91

st
 in 2015. The authorities will remain focused on improving crucial infrastructure, 

particularly in the energy and transport sectors, but increasing attention will turn to investment in 
communications infrastructure, as well as the education and healthcare system. They will continue to look 
abroad to finance much of the sizeable infrastructure investment that is underway. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

B.1 Rural economy and rural agriculture sectoral 

6. The rural economy is dominated by the agriculture sector, which is mostly made of: (i) export-oriented cash 
crops; and (ii) food crops and animal and fish production for domestic consumption – The cash crops subsector 
is made of cocoa, coffee, rubber, oil palm, cotton, and cashews. Cote d'Ivoire is the world's largest producer 
and exporter of cocoa beans and a significant producer and exporter of coffee and palm oil. Cash crops benefit 
from the bulk of agricultural investment and usually involve more sophisticated production techniques. Cash 
crops suffer from limited value chain integration among farmers, intermediaries and processors, which 
prevents the country from increasing downstream transformation of its food production. Cash crop agriculture 
is potentially lucrative, but it also entails considerable risk, as volatile international commodity markets 
determine export prices. The food crop subsector is made of plantains, yams, cassava, maize, rice, and 
livestock. It is characterized by traditional practices and receives little support from either the public or private 
sectors (except for rice and maize). The relatively strong performance of the food crop subsector is critical to 
food security in Côte d’Ivoire and has enabled the country to become self-sufficient in most key staple crops 
(except for wheat, rice and dairy). This subsector is often neglected in agricultural research and sector 
development strategies, and thus food production tends to be small-scale, traditional, and mostly informal. 
Nevertheless, prices of food crops are less impacted by international price volatility, and compared to cash 
crops often represent greater economic security but tend to offer more limited returns. 

7. The traditional food crops are mostly produced in the poorer Northern regions, whereas the cash crops are 
produced in the richer Southern regions – Adding to the North/South social and economic disparities, the 
country falls into two distinct agricultural regions: the dry savannah in the North and the forest region in the 
South. Rural poverty has traditionally been significantly higher in the North – where the potential for 
agriculture has not yet been realized – whereas the South benefits from higher and more reliable rainfall and 
better soils and produces most of the export crops. However, both the North and South suffer from low 

        
agricultural productivity, high cost of inputs, considerable post-harvest losses, inadequate use of modern 
farming techniques, lack of modernization and mechanization, all contributing to a decline in agricultural 
production.

8
 

8. Rural economy, and especially rural agriculture, suffers from five gaps crippling economic productivity and 
related to: (i) Enabling environment; (ii) Access to land; (iii) Access to finance; (iv) Skills and technology; (v) 
Physical capital – Poor performance in agriculture undermines shared prosperity and poverty elimination, with 
five major gaps hindering the development of the rural agriculture sector:

9
 

a. Gap #1: Lack of accurate data and enabling environment gap – The agriculture sector lacks good and 
accurate data; for example, the latest available National Agricultural Census is now 16 years old (2001). The 
lack of accurate data hinders the elaboration and implementation of sound policies and strategies, and 
prevents the design and conduct of impact evaluation research.

10
 The agriculture sector also suffers from an 

inadequate national and foreign investment framework, and the sector is still severely disadvantaged by a 
distortive policy framework (taxes on export commodities), coupled with a strong urban bias in 
development spending. 

b. Gap #2: Access to land gap – Lack of access to land is a major cause of rural poverty in SSA, and Cote 
d’Ivoire is no exception. Small-scale producers of food crops have access to about half the amount of land 
available to large-scale producers of export crops and they suffer from low productivity because of the 
small size of their lands.

11
 The 1998 Law on Rural Land required farmers to register their land within ten 

years, but very few farmers had the knowledge, means, and skills to do so. A new Law in August 2013 
extended the deadline by ten years, and as of 2014 only 0.09% of the total agriculture land is registered (i.e. 
20k out of 23m hectares). Food insecurity risk is twice higher for farmers not owning property than for land 
owners

12
 and lack of land certificates is worse for women farmers who face additional gender-related 

constraints, including legal or social norms that prevent them from inheriting or simply owning land. 

c. Gap #3 – Access to finance gap – Cote d’Ivoire is one of the least developed countries in the region for rural 
development finance, and there is a lack of financing services for the agriculture sector. Access to credit by 
small farmers is acutely limited due to the virtual absence of financing structures such as rural microfinance 
institutions and rural banks. Moreover, private banks are reluctant to provide loans to rural small-scale 
farmers as they see them as cumulating too many risks: low levels of capitalization, unstable revenue flows, 
lack of formal credit history, difficulty in evaluating small farmers’ repayment capacity, lack of collateral 
such as titled land, the influence of exogenous factors such as weather conditions, and the limited legal 
avenues for enforcing contracts. Where credit is available, interest rates are often too high compared to the 
average rate of return of farmers’ investments. This translates into a low bank account ownership rate and 
a low percentage of adults having the possibility to benefit from a mortgage. The financing obstacle faced 

                                            
8
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.54). 

9
 ECOWAS-UEMOA-CILSS, Alliance Globale pour l’Initiative Résilience AGIR, Rapport des Priorités Resilience Pays (PRP) Côte d’Ivoire, 2014 ; World 

Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.55-66). 
10

 Without much sector impact analysis, the sector has been subjected to ineffective policies including high indirect and direct taxes on export 
commodities which have prevented small farmers from earning more revenues: the 2015 World Bank SCD calculated that a 10 percent decrease 
in the export tax would boost net revenue by 22 percent, which in turn would improve the living conditions of roughly 4 million Ivoirians.  

11
 IFAD, Rural poverty in the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, accessed in January 2016; World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 
2015, (p.55): “Agriculture in Cote d’Ivoire is dominated by smallholder farmers, the majority of whom use traditional practices and rely on family 
labor. Data from the most recent Agricultural Census (2001) estimated that there are 8.3 million farmers nationwide, of whom 49 percent are 
women. The average cultivated area for each household is about 3.89 hectares, but 80 percent of households cultivate less than 2 hectares.” (). 

     

by the agriculture sector in Cote d’Ivoire is thus similar to the rest of SSA: only about 1% of commercial 
lending in SSA goes to agriculture, mostly to large-scale farmers.

13
 

d. Gap #4 – Skills and technology gap – In 2011, 62% of teenagers in the Northwest region were unschooled 
compared to the national average of 42%, and only 8% of young people aged 15-24 completed their 
secondary education compared to the national average of 27%.

14
 The combination of low level of education 

and other gaps highlighted above (such as access to finance) leads to a low usage of technology and 
agriculture inputs – such as equipment and fertilizers. Several market failures characterize inputs markets, 
including: inconsistent rules and standards requirements, unrealistic standards, and lack of equipment and 
capacity at the rural level to ensure compliance. Moreover, the cost of technology and agriculture inputs for 
smallholders tend to be too high due to several factors

15
: (i) weak bargaining power of smallholders; (ii) 

poor transportation and energy infrastructure; (iii) lack of market information; (iv) lack of knowledge of 
farmers concerning the use of inputs; and (v) limited access to finance.  

e. Gap #5 – Physical capital gap – While several crops such as cashew (anacarde), maize and tomatoes are 
produced in the Northern regions,  principal markets  destinations are located in the Southern regions, 
including the port of Abidjan for exports and urban domestic markets which sometimes offer greater 
opportunities to smallholders than export markets

16
.: This implies that an efficient transportation network 

must be available throughout the whole territory to link production areas to: (i) the port of Abidjan 
international output market; and (ii) the domestic consumption areas spread around the country. Hence, 
having reliable infrastructures – such as road networks, storage facilities, electricity, and 
telecommunications – is essential to the efficiency of the agriculture sector. However, Cote d’Ivoire’s rural 
infrastructure needs additional investments to be rehabilitated and extended. Currently, as much as 90% of 
the paved network in Cote d’Ivoire is between 15 to 40 years old, while routes coatings are generally 
designed and built for a lifetime of 15 years

17
; as a consequence, about 40 percent of the road network is 

not or only partially useable.
18

 In addition to the lack of reliable roads, the lack of efficient public 
transportation services also hinders the economic development of rural agriculture: smallholders often use 
public transportation such as passenger buses to take their products to distant markets, and this 
inadequate transportation mode leads to bruising and damage to the products, thus reducing its quality 
and market value. The electricity network is no better as all departments of the Northern half of the 
country had coverage rates below the national average in 2011. Among them, five departments had less 
than 15% of their localities connected to electricity

19
. The lack of reliable electricity is an impediment to 

well-functioning rural markets as limited access to storage facilities and unreliable electricity supply result in 
post-harvest losses. Most farmers often rely on open-air storage and need to sell quickly their products – 
sometimes at a significantly low price – before it rots. 

9. Several public and private institutions drive the agriculture sector, generating a fragmented knowledge and 
negatively affecting the efficiency of the government’s action on the sector; the sector would thus strongly 
benefit from a stronger coordination for data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination – The 

            
     

agriculture sector is jointly supervised by the Ministère de l’Agriculture et du Développement Rural (MINADER) 
and the Ministère des Ressources Animales et Halieutiques (MIRAH), with the strong implication of the 
Ministère des Eaux et Forêts (MINEFF) and the Ministère de l’Environnement et du Développement Durable 
(MINEDD). The MINADER and MIRAH both have their own internal statistics and planning department: the 
Direction Générale de la Planification, du Contrôle des Projets et des Statistiques (DGPPS, at MINADER) and the 
Direction de la Planification, des Statistiques et des Programmes (DPSP, at MIRAH). The MINADER and MIRAH 
also supervise – with other ministries – several public institutions in charge of agriculture and rural 
development, including the Agence Nationale d’Appui au Développement Rural (ANADER), the Centre National 
de Recherche Agronomique (CNRA), the Fonds Interprofessionnel pour la Recherche et le Conseil Agricole 
(FIRCA), the Office National de Développement de la filière Riz (ONDR), and the Office d’Aide à la 
Commercialisation des Produits Vivriers (OPCV). Several branches of agriculture also have their own 
organizations, including the Chambres d’Agriculture de Côte d’Ivoire, the Association Nationale des 
Organisations Professionnelles Agricoles de Côte d’Ivoire (ANOPACI), the Conseil Café Cacao (CCC), the 
Association des Professionnels de Caoutchouc Naturel de Côte d’Ivoire (APROMAC), etc. The sector would thus 
greatly benefit from a stronger coordination in data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination. 

10. To address the main gaps to fast and sustainable development of the agricultural sector, the Government has 
developed several strategies, including the National Agricultural Investment Program (NAIP) and the e-
Agriculture Strategy – The NAIP is the agricultural pillar of the country’s National Development Plan (NDP). The 
first NAIP (NAIP #1) was a US$4 billion program over the 2010-2015 period, aimed at promoting a diversified 
mix of strategic cash and food crops for growth and food security. It was organized around six programs: (i) 
crops productivity and competitiveness; (ii) development of agricultural supply chains; (iii) sector governance; 
(iv) capacity building; (v) sustainable management of fisheries; and (vi) rehabilitation of forest and wood 
industry. The government launch the update of the PNIA in October 2016 (PNIA #2) and the final release is 
expected in May 2017. The Government has also developed a comprehensive national e-Agriculture strategy in 
2012, and updated it in 2014. This strategy has the aim of modernizing the country’s agricultural sector and 
enhancing its productivity with an increase in the country’s export of cocoa, coffee and other produce, and a 
decrease in food imports. The strategy requires suitable access to information services and data centers as part 
of an ICT package aiming to make real-time market information systems available via mobile phones and 
tablets. Finally, other sectoral strategies include: (i) the Loi d’orientation agricole (Loi n° 2015-537 du 20 juillet 
2015); the Stratégie Nationale de Développement de la filière Riz 2012-2020 (SNDR); the Plan Stratégique de 
Développement de l’Elevage, de la Pêche et de l’Aquaculture (PSDEPA 2014-2020); the Stratégie Nationale de 
Développement de la Mécanisation Agricole (SNDMA); and the Programme National de Sécurisation du Foncier 
Rural (PNSFR). 

 
B.2 Digital economy sectoral and institutional context 

11. The ICT institutions and the enabling environment have drastically improved during the last five years thanks 
to the creation and revamping of key institutions and the introduction of new legal and regulatory 
frameworks – Overall, the ICT enabling environment has drastically improved during the last five years. Each 
year, the World Economic Forum (WEF) performs a global ranking of the ICT sector in each country by 
measuring the Network Readiness Index (NRI). One sub-index of the NRI is the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ 
reflecting both the ‘Political and regulatory environment’ and the ‘Business and innovation environment’. In 
2012, Côte d’Ivoire ranked as one of the worst country in the world regarding the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’, 
being at the 130

th
 place (out of 142 countries). In less than 5 years, Côte d’Ivoire has risen at the 72

nd
 place (out 

of 139 countries) in 2016 for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ (on the overall Network Readiness Index, Côte 



d’Ivoire has risen from 122
nd

 to 106
th

 during 2012-2016): no other country monitored by the WEF has enjoyed 
such a drastic rank increase during the 2012-2016 period for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’. 

12.  The major improvement of the international ranking of the ICT sector in Côte d’Ivoire is partly explained by 
several reforms lead by the five main institutions that drive and supervise the ICT sector – The Ministère de 
l’Economie Numérique et de la Poste (MENuP) is the Ministry in charge of the ICT and digital economy in Côte 
d’Ivoire, and the MENuP has revamped the telecom law in 2012.

20
 The legislation is now aligned with regional 

recommendations and covers major areas such as convergence, universal service, license and authorizations, 
relevant markets and market power, and consumer protection.

21
 The National Regulatory Authority (NRA) is 

the Autorité de Régulation des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (ARTCI),
22

 a fully-equipped NRA dealing 
with licensing, consumer protection, wholesale market regulation, and telecom spectrum management. The 
three main additional institutions are: (i) the Agence Nationale du Service Universel des Télécommunications 
(ANSUT) that ensures the implementation of universal service programs on behalf of the state and manage 
investment operations funded by the state in the field of ICT; the Agence Ivoirienne de Gestion des Fréquences 
radioélectriques (AIGF) focused on radio frequency management; and (iii) the Société Nationale de 
Développement Informatique (SNDI), a state-owned company under the supervision of the Prime Minister, in 
charge of Information Technology and Information System projects for the Government.

23
 

13. Although the ICT sector, and especially the mobile sector, is performing well in Côte d’Ivoire, it has mostly 
benefited the affluent urban and educated population – The ICT sector in Cote d’Ivoire has consistently 
expanded during the last few years; it generated a total revenue of 982.5 billion FCFA in 2013 (US$ 1.6 billion), 
contributed to 8% of the country’s GDP, and provided around 5,400 direct jobs and 100,000 indirect jobs.

24
 The 

recent performance of mobile service (voice and SMS) in Côte d’Ivoire has been buoyant, driven by a healthy 
competition among the three main mobile operators (Orange, MTN, and Moov). The mobile connection 
penetration (number of total SIM divided by total population) reached 113% at the end of 2015, compared to 
88% for West Africa region and 77% for Sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 1). Despite these robust mobile service 
performances an important share of the population is still offline. As of 2014, only 4% of interviewed 
individuals stated that they have an internet access at home compared to an average of 12% for SSA (Gallup 
survey). The World Bank indicator ‘Internet users’ (percentage of the population that have used the internet – 
from any location and with any type of device – during the last 12 months) show that only 21% of the 
population of Cote d’Ivoire has accessed internet at least once during the previous 12 months in 2015, 
compared to an average of 22% for SSA and 29% for lower-middle-income countries (Figure 2). Moreover, the 
use of internet – mostly through mobile broadband, as fixed broadband connectivity is marginal – is 
concentrated in the most affluent, educated and urban population centers. 15% of the Cote d’Ivoire urban 
population uses internet on a weekly basis, but this rate drops to only 3% for the rural Cote d’Ivoire population 

                                            
20

 Until 2012 the main legislation covering the telecommunication sector was the Law No. 95-526 of 7 July 1995 (Code des Télécommunications); as 
this legislation was outdated, it was fully revamped by the Ordonnance n° 2012-293 of 21 march 2012. 

21
 Moreover, the Government has introduced a tax break for the ICT sector in August 2015 with a VAT exoneration and reduced custom duties for 
ICT and electronic equipment, and this measure should last until the end of 2018 (cf. Abidjan.net, Les prix des ordinateurs, tablettes, téléphones 
portables vont baisser en Côte d’Ivoire, November 2015). 

22
 The ARTCI was created in 2013 by merging two institutions, the previous Agence des Télécommunications de Cote d’Ivoire (ATCI) – in charge inter 
alia of telecom spectrum management, licensing, and wholesale pricing – and the Conseil des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (CTCI) – in 
charge inter alia of monitoring the market competition dynamics, ensuring the compliance with the license obligations, and solving litigations. 

23
 In 2011, the Government adopted the e-GOUV scheme, which consists of two major axes – e-Administration and e-Services. The SNDI is working 
to implement ICT solutions in all government activities, including finance, health care, and education, with the goal of providing, by the year 
2020, all government services available online in developed countries (cf. IDAL, ICT Ivory Coast market, 2015, p.6). 

(Figure 3). In a similar fashion, only 1% of those having achieved at most primary education level use internet 
on a weekly basis compared to 19% for those having reached at least a secondary education level (Figure 4). 

Figure 1: Evolution of mobile penetration (combined 2G and 3G, % 
population, 2010-2015) 

 

Figure 2: % of internet users (with averages for income grouping of 
countries, 2006-2015) 

 
Data Source: GSMA Intelligence, World Bank Development Indicators. 

Figure 3: % of weekly internet use amongst rural vs. urban 
population (2014) 

 

Figure 4: % of weekly internet use amongst different education level 
(2014) 

 
Data Source: Gallup, Africa Online – Media Use in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015. 

14. On the supply side, there are significant mobile coverage gaps for rural areas – The regulator ARTCI has 
identified that 48% of the 8,518 localities (localités) in Côte d’Ivoire were not covered by any mobile service; 
the uncovered localities represent 23% of the total population. Mobile operators have confirmed that they 
reached their profitability frontier and that extending their coverage would not be sufficiently profitable at this 
stage due to: (i) the lower population density in rural areas which increases the Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) per 
subscriber; and (ii) the lower purchasing power of subscribers which drives down the Average Revenue Per 
User (ARPU). Mobile broadband coverage with 3G is even worse, with coverage maps showing vast swaths 
without any coverage (. To counter this market failure, the ANSUT is currently deploying a national 7,000 km 
long fibre backbone to cover rural areas, and ARTCI is elaborating a “white zone” program to increase rural 
coverage. However, this will be insufficient to achieve mobile broadband coverage for all as the number of 
mobile sites should be at least tripled: each operator has deployed between 1,600 and 2,000 mobile sites in 
Côte d’Ivoire, a relatively low number compared to European countries that achieved acceptable level of 
coverage and services (in Romania, a country that is 30% smaller in area and with a similar population size, the 
regulator calculated that 6,000 sites were required to cover 99% of the population). 



 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, based on ARTCI data and base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

15. The proposed project is designed to contribute to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and boosting shared prosperity – The project will help the country achieve the twin objectives through 
promoting agricultural growth which is inclusive of smallholder farmers. The proposed project is consistent 
with the Bank’s CPF (FY16-FY19), and especially with ‘Focus Area One: Accelerating sustainable private sector‐
led growth’ which comprises four objectives that the project will directly or indirectly support. 

16. The e-agriculture project will directly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) agriculture and (ii) 
infrastructure – (i) The project will contribute to ‘Objective #1: Improve Productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness 
Value Chains’. Unpredictable weather patterns, unreliable pricing information and crop failure due to diseases 
are a few of the issues that digital services could tackle in Côte d’Ivoire. The project will directly support the 
objective of improving productivity by promoting digital solutions that will: (a) empower smallholder farmers to 
access information and markets, leading to increase in productivity and sales, and reduction in post-harvest 
loss; and (b) enable public institutions to collect and gather agricultural and rural statistics to drive public policy 
and strategy. (ii) The project will also contribute to ‘Objective #2: Strengthen Economic Infrastructure’. By 
extending ICT connectivity in rural areas, the project will directly enhance digital infrastructure and provide 
workarounds to inadequate logistics services. This will positively impact rural agriculture and economy by 
enabling easier access to consumer markets at competitive costs. 


17. The project will also indirectly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) business environment and 
(ii) access to land – (i) ‘Objective #3: Improve Business Regulatory Framework and Access to Finance’ will be 
supported by extending the reach of ICT connectivity and facilitating the digitization of economic transactions. 
The spreading of ICT will support both: (a) the increase in mobile banking usage; and (b) the promotion of 
private sector growth with the ability for smallholders to get a credit with traditional banks thanks to a track 
record on which their financial performance can be assessed. (ii) ‘Objective #4: Formalize and Enhance 
Regulatory Access to Land for Business and Agriculture’ will also be supported thanks to the development of ICT 
platforms providing cheap and reliable tools to register land and deliver land certificates. Enhancing the 
registering process of land is fundamental to improve land security and support informed land transactions for 
both smallholders and private investors, and are a prerequisite for shared growth.  

18. The proposed project will leverage ongoing Bank operations in Côte d’Ivoire – The Bank has also been 
supporting the country’s agricultural strategy implementation through the sub-regional West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Program (WAAPP), which is being implemented in 13 countries of the Economic Community of 
West African States (ECOWAS). The development objective of the Program is to generate and accelerate the 
adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries’ top agricultural commodity priority areas that 
are aligned with the sub-region’s top agricultural commodity priorities, as outlined in the Economic Community 
of West Africa Agriculture Program (ECOWAP). Other development partners such as the International Fund for 
Agriculture Development (IFAD), FAO, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and others have been 
implementing similar projects in support of the sector strategy. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

19. The key results expected from the proposed project are: 

a. Coverage of ICT services is significantly increased in targeted areas, and ICT usage (voice, SMS, and internet 
access) is significantly increased in targeted areas for local public and administrative institutions, 
businesses, and population – including vulnerable population (women); 

b. Digital solutions for rural development are made available, with electronic platforms being operational and 
used by: (i) public administrative services in charge of monitoring and informing rural development policies; 
and (ii) end users such as smallholders. 

c. As a result of increased use of digital solutions, smallholders in targeted area benefit from an increase in: (i) 
yields of selected crops (volume of production per ha or per smallholder); (ii) volume of sales of selected 
crops; and (iii) the reduction in postharvest losses by selected producer organizations supported by the 
project. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



20. The Project will assess the number of ‘beneficiaries’ with a breakdown between both individuals (disaggregated 
by gender) and establishments (disaggregated by central public administrations, local government and public 
administrations, and local businesses). The project will use the following PDO indicators: 

a. Number of beneficiaries accessing mobile communication services (voice and SMS); 

b. Number of beneficiaries accessing the internet; 

c. Share of production of target crops marketed by selected smallholders supported by the project; 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

21. To achieve the Project Development Objectives, the proposed project follows an integrated transformational 
solutions approach with three components: 

a. Component #1 ICT Infrastructure – Extending the coverage of ICT services in rural areas, and thereby 
improving the number of individuals, public administrations, and businesses that will be able to access both 
mobile services (voice and SMS) and the internet to improve productivity; 

b. Component #2 Digital services for rural development – Stimulating the development of digital services for 
rural development (with an emphasis on e-Agriculture), improving public service delivery in rural areas, and 
encouraging development of local content, applications, and services, through the setting up of electronic 
platforms and the creation of business incubators; 

c. Component #3 Project implementation – Project management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. 

22. Component 1 ICT Infrastructure – Component 1 will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing coverage of 
ICT services. The coverage increase will be done through a subsidy to investment in connectivity. Depending on 
the targeted region and community, the PPP model will be adjusted. Among the public subsidy options, and 
based on ad hoc economic analysis, the project will subsidize: (i) the rollout of a Radio Access Network (RAN) 
mobile infrastructure focused on passive elements (i.e., towers and energy solutions). The towers will be 
sufficiently dimensioned to ensure that all mobile operators in Côte d’Ivoire can use the passive RAN to install 
their own active elements (i.e. base stations and transmitters) to improve coverage of their network and 
provide voice, SMS, and data services to the offline population; and (ii) the rollout of backhaul segments. The 
fiber optic links will be deployed either through OPGW when available, or buried along roads to points closer to 
the targeted communities. The private operators will then deploy the last mile (e.g. RAN). Because this 
component implies the subsidy of an ICT infrastructure, the identification of target areas (where the passive 
RAN will be deployed) and project design (how they will be deployed) will comply with a set of criteria in line 
with international best practices to maximize “value for money” and support the overarching twin goals of 
shared prosperity and poverty elimination (cf. below Section B). 

23. Regions identified as priority for Component 1 through the selection criteria – Three districts have been 
identified by the client as priority for component 1: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) and the 
Bounkani Region (District of Bouna). These three district are particularly affected by low connectivity and 
productivity issues (see Figure 5 & Figure 6 above). 

24. Component 2 Digital services for rural development – Component 2 will contribute to achieving the PDO with 
two sub-components: 


a. Sub-component 2.1 – Help improve the performance of the rural development public institutions in Côte 
d’Ivoire in gathering relevant, detailed, and recent data to monitor the rural economy and assist in shaping 
public policy; 

Sub-component 2.2 –Provide digital solutions to smallholders for selected crops that will increase crop 
yields, increase volumes of sales, reduce post-harvest loss, and improve market linkages. To that effect, a 
comprehensive program of activities will be implemented under this component that will be geared at: (i) 
improving the outreach and quality of crop extension and advisory services by strengthening the skills of 
public extension workers, promoting ICT in agricultural extension services, and supporting farmer-to-
farmer extension; (ii) developing farmers’ skills to scale-up the dissemination of Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAPs); and (iii) fostering the emergence of a digital innovation ecosystem aimed at providing local content, 
applications, and services for rural development through the creation and leveraging of e-Government 
platforms. The project will specifically aim at incubators and local labs training young women in 
coding/programming, as well as entrepreneurship in general. 

25. Regions and value-chains identified as priority for Component 2 through the selection criteria – Value-chains 
identified by the Ministry of Agriculture as priorities (with an emphasize on staple food) for this component 
are: (a) maze, manioc, rice; (b) plantain, yam (igname); and (c) poultry. Taking into account the regions where 
these value-chains are predominant, the component will target the following districts and regions: regions 
already included in Component 1 – District of Denguélé, District des Savanes, and the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna) – plus the District of Sassandra-Marahoué, and the District of Gôh-Djiboua. These crops fall to a large 
extent under the informal agriculture sector. Producers and farmers for these crops are predominantly women.  

Figure 7: Regions identified as a priority for Component 1 & Component 2 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 

communications as well as Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), environmental and social studies, their 
implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation. 

 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
In terms of infrastructure, the project will target exclusively the three Districts of the northern part of the country: 

District of Denguélé, District of Savanes, and District of Bouna. As part of component 1, the project will finance the 
construction of towers (passive infrastructure) and/or bury fiber optic links. In the case of fiber optic , the fiber will be 
buried along roads or railways, or installed on the ground cable of power lines. Therefore, the fiber optic infrastructure 
will be installed along existing infrastructure, with negligible impact on the environment and the population. Regarding 
the towers, some towers may be installed on private properties depending on the site and expected coverage. However, 
it is again expected that the installation of towers will have negligible impact on the environment, and minimal impact on 
the neighboring communities. Analysis will be carried out on a case by case basis. For the second component project will 
be implemented in the following areas: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna); (iv) District of Sassandra-Marahoué; (v) and the District of Gôh-Djiboua 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank 

safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Sanitation, Environment, and 
Sustainable Development (MINSEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring 
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of 
Environment (ANDE, Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the 
country. The unit is well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. Based on the preliminary borrower assessment, the 
Agency (ANDE) has sustained resources to carry out the oversight of the safeguards performance during implementation. 
With regard to the PIU, capacity building efforts to support project implementation will be done by implementing 
recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared for the project. The project will also receive 
guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the Project team. 
 

D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes The project will fund the construction of towers, ICT 


     

infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic. 
These constructions may entail potential adverse 
impacts on the environmental components. However, 
as the exact locations of those activities are unknown 
to date, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be developed, reviewed, 
consulted upon and disclosed both within Cote 
d’Ivoire and at the World Bank’s Website prior to the 
Decision meeting. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project activities will not be implemented in areas 
hosting natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not support activities related to forest 
exploitation or management or might have potential 
adverse impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The project does not involve pest management 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as the construction of towers, ICT 
infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to discover Physical cultural resources. However, the 
triggering of this policy does not entail the preparation 
of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a specific 
chapter will be included in the ESMF to provide 
guidance in case physical cultural resources will be 
discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The Project location does not cover Indigenous 
Peoples as defined by the World bank 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

These planned interventions are not expected to lead 
to significant land acquisition or significant restriction 
of access to sources of livelihood. However, the 
implementation of the pools or antenna my lead to 
lands acquisition. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12  as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of envisioned physical 
investments are not known, The  Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be 
prepared by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by 
the team and disclosed in-country and at Bank 
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a 
guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition 
and loss of economic activities issues, as well as 
compensation measures to minimize negative impacts 
on Project Affected People (PAPs). 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams, not rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a disputed area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 02, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: i) an Environmental and 

Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). All these safeguard documents 
will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and at the World 
Bank’s Website prior to the Decision Meeting. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 13

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20175

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Democratic Republic 
of

Project ID: P159037

Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P092724

Project Name: DRC Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery AF (P159037)
Parent Project 
Name:

DRC - Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support (P092724)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

23-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): DRC Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

PARRSA PIU

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 75.00
Total Project Cost 75.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Decision Meeting granted a conditional authorization to proceed with 
appraisal subject to resolution of the outstanding safeguard issues and RVP 
approval of the exception waiver.

Is this a 
Repeater 

No
?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Between 2010 and 2014, the overall economy grew at 7.7 percent and the extractive industry 
grew at 25 percent , making the DRC one of Africa's fastest growing economies. Extractive 
industry exports account for about 95 percent of DRC➢❨ s exports.  While mining revenues have 
contributed to strong macroeconomic growth and poverty reduction, high export concentration 
exposes the country to exogenous shocks and instability .  The recent trends of falling world 
commodity prices, lower export revenues, and the associated slow-down in DRC➢❨ s mining 
sector have contributed to a tight fiscal environment. In this context, the government has placed 
significant priority to economic diversification and has identified the Agriculture sector, 
DRC➢❨ s second biggest sector- as a key sector for expanding its export base and buffering the 
economy against oil price shocks. 
 
Despite high rates of macroeconomic growth, poverty and malnutrition remains widespread in 
DRC.  The national poverty rate is 64 percent, with poverty rates only slightly higher in rural 
areas (65 percent) relative to urban areas (62 percent). Almost one quarter of children are 
underweight. In rural areas, deficiencies in food storage and market access create seasonal food 
shortages. In urban areas, import tariffs (commonly 10 percent) and low domestic production, 
thus requiring sizable food imports, result in food prices that are amongst the highest in Africa.  
About six million people are classified as food insecure in the country. 
 
Climate change will exacerbate droughts, floods, and other extreme weather events. Although the 
Congo basin seems to be less exposed than dryer parts of Africa, Congolese farmers are 
particularly poor and isolated, therefore vulnerable to climate impacts and other external shocks. 
 
In addition, DRC is undergoing a process of decentralization. Last year, the number of provinces 
officially grew from 11 to 26. Equateur Province, where PARRSA is located, has been sub-
divided into five new Provinces, three of them falling under the project area (Sud Ubangi, Nord 
Ubangi, and Mongala). Within the decentralization process, the provincial services of the 
ministries are being revitalized to better serve the rural population. However, some new provinces 
lack the structures and fiscal resources to function independently. Consequently there is a need for 
new investments, including agriculture investments, to make these new provinces more fiscally 
secure. 
 
Socio-Political System. Following the African Union led dialogue, the 2016 elections were 
postponed and a second more inclusive dialogue led by the Conference Episcopale Nationale du 
Congo (CENCO) is still underway but has already achieved an agreement for a new government 
of national unity and a commitment from the President to not run for a third term. Presidential 
elections are expected to be held in December 2017, but this date has been viewed as not credible. 
The majority of the provinces are under-resourced (human and financial) and ill equipped. As a 
result, the majority of the provinces have increased taxes in order to cover their operational costs. 
Democratic process in the DRC faces a myriad of challenges, including a legacy of exploitation 
and conflict, lack of physical and communications infrastructure, extreme poverty and continuing 
pockets of insecurity.  
 



Page 3 of 13

Governance system, conflict and institutional fragility. The factors blocking an economic 
development in the country include: (a) a crisis resulting from contested 2011 election results; (b) 
weak governance; and (c) the weakness of state institutions in implementing appropriate policies. 
As a result, the agricultural sector is operating in an environment of fragile socio-political context, 
low quality human capacity with an outdated skills base, an unattractive business environment, 
rent based economy with low agricultural productivity, dilapidated infrastructure and under 
developed service markets (agricultural inputs, logistics services, financial services). 
 
Enabling environment and tax burden. The macroeconomic indicators for the country have 
remained relatively stable with annual inflation stable at 1.6 percent over the past 5 years. Real 
interest rates have remained at about 17 percent. This is illustrative of a business enabling 
environment which is characterized by: (i) high import taxes; (ii) high sales taxes; (iii) unofficial 
taxes levied across road, rail, river and air transport; (iii) high port handling fees; (iii) unreliable 
electricity supply; (iv) corruption; (v) ➢❨ red tape➢❨  bureaucratic procedures that make it more 
costly to close a transaction or sell a product; and (vi) very high logistical hurdles and costs. In 
addition, the agricultural sector has outdated laws and regulations on seed, land, food quality and 
control. Because of poor transport infrastructure, it is much harder to reach markets and the net 
effect is reduced competitiveness of domestically produced products in local, national and 
regional markets. Under-developed input markets and fragmented value chains further reduce the 
competitiveness of locally produced commodities, but itpresents opportunities for private 
investors.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture currently accounts for about 20 percent of GDP and employs some 70-75 percent of 
the economically active population. Related agro-industries employ another 10 percent of the 
population. Jobs in agriculture tend to be informal, with low value added per worker (US$227/
year ), often providing only for subsistence. Agriculture and other sectors are hampered by the 
fact that DRC is recovering from more than 15 years of civil war, which has created serious 
infrastructure and institutional vacuums. The country faces systematic challenges in its business 
environment and enabling services such as rural connectivity, power infrastructure, and extension 
systems. Public spending is constrained by weak budgetary processes, inefficiencies, and poor 
coordination. 
 
The Government➢❨ s objective is to reduce rural poverty by 2020 by restoring and modernizing 
agricultural production systems, improving nutrition and food security, and mobilizing significant 
public and private sector investments. In recent years, agriculture has become a top priority for 
DRC Government as evidenced by the allocation of 8 percent of total budget in 2016 (up from 3 
percent) in line with the Africa Heads of State Maputo Declaration. The 2013 Programme 
National d➢❨ Investissements Agricoles (PNIA), with a total estimated cost of US$5.7 billion 
over seven years, builds upon five pillars: (i) fostering value chains and agribusiness; (ii) 
achieving food security; (iii) enhancing research, extension, and training; (iv) improving sector 
governance, gender participation and institutional capacity; and (v) adapting to climate change. In 
2014, the Government launched the agro industrial park strategy to boost agribusiness and 
agroindustry, and attract private investments in the sector. 
 
The proposed AF project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for DRC as it 
aims at contributing significantly to the Government➢❨ s efforts to alleviate extreme poverty and 
malnutrition (MDG1). It is also fully aligned with the fourth outcome of the CAS FY13-16, 



Page 4 of 13

addressing fragility through ➢❨ increased agriculture productivity and production and access to 
markets➢❨ . It is also consistent with major strategic initiatives for DRC, the Great Lakes region, 
and sub-Saharan Africa, including the second pillar (vulnerability and resilience) of the World 
Bank➢❨ s Africa Strategy and Africa Climate Business Plan. By supporting the development of 
agricultural value chains with strong economic potential, the proposed AF project is in line with 
the national strategy of DRC and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP). 
 
Several policy documents govern the agriculture sector, including the National Agriculture 
Investment Plan (NAIP), the Agricultural Code, a new proposal for Integrated Rural Development 
Centers, and the Agro-industrial Action Plan. In practice, ownership of these policies at the 
provincial level ➢❨  and even occasionally at the central level ➢❨  is low.  There is weak 
coordination and harmonization across the different policies and implementing agencies, and 
human, technical, and financial capacity to implement agricultural strategies is poor. 
 
DRC➢❨ s green revolution will require a technological leapfrog combined with progress on 
cross-cutting infrastructure, institutional and business climate issues in order to facilitate private 
investment and access to markets. From an operational perspective, DRC➢❨ s green revolution 
would pursue a two-track approach: (i) enabling traditional small-scale farmers to transition from 
subsistence farming to small holder commercial farming ; and (ii) promoting private investment 
in commercial agriculture using modern technologies geared toward mechanized farming and 
agro-processing for domestic and regional markets. 
 
DRC➢❨ s agro-industrial action plan (2015) proposes to privatize several government-owned 
farms, establish agro-industrial parks across all provinces, and has identified 60 abandoned   
farms for development. A focus on large commercial farms has the advantage of tackling many 
constraints simultaneously to promote faster growth in a challenging environment, albeit in a 
limited geographical area. Concentrating resources and political will in specific commercial zones 
can also serve to demonstrate the benefits of specific policy interventions, so that these could be 
scaled up.  Furthermore, incorporating smallholders into agro-industrial revitalization schemes 
will be critical for promoting peace, stability, and inclusive growth.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and improve 
marketing of crops, and animal products by smallholder farmers in targeted areas.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products crops 
and animal products in targeted areas.

Key Results 

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing will provide additional resources to reinforce the basic 
production capacity (staple crops and livestock) of smallholder farmers in three provinces to 



Page 5 of 13

ensure food and nutrition security, relaunch the perennial crops production and embark on 
commercial farming by selling surplus production on local markets. The AF will support the re-
emergence of a sustainable mixed farming system which is prevalent in the project areas. It will 
also revamp the extension and advisory services in the project areas giving a more prominent role 
to government institutions and involving the private sector. The AF will also assist the 
Government in setting up a sustainable feeder roads maintenance program and strengthening 
agriculture research and development. The AF will introduce information and communication 
technologies at different levels of the activities to enable mobile banking, remote sensing and 
other innovations to the beneficiaries. It will also expand a demand driven matching grant facility 
and combine it with free technical assistance so different actors can fully participate in the project 
activities. Finally the proposed AF also aims to promote climate adaptation (new technologies and 
management practices) and build community resilience (micro projects storage facilities, 
warehouses, processing centers, nurseries etc.). A partnership with the Central African Forest 
Initiative (CAFI) Fund is to be confirmed. The potential CAFI financing in the amount of US
$3.64 million as a grant would help enhance the environment benefits of the subprojects and 
increase the project efforts to reduce or mitigate deforestation and forest degradation.

Component Name
Component 1: Improving agricultural and animal production
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will consolidate and further develop the activities undertaken under the parent 
project which sought to increase the capacity of smallholder farmers in targeted areas to produce 
staple crops and small stock including chicken. The scope will be broadened to include the two 
additional territories and perennial crops like coffee and cocoa. The AF will support the private 
sector or small private enterprises interested in investing in commercial crops.  Cross-cutting 
issues such as nutrition, gender, climate smart agriculture, and employment will be fully 
embedded into the AF activities..

Component Name
Component 2: Improving marketing infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 2 aims to continue with the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads and 
construction of key local markets and storage facilities across the three provinces with a focus on 
building capacity at local and provincial levels to ensure that all infrastructure investments are 
maintained and sustainable.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development, and project management
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will support the government efforts to: (i) re-engineer the national agriculture 
extension and advisory services so it is responsive and inclusive (non-governmental 
organizations, private sector and producer organizations as advisory service providers); (ii) 
strengthen the planning, coordination and monitoring and evaluation capacity at national and 
provincial levels (statistics and georeferenced data system); and (iii) strengthen the agricultural 
research and development for efficiency and effectiveness gains in their service delivery and 
conduct a skills needs assessment in the areas of agribusiness and agronomy; (iv) introduce 



Page 6 of 13

landscape management planning at local and provincial levels to support climate adaptation and 
community resilience; and (v) manage the project.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The Additional Financing will be implemented in South Ubangi, North Ubangi, Mongala and 
Kinshasa.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Antoine V. Lema (GSU05)
Claude Lina Lobo (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSU01)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The same structure that governed the implementation of the parent project will remain, with a 
National Project Implementation Coordination Unit in Kinshasa and three Project Implementation 
units at provincial level, one per each newly created province. The delegated management contractor 
will be responsible for implementing the infrastructure component with an extension of UNOPS 
contract. For each province, a provincial coordination monitoring committee will be established to 
oversee the project's planning process and implementation.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Project activities will generate impacts on environment, 
especially the ones relating to the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of feeder roads and construction of key local 
markets. In addition to this, the ongoing operation intends to 
fund sub-projects such as storage facilities, warehouses, 
processing centers, nurseries, etc. These activities will 
unquestionably induce adverse impacts on environmental 
components. However, adverse impacts are expected to be 
moderate, site specific and easily manageable. Besides, the 
exact locations of these investments are unknown to date. 
Consequently, an Environmental and social Assessment 
Framework (ESMF) which is the proper safeguard instrument 
in such a case has been prepared, reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in DRC on January 13, 2017 and at the 
Infoshop on January 17, 2017.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy is triggered in the preventive way because of the 
potential of the project to cause loss or degradation of natural 
habitats, whether directly or indirectly. This policy is also 
triggered to draw attention when activities may be undertaken 



Page 7 of 13

near Natural habitats, with the possibility to impact them. The 
ESMF was prepared in line with the OP/BP4.01 includes a 
section handling this matter.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The policy on Forests is triggered preventively as the project 
will be implemented in forested areas with the possibility of 
impact on the natural or plantation forests, and/or can bring 
some changes in management or protection of these forests. 
This is to avoid any significant conversion (loss) or 
degradation. This concern was taken in account in the ESMF.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Activities in the component 1 aims to improve agricultural and 
animal production where the main focus will be on improved 
access to fertilizers, pesticides, veterinary drugs and access to 
high quality and affordable agro-veterinary services. 
Consequently an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
about the safe use of agricultural pesticides and a promotion of 
the use of biological or environmental control methods was 
developed as a separate document. This safeguard tool has 
been reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed within DRC and 
at the Infoshop respectively on January 13 and January 17, 
2017.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the precautions 
have been taken to protect and safeguard physical cultural 
resources, a section addressing these concerns was included in 
the ESMF.  This is because activities related to the 
rehabilitation and the maintenance of feeder roads and other 
infrastructure works will induce excavations with potential 
discoveries of physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes As the project is focusing mainly on rural areas, and as there 
are Indigenous People in the project area, the Indigenous 
People Policy Framework (IPPF) of the parent project has been 
updated. Once the project site is clearly identified, the project 
will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes This policy is triggered because of the potential restriction of 
access to assets or sources of livelihood as a result of the 
proposed project activities. Since the exact geographic 
coverage of proposed activities is still to be determined, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project 
has been updated by the Borrower for the project to clearly 
outline the basic principles and guidelines for mitigating any 
potential impact that may require compensation in the event of 
land acquisition and in some cases involuntary resettlement in 
the broad sense.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance dam works or activities associated 
to existing dams.

Projects on 
International 

Yes Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is triggered 
because of planned irrigation activities. An exception to the 



Page 8 of 13

Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Riparian Notification Requirement under OP 7.50 (Projects on 
International Waterways) was approved by the RVP on 
December 15, 2016. Due diligence was also completed under 
the parent project and an exception to the Riparian Notification 
Requirement was approved by the RVP on Oct 27, 2009..

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will support activities related to the rehabilitation and the maintenance 
of feeder roads, the construction of key local markets, storage facilities, warehouses, processing 
centers, nurseries, etc. These civil works will unquestionably induce environmental and social 
adverse impacts in terms of trees cutting, dust, noise, waste management, and security and health 
issues both for populations and for employees. However, most of adverse impacts associated with 
these investments will likely be site-specific, so manageable at an acceptable level.  
In addition, those civil works will take place in forested areas. Potential adverse impacts could 
occur on forests and natural resources. The civil works could also induce impacts on Physical 
cultural resources.  
 
On social level, the rehabilitation/maintenance of feeder roads and the construction of local 
markets as well as warehouses may induce the displacement of populations. In addition, 
Indigenous people are present within areas where some civil works will be undertaken with the 
possibility to some adverse impacts on them.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
Anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project would result mainly from 
civil works associated with rural roads rehabilitation, but also from increase and intensified crop 
production. The consequence would be change in routine activities, use of fertilizers and 
pesticides, generation of solid and liquid waste, acquisition/taking of private land. In addition, the 
potential use of quarry materials for consolidation of rural roads could also be sources of negative 
impacts on both the natural and physical environment, which will require restoration actions after 
use.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project remains EA category B and triggers eight safeguards policies which are OP/BP 4.01; 
OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP4.36; OP4.09; OP/BP4.11, OP/BP7.50; OP/BP4.10 and OP/PB 4.12.   
 
Considering that the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet 
determined with certainty, the Borrower updated four environmental and social safeguards 
instruments, namely an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a 



Page 9 of 13

Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) and a 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) in compliance with the core requirements of the triggered 
safeguards policies : OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/
BP.4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  The ESMF has also 
made provision to address basic requirements from both OP/BP 4.36 (forestry) and OP/BP 4.04 
(Natural Habitats). Both the ESMF and the PMP were reviewed and cleared by the Bank and the 
Government and disclosed both in-country on January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on January 
17, 2017. The RPF and the IPPF was were also reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed 
both in-country on  January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on  January 17, 2017. 
 
During the parent project implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure 
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. Consequently, many ESIA, RAP and 
IPPs have been prepared, disclosed and implemented as guidance/guidelines prior to activities 
implementation. As the parent project, the ongoing AF will follow the same process regarding the 
safeguard aspects.  
 
There is a recently recruited safeguards specialist in the PIU, who is familiar with project activities 
in the parent project, he has also been implicated in the preparation stage. For Component 2, the 
Contractor (UNOPS) has equally recruited a safeguards specialist, as well as the Netherlands 
Development Organization (Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers/SNV) that implemented the IPP 
of the parent project, also has a safeguards specialist in the team. To supervise the implementation 
of social measures, it is recommended that the project recruit a social expert. 
All the environmental and social safeguard specialists involved in the team will ensure that all the 
sub-projects to be financed under the AF are in full compliance with Bank safeguards policies and 
in line with the national regulatory framework. Furthermore, the National Agency in charge of 
environmental impact assessment and safeguards monitoring (Agence Congolaise de 
l➢❨ Environnementale-ACE) is also involved in the environmental and social aspects monitoring.  
 
Lastly, the safeguards specialists at the World Bank, part of the project team, will ensure that all 
the project staff are trained on safeguards on the one hand and will be part on supervision missions 
on the other hand with the aim to make sure safeguards aspects are properly handled.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary communities, Ministries in charge of Agriculture, 
fisheries and livestock, rural development, transport, Environment and sustainable development 
(and their relevant agencies/departments), municipalities, NGOs and other relevant institutions. 
 
One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant 
stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project implementation. The 
environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF, IPMP. IPPF and RPF, were also 
carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, 
involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities 
and impacts and foster ownership on their part. All the relevant bodies have been adequately 
informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have been 
taken into account in the body of the different reports and other results provided as Annexes. The 
key concerns raised during the consultation process included: (i) permanent information and 
sensitization of the population, (ii) compensation process for those impacted by the project, (iii) 
participation of local population as employee on works they qualify for, (iv) the involvement of 



Page 10 of 13

NGOs and state technical services during the execution of works. All these concerns have been 
addressed in the alternatives proposed through the developed safeguards instruments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 28-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 22-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 27-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



























































World Bank Document


 

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.: 110552  

Project Name Land Bank Financial Intermediation Loan (P150008) 

Region AFRICA 

Country South Africa 

Sector(s) General finance sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (20%), SME Finance (50%) 

Theme(s) Rural markets (50%), Other Financial Sector Development (50%) 

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing 

Project ID P150008 

Borrower(s) Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

Implementing Agency Land Bank 

Environmental Category F-Financial Intermediary Assessment 

Date PID Prepared/Updated 12-October-2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

23-January-2017 

Appraisal Review Decision 

(from Decision Note) 
 

Other Decision  

I. Project Context 

 Country Context 

 

More than twenty years after the end of apartheid, unemployment, poverty and inequality remain 

important development challenges in South Africa, despite substantial progress in overcoming the 

legacy of the past. While total employment increased from 9 million in 1996 to 16 million in 2015, the 

unemployment rate has stayed stubbornly high in the range of 20-26 percent. In 2015 approximately 5.4 

million South Africans were unemployed, of which about 40 percent were new entrants.  A 30 percent 

increase in per capita GDP since the late 1990s and a sharp expansion of the social grant coverage 

enabled a significant decline in the poverty rate—from 43.5 percent of the population living below 

ZAR219 (inflation-adjusted) a month in 2000 to 36.7 percent (or 18.3 million people) living below R501 

in 2015. Nevertheless, pockets of poverty remain deeply entrenched, mostly among the historically 

disadvantaged population. With a relatively stagnant income Gini coefficient of around 0.69 in 2011 

(versus 0.72 in 2006) and expenditure Gini of 0.634 in 2015 (versus 0.67 in 2006), South Africa has one 

of the highest inequality rates in the world. Land distribution, in particular, is one of the most unequal in 

the world. Threatening progress in poverty alleviation is the impact of the drought on agriculture and the 

widening gap between those with and without jobs. 

Recent developments in economic activity are not indicative of major improvements in growth or 

employment. South Africa’s annual GDP is estimated to have increased by 1.3 percent in 2015, 


compared to 1.5 percent in 2014 and 2.2 percent in 2013, a result of depressed global conditions, as well 

as labor unrest and electricity shortages which compounded structural constraints. This weak growth is 

well-below the projected 5 percent growth needed to drive down unemployment. Inflation was relatively 

subdued in 2015 amid lower food and fuel prices (5.2 percent as of December 2015, up from 4.8 percent 

in November). However the Reserve Bank increased the repurchase rate by a total of 125 basis points 

from start 2015 to end March 2016 due to a deterioration of the inflation outlook as a result of the effects 

from rising food prices due to the drought, the risk of a higher pass-through from the sharp depreciation 

of the rand (depreciated by more than 30 percent against the dollar in 2015 and continued to weaken in 

January 2016, before showing a subsequent moderate recovery) and subdued global growth. 

A weaker growth environment will pose a challenge in the management of the fiscal deficit, which in 

turn increases the sovereign credit risk.  In an effort to mitigate sovereign credit risk, the National 

Budget Speech of February 2016 announced a strong fiscal adjustment effort, bringing the fiscal deficit 

from 3.9 percent of GDP for 2015/16 to 2.8 percent by 2017/18. The original target of the 2015 budget 

had been 2.5 percent, however deterioration in the growth outlook rendered the target unrealistic. In 

December 2015, Fitch and Standard and Poor’s (S&P) downgraded South Africa’s creditworthiness 

rating to BBB-, one notch above speculative grade, and S&P placed its rating on negative watch. The 

turmoil in markets experienced in December 2015 when a weakening in the government’s commitment 

to fiscal discipline was perceived, hints at the potential fallout from a further ratings downgrade.  

A substantial reduction in poverty and inequality will be hard to achieve without a major success in rural 

development. As stated by South Africa’s National Development Plan (NDP), the main challenge for 

rural development in South Africa is to “combat the marginalization of the poor”. While the rural share 

of poverty fell from 70 percent in 1993 to 58.3 percent in 2011, partly due to migration of the poor to 

townships and informal settlements around urban centers, rural areas remain characterized by greater 

poverty and inequality than urban areas.  The contraction in agricultural production at double-digit 

rates in the first three quarters of 2015, as extreme weather conditions related to El Nino led to the most 

severe drought in almost 20 years, pushed an estimated 50,000 South Africans into poverty. 

Agriculture development and successful land reform are key pillars of the strategy laid out by the NDP 

for integrated and inclusive rural development. South Africa’s agriculture sector is characterized by 

dualism: a modern, market-oriented capital intensive farming sector consisting of a small number of 

large commercial farms (around 40,000 farming units) and a large number of subsistence and 

small-scale or emerging farms, many in the former homeland areas. In addition, there is growing 

consolidation in the industry with a number of mergers taking place and the acquisition of smaller 

players. While improving economies of scale, this consolidation may also lead to lower competition in 

the market. Around 2006, over 80 percent of South African farmers worked on a piece of land of one 

hectare or smaller, and another 11 percent on one to five hectares. Only 3 percent had access to land of 

larger than 20 hectares. It is estimated that there are 2.5 – 3.5 million households engaged in subsistence 

farming, about 350,000 – 700,000 who can be classified as emerging farmers, producing part of their 

output for the market, and between 11,000 – 15,000 small to medium scale farmers who are 

commercially oriented. 

The progress of land reform has been slow and a large number of land reform beneficiaries are not using 

the land productively. The government committed itself to transfer 30 percent of the 82 million hectares 

of agricultural land owned by whites in 1994 to historically disadvantaged farmers by 2014, a total of 

24.5 million hectares, through both land restitution and land redistribution. According to the Twenty 

Year Review published by the Presidency, only 9.4 million hectares have been redistributed since 1994 

through both land restitution and redistribution. Achieving the objective of “productive use” of 

redistributed and restituted land requires even greater efforts and innovation. Land reform in South 

Africa to date has involved the transfer of relatively large commercial farms in their entirety to groups of 



beneficiaries. Land reform beneficiaries are typically resource-poor, risk-averse, and inexperienced 

historically disadvantaged farmers. Support provided to them after their takeover of the land, that is 

post-settlement support, has been inadequate. Land reform beneficiaries have experienced numerous 

problems accessing services, such as credit, training, technology extension, transport, plowing services, 

veterinary services, and marketing services. The well-developed agribusiness sector that services 

large-scale commercial agriculture has not been seen extending its operations to emerging farmers who, 

in most cases, would be cash-strapped and incapable of paying for such services anyway. As a 

consequence, there is limited integration of small farmers into the value chain.  

Support for small-scale farmers is equally crucial to job creation. Employment in the formal agriculture 

sector declined from 1.1 million in 1992 to 739,000 in 2014 despite output growth. Nevertheless, the 

NDP believes that with successful rural development and land reform the agriculture sector has the 

potential to create 1 million new jobs by 2030. The NDP counts on small-scale/ emerging farmers for 

over 35 percent of the job creation target, in addition to a 10 percent share from subsistence farmers, a 10 

percent share expected from better use of the land that has already been redistributed or restituted to land 

reform beneficiaries, and a 30 percent share from expansion of labor intensive commercial farming.   

 
 

Sectoral and institutional Context 

 

South Africa’s financial sector is the most developed in Sub-Saharan Africa and is significantly larger 

and more diversified compared to regional and income-group peers. It is supported by an elaborate legal 

and financial infrastructure and a generally effective regulatory framework. South Africa’s financial 

system totaled approximately ZAR 10 trillion in assets as of year-end 2014 (US$ equivalent of 1,026 

billion). As of end 2014, the banking sector constitutes almost 40 percent of the financial system assets, 

with pension funds and long-term insurers each contributing roughly 35 and 18 percent, respectively. 

The banking sector is highly concentrated, but at the same time commercially driven and professional. 

The ‘big four’ banks in South Africa, two of which are foreign owned, account for over 83 percent of 

total banking assets. This concentrated ownership structure has led to limited competition and distorted 

incentives for these banks to serve the lower end of the market, especially micro, small, and 

medium-sized enterprises and the low-income population. Nevertheless, the banking system generally is 

highly professional and commercially driven, and does not suffer from distortionary policies.   

Provision of agricultural finance and support  

One of the main challenges for rural and agriculture development is affordable access to working capital 

for emerging farmers and medium to long-term finance for small and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises. While the financial services needs of the large commercial farms are generally well catered 

for by the private sector, farmers in rural areas experience many of the challenges faced by their peers in 

other African countries, ranging from difficulties in accessing markets, poor infrastructure, and little or 

no physical assets that could be used as collateral for accessing financing. With few exceptions, 

emerging and small-scale farmers are unable to use the land that they farm on as collateral given that the 

state owns most of the land in the former homelands. FinScope’s 2010 Small Business Survey estimates 

that of the roughly 700,000 emerging and small commercial farmers, only 5.6 percent used formal credit 

services and only 2.5 percent from a bank. In contrast, nearly half of those farmers used formal savings 

and/ or payments services and about 30 percent formal insurance. 

Without adequate collateral, rural farmers face challenges in accessing credit from traditional 

commercial banks. While the ‘big four’ commercial banks have made efforts to become more inclusive, 

their business models and cost structure do not lend themselves to serving the agricultural sector. Some 



banks are funding value chain off-take agreements with large processors and retailers for on-lending to 

smaller farmers, but such lending is small compared to the overall loan book of commercial banks. 

According to the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF), total farming debt 

amounted to ZAR 116,576 million (US$10,137 million) in 2014, out of which ZAR 66,345 million 

(US$5,769 million) was from commercial banks and ZAR 30,580 million (US$2,659 million) from the 

Land Bank. Compared to total commercial bank loans and advances of ZAR 2,967 billion (US$258 

billion), agricultural lending amounts to about 1 percent of their total loan book. 

A wide range of programs have been implemented by the government to provide financial support to 

land reform beneficiaries and small-scale farmers. In 1994 the government introduced the 

Settlement/Land Acquisition Grant (SLAG) to enable individuals and groups to finance the purchase of 

land from a willing seller. Until 2000, redistribution policy centered on the provision of a grant of ZAR 

16,000 (~US$1,034) to qualifying households with an income of less than ZAR 1,500 (~US$97) a 

month. In 2001 the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) Grant was introduced to 

establish and promote emerging farmers. LRAD offered higher grants, paid to individuals rather than to 

households, and made greater use of loan financing through institutions such as Land Bank to 

supplement the grant. A few years later, the slow pace of land reform led to the introduction of the 

Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy (PLAS) in 2005-06. The use of grants for land acquisition was 

discontinued and the focus was shifted to the acquisition of strategically located land through PLAS by 

the state. Since its inception, PLAS has become the biggest single program area within redistribution, in 

terms of both budget and land area. 

There are also initiatives designed to provide post-settlement support to land reform beneficiaries. The 

LRAD policy for example sets out to close the post-settlement support gap that prevailed under SLAG. 

In addition, the Comprehensive Farmer Support Program (CFSP) provides two grants, one for capacity 

building and one for on-farm infrastructure. In order to access on-farm infrastructure grants ranging 

from a minimum of ZAR 5,000 to a maximum of ZAR 100,000 (~ US$323 to 6,462), beneficiaries must 

make an ‘own contribution’ along a sliding scale similar to that of the LRAD grant program. It is a 

once-off support package designed for LRAD beneficiaries. The Comprehensive Agricultural Support 

Program (CASP) supported by DAFF offers grants to support short-term operating expenses and small 

operating needs such as machinery. These grants are managed at the provincial level and come from 

funds that are transferred from the national to the provincial level. Combined land acquisition grants, 

both for redistribution and restitution, totaled ZAR 13.6 billion (US$1.61 billion) between 2008 and 

2012 while grants for movable equipment and fixed improvements amounted to ZAR 3.4 billion 

(US$1.58 billion) between 2004 and 2012 (DAFF). Borrowing for working capital needs to operate and 

expand farms has been one of the most acute challenges for emerging and small farmers as well as land 

reform beneficiaries due to the reasons mentioned above.  

Value chain integration is an opportunity to address significant skills and financing gaps of emerging 

farmers. In South Africa, there is a growing recognition in government and the private sector that value 

chain integration may be an effective way of building up a new class of commercial emerging farmers. 

Drawing on the successful experiences in the sugar, poultry, cotton, tobacco and forestry sectors, the 

government and private sector are joining forces to scale up efforts in these and other sectors. A new 

area opening for value chain integration is in the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables to retail 

supermarkets. With new BBBEE procurement policies government is encouraging the private sector to 

get involved. For example, Walmart-Massmart has established a supplier fund to support emerging 

farmer integration into their supply chain. The South African Poultry Association through the creation 

of the Developing Poultry Farmers Organization (DPFO) facilitates technical and financial assistance to 

access contracts with egg and poultry businesses. 



Land Bank 

In addition to government grants, financing from Land Bank has been expected to play a critical role in 

land reform and agriculture development. Land Bank was established in 1912 and is governed by the 

Land and Agricultural Development Bank Act of 2002. Land Bank was given a mandate of 11 aspects, 

which fall into five broader areas: (i) access of the historically disadvantaged population to land; (ii) 

agriculture productivity, growth and job creation; (iii) gender equity; (iv) environmental sustainability; 

and (v) food security. The NDP published in 2011 continues to call for a key role of Land Bank in 

providing financial support to land reform beneficiaries and to help them overcome difficulties in entry 

into commercial farming. 

As the leading development financial institution in the rural and agriculture sector in South Africa, Land 

Bank had an approximately 29 percent market share in agricultural financing as of July 2015. The bank 

has achieved a significant turnaround during the past five years. It is now on a sustainable trajectory with 

profits of ZAR 420 million in 2014/15 (up 61 percent from 2013/14), and a Return on Average Assets of 

1.12 percent and a Return on Average Equity of 6.78 percent. Total assets stood at ZAR 39.4 billion in 

2014/15 with a performing loan book of ZAR 36 billion. Non-performing loans (NPLs) under Land 

Bank methodology were at 3.72 percent in 2014/15 and the cost-to-income ratio was 54.9 percent. Fitch 

Ratings upgraded Land Bank from AA to AA+ in January 2014. The rating was maintained at AA+ in 

December 2015. The bank does not take general deposits and funds itself mainly through the debt and 

capital markets, issuing instruments such as promissory notes.  

Land Bank is fully owned by the South African government and supervised by the National Treasury. It 

follows prudential guidelines as issued by its Board of Directors. It is consequently not prudentially 

supervised by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The bank is audited by the Auditor General. 

Land Bank is engaged in both wholesale lending through intermediaries as well as direct lending. 

Intermediaries are mainly credit providers, cooperatives, or agri-businesses.  

In 2015, Land Bank adopted a new strategy following the completion of its organizational review. The 

review was undertaken following conditions set by NT pursuant to the issue of a Government guarantee, 

aimed at enabling the Land Bank to raise longer term funding. The review was completed in August 

2015 and subsequently an implementation plan was approved by the Land Bank Board. Land Bank has 

started implementing the new strategy and key changes are planned to be put in place over a two-year 

period in line with the priorities of Land Bank. The changes focus on: (i) a strategy to optimize the retail 

commercial banking segment of Land Bank, the long term viability of which was a concern owing to 

loan losses and significant operational costs; (ii) new initiatives to potentially expand the development 

portfolio of Land Bank for emerging farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner by 

adopting a project finance approach in partnership with large corporates and intermediaries to integrate 

the emerging farmers into established value chains; and (iii) steps to align Land Bank financial 

soundness indicators, credit appraisal processes and risk management practices with international 

banking standards.  

Following the adoption of this new strategy, Land Bank has two main business lines: Corporate Banking 

(CB) and Commercial Development Banking (CDB). The new CDB business line is a combination of 

previous Retail Emerging Markets (REM) and Retail Commercial Banking (RCB) business lines. In 

2014/15, CB accounted for 83.6 percent of the bank’s loan book and CDB accounted for 16.4 percent, of 

which 1.3 percent was composed of loans provided under REM. 

Under CDB, the REM sub-business line continues to focus exclusively on lending to emerging farmers 

for development purposes. Farmers supported under REM typically have no or limited access to 

commercial funding and little or no collateral, but can be commercially sustainable and viable with 



financing and technical support. Subsistence farmers are not supported under REM. Lending is based on 

cash-flows and non-financial support (end to end on-farm support) is provided by Land Bank 

intermediaries and agricultural specialists based in Land Bank branches. REM uses wholesale as well as 

direct lending and offers production financing, installment sale finance, and medium-term loans. The 

total REM portfolio amounted to ZAR 489 million in 2014/15 (increase of ZAR 97 million in that year).  

Intensive and high-quality extensions services under the REM program are effectively provided by Land 

Bank’s intermediaries. These intermediaries have a comparative advantage in providing these services 

due to their close interaction with the beneficiaries. The non-financial complementary services, 

especially extension services, are critical for emerging farmers to develop. The costs for the extension 

services are embedded in the overall cost structure under REM and are borne by the intermediaries. 

While the provision of extension services is costly, especially for new emerging farmers, intermediaries 

can generate profits from these clients over time due to the long-run and comprehensive nature of 

engagement between intermediaries and their clients. The current model of providing extension services 

is considered to be of high quality according to the assessment carried out during project preparation. 

Under CDB, the RCB business line which was exclusively focused on direct retail lending to medium 

scale farmers, through 27 Agriculture Finance Centers (AFCs), has been significantly restructured to 

improve its long term sustainability. RCB was loss-making due to high operating costs of the large 

branch network and had NPLs of 11 percent in 2014/15. RCB was losing clients to commercial banks 

and agricultural enterprises who started to lend in that space and could offer a wider range of products. 

The competitiveness and long-term viability of RCB was therefore questionable. The new strategy aims 

at consolidating the branch network into 9 provincial offices in strategically important geographical 

locations which will also result in significant staff reduction. Importantly, the consolidated branch 

network’s role will specifically focus on facilitating effective partnerships in their respective regions 

with corporate retailers, emerging farmers, government programs, as well as technical and financial 

intermediaries to leverage on high impact and high value chain finance deals. 

Importantly, as part of the new strategy, Land Bank aims to scale up financing support to emerging 

farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner through their integration in established value 

chains. The approach is anchored in identifying high-potential value chain projects in a given 

geographic region and securing buy-in from large agriculture corporates or technical partners to assist in 

supporting emerging farmers’ integration into the chain. The agriculture corporates will provide 

technical support (directly or indirectly) to the emerging farmers, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. Land Bank has identified selected potential value chain projects and 

agriculture corporates to partner with in the grains, winery, horticulture and livestock sectors for this 

type of financing. 

The CB business line is the corporate part of the bank and the most viable business line. The CB 

business line involves both direct and wholesale lending. Lending takes place primarily through 

intermediaries (cooperatives and agri-businesses). CB operates through two offices in Pretoria and Cape 

Town. The total portfolio of CB amounted to ZAR 31 billion in 2014/15. While CB targets commercial 

farmers, the workers employed on these farm tend to be part of the low-income population.  

Land Bank aims at increasing its developmental focus in both CB and CDB business lines by 

strengthening its wholesale business as well as its direct lending to emerging farmers. Both business 

lines contain a development portfolio with “development” referring to a focus on supporting the 

historically disadvantaged population in line with Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 

(BBBEE). International experience with development banks suggests that wholesale lending is more 

likely to be successful than retail lending. The key reason is that wholesale lending does not require a 

large branch network which is costly to build and maintain but rather leverages the networks already 



built by other financial service providers. Wholesale lending is also more market enabling and does not 

aim at competing with the private sector.  Direct lending via value chain financing leverages the 

corporate partner’s ability to provide technical support to the borrower, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. As such, emerging farmers in this scheme have the potential to 

increase their revenues and thus a greater likelihood of fulfilling debt obligations to the bank. The 

project will therefore focus on supporting Land Bank in scaling up its wholesale portfolio as well as 

expanding direct lending through LB’s new approach of integrating emerging farmers into established 

value chains. Using long-term financing to fill existing funding gaps will additionally help Land Bank 

meet its investment needs as well as improve its asset liability management.  

Land Bank is making an important contribution to job creation. Land Bank estimates that the impact of 

its loan disbursements on employment opportunities in South Africa was close to 400,000 in 2013-2014. 

This estimate is comprised of over 23,000 new employment opportunities generated and over 370,000 

jobs maintained during the year. One employment opportunity constitutes 240 days worked per year. 

The estimated new jobs created are arising out of the medium and long-term loans Land Bank is 

providing.  

II. Project Development Objective(s) 

 
The project’s development objective is to sustainably scale up Land Bank’s financing, specifically to 

benefit emerging farmers. 

III. Project Description 

 Component Name 

 Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing 

 Comments (optional) 

 

Land Bank will provide both wholesale finance to participating PFIs for on-lending to commercial 

and emerging farmers and direct financing, in partnership with large agriculture corporates, to 

emerging farmers to support their integration in established value chains. It will do so through two 

main financing windows 

Window 1: Wholesale finance to commercial and emerging farmers. This window will provide a 

wholesale line of credit to Land Bank. Land Bank will on-lend the funds to participating financial 

intermediaries (PFIs) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World Bank. The PFIs 

will on-lend funds to eligible agriculture enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal 

property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the Land Bank’s CB and CDB 

business lines. Currently, the wholesale line under CDB primarily includes the REM portfolio, 

however, over the life of the project this may change to include other wholesale loans under CDB. 

Window 2: Financing to integrate emerging farmers into established value chains. This window will 

provide a line of credit to Land Bank to finance direct lending to emerging farmers for integrated value 

chain finance. For direct lending to value chain finance/development projects, Land Bank will finance 

eligible emerging farmers and agriculture enterprises in collaboration with large agriculture 

corporates and/or technical partners in a targeted value chain. 

. 

IV. Financing (in USD Million) 



 Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 95.00 

 Financing Gap: 0.00  

 Financing Source Amount 

 Borrower 0.00 

 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 95.00 

 Total 95.00 

. 

V. Implementation 

 

The project is a financial intermediary loan (FIL) of US$95 million to Land Bank as the borrower and 

implementing agency with a guarantee of the Republic of South Africa. The project has one component: 

a Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing in the amount of US$95 million. 

 

The loan will be extended to Land Bank as the borrower and implementing agency with a guarantee of 

the Republic of South Africa. Land Bank will use the funds under the LOC component for on-lending to 

PFIs. Land Bank will be responsible for project implementation and monitoring. Dedicated staff in Land 

Bank has been identified for managing all aspects of the project, including reporting on implementation 

progress and monitoring and evaluation, ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguards 

as well as with financial management and procurement arrangements. 

 

Land Bank will report on the PDO and intermediate indicators on a semi-annual basis. The data will 

come from Land Bank’s internal reports and from information provided by the PFIs. Land Bank will 

prepare quarterly Interim Financial Reports for the project. The specific reporting templates will be 

defined in the Project’s Operational Manual. Land Bank’s financial performance will be audited 

annually by the Auditor General. 

VI. Safeguard Policies  

 WBG Performance Standards Applicable  Yes No 

 
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks 

and Impacts 

X  

 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions X  

 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention X  

 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security X  

 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement X  

 
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living 

Natural Resources 

 X 

 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples  X 

 PS 8: Cultural Heritage  X 

 Comments (optional) 

  


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 
 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 1 of 25  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Congo, Republic of P159979 Congo Commercial 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 21-Mar-2017 06-Jul-2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Congo Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Livestock 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity of farmers and market access for producer groups 
and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective 
response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMES 
Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial agriculture 
Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial agriculture 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. The Republic of Congo (ROC) is sparsely inhabited, with a population of 4.4 million people 
and ranks among the least densely populated in the world (12.8/km

2
). The country has an   

urbanization rate of about 62 percent, with more than half of the population living in 

Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, its two largest cities. Oil’s share of total GDP increased from 

56 percent in 2000-2004 to 66 percent in 2010-2014 and – despite the recent oil price decline 

– still accounts for more than half of GDP and more than 80 percent of total exports. 

Agricultural exports (palm oil, sugar, and cocoa) are stagnant and the country suffers from a 

rapidly deteriorating trade balance for food. ROC’s cereal import dependency ratio is 94 

percent
1
.  

 

2. ROC is highly endowed in natural resources, but with poor social indicators. The 
country is largely covered by the Congo Forest Basin, with 31 percent of its total surface area 

comprising cultivable land. The country is also endowed with significant hydrocarbon 

reserves with an estimated 1.6 billion barrels of oil reserves and with a proven 90 billion m
3
 

of natural gas, respectively the 4
th

 largest oil reserves and the 5
th

 largest natural gas reserves 

in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, the country is significantly endowed in mining ore such 

as iron, potash and magnesium. However, ROC’s key social indicators, notably health and 

education outcomes, as well as service delivery in these sectors, are much lower than 

countries with similar resource endowments, evidence of the Country’s inability to harness 

its potential into dividends for its citizens. 

 

3. High vulnerability of the economy and inequality. Despite steady GDP growth of 5 
percent over the past 10 years, ROC continues to suffer from high rates of poverty and 

inequality due to jobless growth. 63 percent of the population are self-employed in either 

agriculture or the informal services, with youth severely affected by unemployment. The 

unemployment rate for those aged 15-29 is 32.7 percent.
2
 The country has a Gini coefficient 

of 0.45 with a poverty incidence of 74.8 percent in rural areas against 32.3 percent in urban 

areas. Gender and disability have an indirect impact on poverty as women and disabled 

persons exhibit lower levels of education and employment opportunities. The ROC’s Gender 

Inequality country index is 137 out of 157 countries. Cultural division of labor and a 

preference for boys regarding expenditure on education often work against women. The 

malnutrition rate remains high (32 percent), with a total of 1.4 million people estimated as 

                                                           
1
 FAO food security indicators. Figure is from 2010. 

2
 Poverty Report Republic of Congo 2016 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

malnourished
3
 and 31 percent of children stunted. Food and nutrition insecurity is driven by: 

(a) inadequate access to quality food; (b) poor hygiene practices and lack of awareness of 

food and nutrition requirements; and (c) unsafe food.    

 

4. Business climate and access to financial services. ROC was listed the 177
th

 country out of 

190 in the ranking of the World Bank Doing Business report 2017, which noted it takes an 

average of 50 days to register a business well beyond the regional average of 27.3. Access to 

finance is cited as the second highest constraint by businesses
4
. Bank credit to agriculture 

accounts for 6 percent of short-term credit and 17 percent of medium-term credit, and is 

focused primarily on the forestry industry
5
. Microfinance institutions are mostly focused on 

urban markets, and agriculture accounts for only 2 percent of Mutuelles Congolaises 

d’Epargne et de Crédit (MUCODEC)’s portfolio (the largest microfinance institution). Low 

penetration of financial services in rural areas, knowledge of the agriculture sector and 

collateral requirements limit access to credit for producer groups and micro, small and 

medium agribusiness enterprises (MSME).  

 

5. Private sector development. The private sector in ROC is largely fragmented with little or 
no structured public-private dialogue taking place to improve the enabling environment for 

business. The contribution of the private sector to growth is limited, as reflected by the level 

of private investments (excluding oil), which represents only 5 percent of GDP (against 14 

percent on average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 25 percent of GDP in Asia). Sectors with 

strong growth potential identified by the Government include transport services, 

agribusiness, forestry and mining. 

 

6. Environment. As part of its Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
(REDD+) agenda, ROC is developing an Emissions Reductions Program in the Sangha and 

Likouala departments. The government program seeks to access a variety of REDD+ funding 

sources like the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), the Forest Investment Program 

(FIP), and the Central Africa Forest Initiative (CAFI). ROC’s forests are at risk of 

deforestation due to mineral extraction, road development, illegal logging, agricultural 

expansion and charcoal collection. In addition, trends
6
 indicate that exposure to periods of 

intense rainfall has been increasing. ROC, in its recently submitted Intended Nationally 

Determined Contribution (INDC), has highlighted agriculture among its priority areas. 

Climate actions with regards to agriculture will embrace adaptation and mitigation through 

the promotion of agro-forestry plantations, an increase in the number of producer 

associations, and production of bioenergy. 

                                                           
3
 Undernourishment means that a person is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary 

energy requirements, over a period of one year. FAO defines hunger as being synonymous with chronic 
undernourishment. Food Hunger Map 2015. 
4
 Enterprises Survey Report surveyed in 2009  

5
 The Republic of Congo ranks 118 out of 190 countries in access to credit according to the World Bank Doing 

Business report 2017. In rural areas, 58 percent of rural adults save, but only 8 percent do so in a financial 
institution. 
6
 Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 

http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/countryprofile/home.cfm?page=country_profile&CCode=COG 



Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture, including forestry, employs about 40 percent of the labor force and contributes 
5 percent of GDP. Approximately 498,000 people are actively engaged in agricultural 

production, of which 70 percent are female. With an average rainfall of 1,200 mm per year 

and only 2 percent of the 10 million hectares of arable land exploited, the agricultural sector 

holds potential for growth. ROC has three types of agricultural production systems: (i) 

subsistence agriculture, mainly composed of small-scale producers farming 1 to 2 hectares 

per household, and accounts for 90 percent of agricultural output. Subsistence producers 

cultivate primarily staple crops such as plantain, cassava, ground nuts, maize, potatoes, 

beans, banana, and yam. Yields of these crops are lower on average than in other Sub-

Saharan countries mainly due to the poor quality of planting materials, the low use of 

fertilizer and the limited access to improved technologies and mechanization; (ii) urban and 

peri-urban agriculture is mainly composed of producers with small-scale gardens and semi-

modern commercial farms producing for urban consumers; and (iii) agro-industrial 

production systems, mainly monocultures geared towards export markets or niche urban 

markets. Apart from that of sugar cane, the production of traditional export and cash crops 

(e.g. coffee, cocoa, palm oil and rice) collapsed over the past couple of decades. A few large 

private agribusiness investors have recently started to invest again in these crops (including 

large-scale maize cultivation and the revival of palm oil and cocoa plantations). 

 

8. The cumulative effects of the different production systems have left an undeniable 
impact on the environment. Studies revealed that the sector contributes a total of 79 percent 

of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
7
. Subsistence farming has promoted deforestation 

through slash and burn shifting cultivation techniques. As a result, particularly in the 

Province of Plateau, producers are experiencing: (i) earlier planting times and longer crop 

cycles; (ii) soil degradation, which makes some crops no longer suitable; and (iii) greater 

occurrences of flooding. Lastly, peri-urban vegetable and fish farming are competing with 

growing demand for water from urban dwellers. 

 

9. Gender in agriculture. Women are underrepresented in politics and higher levels of 
government, even though the Family Code protects them against racial, ethnic and sexual 

discrimination. Women earn less than men and are more likely to be self-employed as they 

do not have equal opportunities for accessing secondary education and paid employment. 

Labor market analyses show that gender employment gaps result from unequal access to 

education and skills training. Lack of education gives women limited power in business and 

social dealings with men, who typically are better educated. Women are customarily 

encouraged to focus on subsistence farming, family and child-rearing activities (fertility rate 

is high at 3.8 percent) and, as a result, 70 percent of the country’s agricultural workforce are 

women. Congolese women face additional barriers compared to men in accessing credit, 

agriculture inputs, land ownership and labor.   

 

10. Agricultural skills, competencies and jobs. Access to formal paid wage job is very limited 

for the youth who are more likely to be unemployed. If they manage to find a job, those aged 

15-29 are more likely to be employed by a household (15 percent) or by an SME (12 

percent)
8
. There is only one institute for higher education in agriculture, Ecole Nationale 

Supérieure d’Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), with approximately additional 7 

agriculture vocational skills training centers. They are under resourced and do not offer all of 

the relevant skills and entrepreneurship training. Internship arrangements with the private 

sector are difficult to organize and the capacity to train masters and doctoral students is 

limited. 

  

11. Demand for food is high and growing in domestic and regional markets. ROC is highly 
dependent on food imports, with a negative trade balance. Food imports increased from US 

$197 million to US$240 million between 2007 and 2013, and spiked to US$353 million in 

2011. Volumes of imported food in 2013 included 104,567 tons of wheat, 50,581 tons of 

palm oil, 45,878 tons of chicken meat, 41,541 tons of rice and 38,455 tons of wheat flour
9
.
 

The domestic cassava market is valued at US$ 174 million with some value addition already 

taking place. Cassava is consumed by 90 percent of the population. There is a high 

consumption of chicken at household level and consumption of other livestock products is 

expected to grow significantly, e.g. 80 million eggs and 15,000 tons of pork per annum by 

2020
10

. Demand for milk (and milk-based products) is high and growing. Fish consumption 

is at 24.4 kg per head per year, one of the highest in Africa. Other regional markets present 

sizable opportunities as well, for instance the Kinshasa market (over 12 million inhabitants) 

in the Democratic Republic of Congo, or other neighboring countries such as Angola, Gabon 

and Cameroon.  

 

12. Food safety concerns are huge and compounded by the absence of a food policy and 
regulatory framework. No analysis has been done to understand the national cost of food 

borne diseases (e.g. loss of human lives, cost of treatment and loss of income especially on 

poor households). Food safety issues from imports include: (i) food spoilage; (ii) absence of 

harmonized food and product standards; (iii) poor product quality (e.g. expired food, 

deceitful labelling and high levels of preservatives in food); (iv) limited coordinated national 

surveillance and inspection capacity; and (vi) no laboratories for food testing. In addition to 

the risks created by limited awareness amongst consumers and low levels of hygiene 

standards (e.g. unregistered food street vendors & unsanitary urban markets), additional food 

safety risks from domestic agriculture include: (i) the use of animal waste and sewage on 

crops as agriculture fertilizer; (ii) poor harvesting and post-harvest handling (raises risks of 

mycotoxins and aflatoxins); and (iii) unhygienic agricultural transport systems.          

 

13. Every segment across the agriculture value chain is characterized by under 
development and fragmentation. Most inputs are imported, at high cost with no quality 

assurance. Agricultural production is performed in a rudimentary, inefficient, low input-

output model making unit costs of production much higher than imported commodities. The 

               

transport sector is managed by cartels that fix the transport prices, making it difficult for 

producers to transport commodities and processors to source primary material. There is only 

a few domestic agro-processing companies and the distribution and retail of food is done 

mostly through formal open markets, informal markets and small corner stores. There are 

only seven registered retail outlets (supermarkets) in urban areas selling mostly imported 

food.  

 

14. Commercial agricultural production is constrained by a multiplicity of factors. The 
competitiveness of domestic production – in value chains such as poultry, piggery, and fish 

for livestock, cassava and groundnuts for staple crops, and cocoa and palm oil for cash crops 

– is hampered by: (i) sector specific legislative and governance constraints (seed policies, 

land access, food safety policies and guidelines, taxes and registration procedures for the 

legal status of cooperatives); (ii) weak producer organizations (iii) non-existent agricultural 

extension and veterinary services and obsolete Research and Development (R&D) capacity;  
(iv) high costs of agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, land, animal feed, credit); (v) an 

ageing and under skilled workforce; and  (vi) poor road and communication networks and 

costly logistics and energy services.  

 

15. A substantial number of smallholders have the potential to engage successfully in 
commercially demanding value chains.

11
 These producers are found amongst farms located 

outside cities and towns (urban and peri-urban) as well as within specific value chains (e.g. 

cocoa, palm oil).
12

 These producers work in groups but are often marginalized from higher-

value markets due to high unit costs of production, poor infrastructure and limited access to 

credit and technical assistance. Three main profiles have been identified in the ROC of SMEs 

that are currently operating in the agribusiness sector and could establish business 

relationships with producer groups for commercial agriculture: (i) suppliers of critical inputs 

(e.g. day-old chicks, veterinary medicine and technical assistance provided by 

Transcontinental Business Néerlandais (TBN) in Pointe-Noire); (ii) off-takers for agricultural 

products (e.g. tropical fruits to produce concentrate bought by Bayo in Brazzaville); and (iii) 

firms that are both input suppliers and off-takers (e.g. supplying cassava cuttings then 

purchasing of cassava for saka-saka processing by Agridec in Dolisie).    
 
 
 

                                                           
11

 M.H. Collion, Rural Productive Partnerships: An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Overcoming Small-holder 
Market Barriers, World Bank, 2012. This finding is echoed by studies in Africa and Asia which indicate that 50-70% 
of farmers are unable to move out of subsistence (S. Ferris et alt., Linking Smallholder Farmers to Markets and the 
Implications for Extension and Advisory Services, MEAS Discussion Paper 4, 2014). 
12

 The Ministry of Agriculture holds a Registry of Farmer Cooperatives that totals 1,055 cooperatives nation-wide, 
out of which 25% (approximately 250) are estimated to be active according to a survey conducted by the Ministry 
in 2015.  According to records from ongoing projects (PDARP, PADE), there are approximately more than 500 
additional active producer groups that are not registered with the Ministry since they registered at the 
Department level or they decided to register as an Association with the Ministry of Interior instead. There are 
therefore approximately 800 active producer groups (associations/cooperatives) in Congo, totaling approximately 
16,000 smallholders. 




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity and market access for producer groups and micro, 
small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective response in the 
event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
 
Key Results 

1. Direct beneficiaries, of which Female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core); 

2. Average seasonal yield per standard area of specific crops among targeted farmers; and  

3. Increase in marketed production volume of raw and processed products by producer groups 

and MSMEs supported by the project. 

 
 

 
D. Project Description  

16. Key issues to be addressed. Through the support of the emergence and the revival of a 
competitive commercial agriculture sector, the project will address: (a) access to market 

with: (i) consistent supply of high volumes of quality produce meeting market requirements 
for commercial and industrial production; (ii) high quality value added agricultural products; 

(b) an enabling business environment with: (i) favorable legislation; (ii) a partnership 

framework for public-private dialogue between agricultural stakeholders; and (iii) an 

enabling institutional framework for private investors in the agricultural sector; and (c) an 

ecosystem of services that provide actors with: (i) appropriate inputs (feed for livestock, 

seeds, organic fertilizers, finance, processing technology, micro-irrigation equipment, etc.); 

(ii) a qualified workforce,; (iii) marketing infrastructure (logistics, agricultural feeder roads, 

storage); and (iv) access to water and electricity. 

 

17. Additional development challenges to be considered. The project will also help address 
nutrition and food insecurity by promoting producer groups’ access to nutrition and climate 

sensitive technology, agriculture extension services, and by supporting MSMEs to produce 

fortified and enriched foods in the market. Skills development and job creation for youth 

challenges (auto-employment, semi-permanent, temporary jobs, etc.) will be addressed 

through support to internship arrangements between institutes of higher learning and the 

private sector. 

The gender gap 

with respect to 

access to 

services, inputs 

and finance and 

ownership of 

economic 

resources will be 

reduced by 

promoting female 

producer groups’ 

access to 

matching grants. 

Female owned 

MSMEs will also 

be promoted 

through access to 

a tailored 

technical 

assistance 

package for 

women MSMEs 

(business 

leadership, 

entrepreneurship 

training, 

mentorship and networking support).  Targeting principles and the approaches by component 

are described in Box 1. 
 
 

A. Project Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs (IDA: US$25 million)  

18. Component 1 seeks to increase productivity and value addition along value chains, and 
improve food and nutrition security. Support provided under this component will be through 

a matching grant program financing technical assistance and productive investments to 

support production, marketing and processing activities. This component has two sub-

components. 

Box 1: Targeting Principles 

Two basic principles will guide project design: (i) an open menu approach with 

respect to the selection of value chains, subsectors and business opportunities; 

and (ii) a geographical concentration and targeting of project interventions where 

commercial opportunities and the need for support have been identified and 

expressed by market actors (producers, processors and others). The rationale for 

an open menu is to avoid excluding any potentially viable value chain and 

business opportunity. The project’s geographical focus will start where 

commercial agriculture has the strongest potential: the three main cities of 

Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie and in the North of the country. In its first 

component, the project will directly support private sector initiative in agriculture 

by facilitating market access for producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs. 

Support to producer groups will follow a Productive Alliance approach through 

which these producer groups target new markets and seek to establish commercial 

relationships with buyers and off-takers. Support to MSMEs will focus on 

helping agribusiness firms to connect with specific off-takers and markets (both 

domestic and export), through  sound business plan development, supply chain 

development for sourcing quality raw materials, and access to know-how to 

improve processing techniques, relevant market information and/or equipment, 

etc.  

 

The second component will support public investments in agricultural service 

roads and other improved public infrastructure (e.g. access to electricity and 

water supply for agro-processing) selected based on the location (clustering) of 

the demand for sub-projects from producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs in 

Component 1. Producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs will need to identify 

(along with their expression of interest) if their value chain development activities 

are constrained by the lack of viable infrastructure. Activities in Component 2 

will also contribute to improving the business climate for commercial agriculture. 

Lastly, the project will support the strengthening of institutional capacities for 

commercial agriculture development in its third component. 


Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable intensification and commercialization of crop and animal 

production (IDA: US$ 20 million)  

19. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support producer groups in 
Productive Alliance arrangements with buyers and markets for increased production, value 

addition and improved marketing of their products. It will support the intensification of 

production and commercialization of products within supported value chains through 

technical assistance and financing of business plans using a matching grant scheme 

administered through a Productive Alliance approach.  

 

20. Productive Alliance approach.
13

 Productive Alliances will aim to develop the managerial 

and technical capacity of producer groups and help them implement business plans that 

include support for productive investment (access to inputs, production facilities, nutrition 

and climate-sensitive technology) and technical assistance (agriculture advisory, extension 

services and business development skills and practices). The project will also seek to 

strengthen existing business arrangements between producer groups and buyers and/or 

support new ones.  

 

21. Business plans. Producer groups will be supported to translate their vision and strategy into 
a business plan that clearly identifies specific markets, marketing plans and technical and 

financial needs. Business plans are expected to finance a series of investments (depending on 

market requirements, the supply chain and associated constraints), such as: (i) improved 

access to quality inputs (e.g. seeds, cuttings, chicks, fertilizer, feed, water through small 

pumped and piped irrigation systems, etc.); (ii) infrastructure and/or equipment for 

processing; and (iii) infrastructure and/or equipment to improve the storage and transport to 

reach target markets. Investments will systematically be accompanied with technical 

assistance to install and maintain the investment and to improve the producer group’s 

marketing skills and management of its business and finances. The matching grants, 

however, will be awarded based on a competitive process. Applicants will have to meet a set 

of eligibility criteria to present their business plan, which will then be assessed on the basis 

of additional relevant prioritization criteria
14

. In forest areas, application of REDD+ 

principles will for instance be a precondition for relevant value chains. Female producer 

groups will receive tailored technical assistance that will include business leadership 

networking support to enable them to access markets and manage business operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                      

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Development of agro-industrial activities (IDA: US$ 5 million) 

22. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support the competitiveness of 
MSMEs involved in agribusiness, from input supply to the production, processing and 

distribution of agricultural products, as well as the delivery of agri-based services. These 

actors face efficiency challenges linked to the cost of processing, packaging and marketing 

their products. Efficiency gains in operations will result in higher quality agricultural 

products (nutritional and safety standards compliant), jobs (full, part-time and seasonal), and 

a secure market that rewards farmers with quality produce with higher prices. Female owned 

MSMEs will access a technical assistance plus package (business leadership, 

entrepreneurship training, with additional mentorship and networking support) to support 

them to bridge specific gender related challenges. This subcomponent will aim to allow 

MSMEs to have better access to training, equipment and skills they need to develop their 

business. 

 

23. Business plans. Agribusiness MSMEs will be able to apply for grants on a competitive basis 
through the same matching-grant scheme as the one described for Subcomponent 1.1. They 

will have to submit a business plan that identifies market demand for the firm’s products and 

services and shows returns on investment and financial sustainability of the firm’s 

operations, while clearly demonstrating that the investment contributes to addressing at least 

one of the following challenges: product upgrade, process improvement, new product 

development, volume increase, or reduction of the environmental footprint. The matching 

grants will cover technical assistance and equipment. Technical assistance will systematically 

accompany equipment requests to ensure the proper use and maintenance of the investment. 

Eligibility and prioritization criteria will be applied to maximize the transparency of the 

Promotion plans and 

activities targeting 

potential members of 

productive alliances. 

This process 

continues during the 

call for proposals 

phase.

Public calls for 

potential productive 

alliance partners (i.e. 

producer groups, 

input suppliers, 

buyers, etc.) to 

present business 

plans. 

The calls will be 

accompanied by a 

communications 

campaign, as well as 

field information and 

training workshops.

Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest (EOI) from 

producer groups with 

the following criteria: 

(i) compliance with 

basic eligibility criteria 

and safeguards; (ii) 

location based on 

pre-identified areas; 

and (iii) commitment 

by producer groups 

to co-financing.

Producer groups, 

whose profiles are 

approved, receive 

technical assistance 

for the formulation of 

their business plan.

Groups that do not 

meet basic criteria 

receive capacity 

building support.

EOI and business 

plans identify public 

infrastructure gaps to 

help prioritize 

infrastructure support 

under Component 2.

5. Evaluation of 

proposals

Evaluation of the 

commercial, technical 

and financial 

soundness of 

business plans 

conducted by an 

independent entity. 

Safeguards 

evaluation and 

inclusion of mitigating 

measures, if required, 

are carried out by the 

project unit.

4. Formulation of 

business plans

3. Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest

2. Call for 

proposals

1. Marketing 

strategy and 

promotion

6. Implementation

of business plans

Implementation of 

subprojects by 

producer groups, with 

systematic technical 

assistance to improve 

organizational, 

managerial, business 

and risk-management 

skills. 

Other agents (e.g. 

input suppliers, 

buyers, technical 

assistance providers) 

implement agreed 

measures separately. 


selection process and the sustainability of the investments made and assistance received
15

.  

  

Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 45 million) 
24. This component aims to foster the development of commercial agriculture by lifting 

constraints in terms of infrastructure and business climate. This component consists of two 

sub-components:  

 

Subcomponent 2.1: Public infrastructure for the development of commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 

37 million)  

25. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will contribute to the development of 
basic infrastructure essential for the promotion of commercial agriculture and the emergence 

of an agro-industry. It will include public investments in the rehabilitation and maintenance 

of the feeder road network and improved access to other public infrastructure (e.g. access to 

electricity and water supply for agro-processing, and other public infrastructure) in a targeted 

way.  

 

26. Prioritization criteria. High logistical costs and limited access to markets are major 
obstacles faced by the private sector. To address these important issues, the project will make 

a provision to ensure public investments in infrastructure: (i) are identified by the 

Government as infrastructure of a public nature; and (ii) are located in targeted geographic 

zones where producer groups and MSMEs promoting commercial agriculture development 

express interest in receiving Productive Alliance and / or MSME support (see Component 1). 

 

27. Sustainability of investments. Technical assistance will also be provided through this 
subcomponent to selected departmental councils to implement the new road maintenance 

strategy developed with the assistance of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 

Rehabilitation Project (PDARP) in order to make such maintenance more sustainable.  

 

Subcomponent 2.2: Governance and regulatory framework for commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 8 

million) 

28. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent aims to improve the legal and 
regulatory framework for commercial agriculture. It will do so by: (i) establishing and 

financing platforms for public-private dialogue on commercial agriculture at the 

departmental and national levels to identify needed reforms; (ii) providing technical 

assistance to draft the identified legislation and regulations; (iii) policy advocacy with 

parliamentarians (e.g. policy notes, sensitization, training); and (iv) conducting sensitization, 

dissemination and training activities toward relevant stakeholders (i.e. ministries and public 

institutions, producer groups, agribusiness MSMEs and other private sector actors, etc.) on 

drafted legislations and regulations pertaining to commercial agriculture. 

 

29. Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) on commercial agriculture. The project will build on the 
mechanism for public-private dialogue put in place with the support of PADE to start a 

                                                           
 

public-private dialogue specifically on commercial agriculture by providing technical 

assistance and budget support to set up and operate PPD platforms
16

 on commercial 

agriculture at the departmental and national levels. The platforms are expected to identify and 

contribute to building consensus around changes to legislation and practices that constrain 

commercial agriculture.    

 

30. Identified reforms. Some of the needed improvements to constraining legislation specific to 
commercial agriculture have already been identified with stakeholders and their drafting will 

be supported by the project. The legislation pertains to: (i) compliance with the Organisation 

pour l’Harmonisation du Droit des affaires en Afrique (OHADA) Uniform Act on 

Cooperatives; (ii) National Seed Policy in compliance with the norms of the Economic 

Community of Central African States (CEEAC); (iii) Rural Code to clarify and secure land 

access; and (iv) food safety policy and regulatory framework, standards and the certification 

of products
17

. 

 

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 30 million) 

31. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of public and non-public 
service providers involved in the implementation of project activities and / or supporting the 

development of commercial agriculture in the Republic of Congo. At the same time, it will 

ensure and oversee the successful management and implementation of the project, while 

making a provision to enable an immediate response in case of declared crisis or emergency. 

This component has three sub-components: 

 

Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity-building of institutions providing support to commercial agriculture 

(IDA: US$20 million) 

32. Objective and instruments used. The subcomponent will provide equipment, training and 
operating cost support to government and non-government actors that are necessary for 

commercial agriculture to succeed, including a number of technical departments of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP).  

 

33. Targeted institutions. These capacity-building efforts will target institutions involved in key 
areas related to: (i) agricultural statistics services; (ii) the access to improved genetic 

materials; (iii) the implementation of the reform of the national public system for agricultural 

extension and advisory services; (iv) the agricultural vocational and higher education training 

systems; and (v) the policy framework for food safety, quality standards and product 

certification supported in Subcomponent 2.2
18

. 

                                                           
16

 When business practices and legislation identified by these sector-specific PPD platforms are economy-wide in nature (e.g. easing business 
entry and business exit, facilitating trade across borders, etc.), the project will share these inputs with PADE, which is better placed to address 
them. When identified reforms are specific to commercial agriculture, and if a strong consensus can be built with stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors around them, the project will provide support for their drafting through this subcomponent. 
17

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the reforms that have been identified. 
18

 A list of the institutions identified for capacity-building support includes: (i) the Studies and Planning Department 
of MAEP; (ii) the Ministry of Scientific Research and Technical Innovation through the Institut National de 
Recherche Agronomique (IRA) and the Centre National de Semences Améliorées (CNSA), among others; (iii) the 




Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, coordination and monitoring at national and provincial 

levels (IDA: US$ 10 million)  
34. This subcomponent will support project management, coordination, communication, 

monitoring and evaluation, adequate monitoring of the environmental and social safeguard 

policies, at the national level as well as at the departmental levels. Under this subcomponent, 

a strong fiduciary management system will be introduced and an effective monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be designed, which will not only monitor impact indicators, but 

will also ensure real time data collection that will facilitate the adoption of corrective 

measures in a timely manner and even attempt to integrate the data into the national 

agricultural statistics database.  

 

35. Through this subcomponent, the project will finance a baseline study, mid-term review study, 
final impact assessment, the recruitment of staff, consultancy services, the acquisition of 

property and equipment, and will support relevant seminars and training, as well as diverse 

operating costs to supervise the project activities. 

 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response (IDA: US$ 0.0M) 

36. This component will provide support for immediate response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency, as needed. A crisis or emergency eligible for financing is: an event that has 

caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact to 

the Borrower, associated with a natural or man-made crisis or disaster. Rapid disbursement 

of funds will allow the Government to request a reallocation of project funds to partially 

cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component will be triggered if: (i) the 

Government has determined that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and has 

furnished to the Bank a request to include said activities in the Contingency Emergency 

Response Component (CERC) for emergency response; (ii) the Government has prepared 

and disclosed all safeguards instruments required for said activities; (iii) the Borrower has 

adopted the CERC Operations Manual (OM) in form, substance and manner acceptable to the 

Bank. A specific OM for this component will be prepared detailing financial management, 

procurement, safeguards, and any other necessary implementation arrangements. While 

Components 1, 2 and 3 focus on pre-crisis disaster risk mitigation and climate resilience 

enhancement measures, Component 4 will help to strengthen the Government’s capacity to 

respond effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
 
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

37. The institutional arrangements proposed for this project, under the supervision of the 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
Cooperative Action Department of MAEP and Agricongo among others; (iv) the Ministry of Higher Education 
through the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), among others; and (v) institutions 
identified through the food safety reform supported in Subcomponent 2.2. See Annex 1 for more detail on the 
institutional capacity-building work of Subcomponent 3.1.    



 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP), includes the following supervisory 

and implementation bodies: (i) a Steering Committee; (ii) a National Coordination Unit of 

the project (including a Matching Grant scheme); (iii) Project Implementation Units at 

departmental level; (iv) technical service providers (public, private, NGOs); and (v) financial 

institutions, which will render financial services to the private sector (producer groups, 

agribusiness MSMEs) (See Figure 2). 

 

38. Public service providers will participate in the project through the structures of the MAEP, 
The ongoing reform of MAEP and the introduction of specialized agencies is an opportunity 

for re-thinking and repositioning the role of public technical services, including agriculture 

advisory and extension services.  

Steering Committee (CP)  
39. A high level Steering Committee will be officially established before effectiveness. It will be 

chaired by the Minister in charge of Agriculture and composed of representatives of key 

project stakeholders (relevant ministries, private sector, and civil society including producer 

groups) in the project. The Steering Committee will be responsible for the strategic direction, 

operational oversight, communication and overall good governance of the project. 

 

National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU)  

40. It is proposed that the current PDARP national project coordination unit, with a proven track 
record in administrative and fiduciary management, be retained and strengthened to 

coordinate and manage the Commercial Agricultural Project. The NPCU will be responsible 

for project implementation, management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and 

supervision. The NPCU will rely on specific expertise, including the hiring of an independent 

firm contracted for the management of the matching grant program of Component 1.  

 

Project Implementation Units (PIUs) 

41. Four Project Implementation Units will be established at departmental level to support 
specific zones targeted by the project. They will ensure project activity monitoring and 

evaluation as well as receive and process complaints related to the implementation of the 

project in collaboration with the authorities and civil society.  
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project envisages to target 3 main high potential agricultural zones as defined in the Schema National 
d’Amenagement du Territoire (National Spatial Master Plan). These are (i) agri-zone 1 South Corridor 
Brazzaville - Pointe Noire, (ii) agri-zone 2 Central Corridor Konda- Oyo-Lekye- Gambona, including special 
economic zone Oyo-Owando where fisheries and palm oil are being promoted; and (iii) agri-zone 3 North 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 


special economic zone Ouesso where cocoa, coffee and palm oil are being promoted. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Lucienne M. M'Baipor,Grace Muhimpundu,Claude Lina Lobo 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Activities from Subcomponent 1.1: Intensification of 
Agricultural and Livestock value chains; 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of logistic, trade 
and business services; and Subcomponent 2.1: 
Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development are expected to impact 
environment and these impacts are evaluated to be 
moderate, localized and manageable; so the project 
is classified to the EA category “B”. And the 
Environmental Safeguards Policies triggered are 
PO/PB 4.01 "Environmental Assessment"; PO/PB 
4.04 "Natural Habitats"; OP/PB 4.09 "Pest 
management and pesticides"; PO/PB 4.10 
"Indigenous Peoples"; PO/PB 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources"; OP/PB 4.12 "Involuntary Relocation"; 
PO/PB 4.36 "Forests"; OP/PB 7.50 Projects relating 
to International Waterways; PO/PB 17.50: Right of 
access to information. 
To ensure that any environmental issues by the 
project activities are appropriately addressed, the 
safeguard instrument elaborated according OP/BP 
4.01 is the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). This one is also designed to 
serve as a guide for developing ESIAs and ESMPs as 
needed, when the exact sites of sub-projects will be 
known. In particular, the ESIA will include a 
diagnostic of the project areas, potential 
environmental adverse impacts, potential issues 
related to labor influx, and mitigation measures to 
manage properly expected adverse impacts. The 
ESIA will highlight specific provisions that need to be 


included in construction/installation contracts to 
ensure that contractors’ ESMPs address relevant 
mitigation measures. 
The ESMF include specific sections to address all 
issues related to OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; 
OP/BP 4.36 on Forests and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical 
Cultural Resources. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to enable the project to 
perform the screening of the identified sites and 
their vicinities relative to natural habitats, the aim is 
to avoid project activities to create significant 
degradation of natural habitats. Project will also 
seek to identify appropriate conservation measures, 
follow-up, assessment and management of natural 
habitats within the project area. The Government 
will be encouraged to provide necessary information 
to the people and to provide them with the right 
incentives to protect and to support the 
conservation of natural habitats and to facilitate, if 
necessary, the rehabilitation of degraded habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This project could possibly impact the health and 
quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon the interaction 
with forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the project supports 
activities that requires the use of pesticides, 
fertilizers, vaccines and other chemicals like in the 
production of eggs, of cattle feed and veterinary 
products in the poultry, goats, pigs, cattle, fish 
farming and aquaculture, and some projects 
activities will lead to a surge in the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers which can create negative effects on 
the environment. This policy supports the integrated 
pest control approaches. It identifies pesticides that 
can be financed under the project and develop an 
appropriate plan of pests to deal with risks. To 
comply with this policy a Plan of Management of 
Pests and Pesticides (PMPP) was prepared in 
separated document from the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
This policy, OP/BP 4.11, is triggered by the project 
because during implementation of project activities, 
it is possible to discover or to affect some cultural 


relics. The Physical Cultural Resources Policy aims to 
protect cultural resources, to avoid any significant 
conversion (loss) or degradation of these resources. 
To be in compliance with this policy, project has 
developed, into a separate document, the Physical 
Cultural Resources Framework (PCRF). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Indigenous Peoples are found on a large part of the 
Republic of Congo’s rural territory, and a number of 
the areas visited under project preparation and 
evaluation phase are known to inhabit Indigenous 
Peoples (IPs). This includes the Cuvette (Oyo-
Owando), in the Sangha (Ouesso), and Plateau (Oyo, 
Gamboma). Since the project will be implemented at 
the national level, with specific zones of 
interventions yet to be identified (based on targeted 
crops, agribusiness, and in accordance to the 
national agricultural plan), the project has prepared 
an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF), 
which will establish the framework for consultation 
and inclusion of IPs in the project areas. The project 
will identify various IPs associations and IP 
communities in the selected zones as collaborators, 
as well as potential CSOs and local NGOs. Once the 
specific sites are known, an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP) will be development, and it would identify the 
targeted IPs, and ensure their inclusion as 
beneficiaries of project activities, in a culturally 
appropriate and inclusive manner. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Activities suggested in Component 2, Subcomponent 
2.2 “Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development”, may require acquisition of 
land. Due to low population density in rural areas, 
however, the risk of physical resettlement is 
minimal, although there may be potential economic 
displacement or loss of assets.  
The project has prepared the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) since the exact site locations are 
yet unknown, and eventually Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAP) or Abreviated Resettelement Action 
Plans (ARAP) will be prepared to mitigate potential 
negative impacts.  
This new project is to some regards an extension of 
the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project (P095251, and Additional 
Finance P145627). The project established an escrow 

US $500,000 for resettlement 
compensation. Since the project did not require any 
land acquisition and therefore did not induce any 
resettlement (physical or economic displacement), 
no RAPs were prepared for the project. The funds in 
the escrow account remain unused, and the account 
will be transferred to the new project in order to 
fund potential compensation cases for the new 
Commercial Agriculture project.  
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
This Safeguard Policy is not trigged because no 
project activities involved in dams or located in their 
vicinities. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

OP 7.50 is applicable to the Project because 
activities may have an impact on the Congo, 
Oubangui and Sangha river basins, all of which are 
international waterways. ROC is one of the riparians 
of the Congo-Oubangui-Sangha basin together with 
DRC, Central African Republic, Cameroon, Gabon, 
and Angola. The proposed Project covers primarily 
high potential agricultural zones around the main 
cities of Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie, the 
south corridor along the national road from 
Brazzaville to Bouenza and Kouilou and the northern 
part of country, Sangha and Likouala. The planned 
rehabilitations of irrigation systems are very small in 
size. Most of these schemes will be located around 
the three big cities and markets of Brazzaville, Pointe 
Noire and Dolisie (using the rivers of Djoué, Niari, 
Kouilou … ), the country’s bread basket and where 
70% of the population live. The task team has 
carefully considered any potential impacts of the 
proposed investments, and because that: (i) the 
project will not cause appreciable harm to the 
riparian countries; and (ii) no activities are expected 
to have any adverse effects on the water quality or 
quantity, no notification is required under OP 7.50 
since the project deals only with micro/minor 
irrigation rehabilitation, and thus falls under the 
exception to the notification requirement under 
paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. An exception memo 
has been prepared and was approved by the AFRVP 
on May 15, 2017. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No This Safeguard Policy is not triggered. 

 
KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In agricultural development and infrastructure implementation, the expected negative impacts are inherent in 
deforestation and the loss of biodiversity; soil erosion, silting of rivers, degradation of water courses; pollutions and 
nuisances, the generation of construction waste, rubble and other demolition residues, disruption of activities on land 
rights, etc.  
In the operational phase, the risks relate to pollution and degradation of watercourses linked to the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers; pollution and nuisance due to solid and liquid waste from agricultural activities, pollution of the 
environment by sewage and solid waste disease, risk of accidents, risks (HIV / AIDS) and development of water-related 
diseases (malaria, bilharziasis), social conflicts related to local customs and practices; losses of land and socio-
economic income sources; influx of the population as a result of the installation of structuring facilities, strong 
pressure on land and water with increasing development.  
Terrestrial and aquatic habitats (wetlands) can be altered mainly during the start-up and implementation phase of 
agricultural. But globally, all these impacts are evaluated to be moderate, localized and manageable. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
This project would increase agricultural productivity, enhance food security and nutrition. No adverse long term or 
indirect environmental or social impacts are expected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
There are no significant negative impacts of the project, designed on the contrary to have positive social and 
environmental impacts. No alternatives were therefore considered to avoid impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on experience gained through the implementation of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project, a Category B project, the capacity of the Implementing Agency housed in the Ministry of 
Agriculture to implement the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies is considered high. An 
environmental specialist has been included as part of the PIU core team, and the project will recruit a social specialist. 
The two specialists will monitor and supervise the environmental and social measures as recommended in the various 
safeguards instruments for the project. The current environmental specialist, as well as the Project Coordinator have 
both benefitted from the World Bank organized capacity-building initiative in November 2016.   
Finally, to manage and monitor safeguards implementation in a timely manner, the PIU will prepare quarterly reports 
of the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The Project will equally ensure that all the instruments (in 
accordance with OP 4.01, OP 4.10, OP 4.11 and OP 4.12) put in place and the Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs). 
The project will monitor indicators set forth in the safeguards instruments. To this extent, the two safeguards 
specialists in the PIU, will closely collaborate with the M&E specialist in the PIU, and reflect the findings in the 
quarterly reports. 
An important lesson learned under the previous Agriculture project was the poor management of grievances. The 


mechanism as established in the safeguards documents were not appropriate or applicable to existing local structures. 
The PIU has drafted a new GRM to manage complaints ensuing from the new project.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders outside of government structures are agricultural producers, civil society, private sector (MSMEs 
and SMEs), Indigenous Peoples communities and representatives. Overall, the design of the project has been 
participatory at various levels, through consultation with the different stakeholders throughout preparation. This is 
complemented with additional consultations as part of the review of safeguards instruments.  Representatives of the 
national government formulated the design of the project, while regional governments, local authorities, and 
conservation actors provided inputs. The project will be implemented with the participation of local stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC18688

Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Angola Project ID: P159052
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Angola: Commercial Agriculture Development Project (P159052)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

18-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of Angola
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 230.00
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 230.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1.  The Republic of Angola is still recovering from a turbulent past despite oil and mineral wealth. 
With approximately 25.8 million inhabitants,  it is the seventh most populated country in Africa. 
Angola is one of the largest oil exporters in the region, and is rich in diamonds and other mineral 
resources. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975, but was then engulfed in a 27-year 
civil conflict, which ended with a peace accord in 2002. Despite the country➢❨ s upper-middle 
income status with GDP per capita of US$5,400 in 2014, poverty remains pervasive with 30.1 
percent of the population living below the international poverty line in 2008. 
 
2.     Propelled by the end of the civil conflict and the expansion of the oil sector, the Angolan 
economy posted an average growth rate of 12.5 percent between 2004 and 2008. This period of 
high growth was interrupted by the 2008-09 global financial crisis. Following a slowdown 
between 2009 and 2011, when GDP grew at 2.5 percent on average, fast growth resumed in 2012 
(7.6 percent). 
 
3.  Limited progress was made in improving social indicators during the oil boom years. Angola's 
remarkable growth has not been equally shared. Large parts of the population lack access to basic 
services. Life expectancy is 52.3 years and the country ranks 149th out of 188 in the Human 
Development Index. Income inequality is high and marked disparities in regional and urban/rural 
poverty persist. More than half of Angola➢❨ s poor are located in rural areas and depend almost 
exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood. Among the most vulnerable groups in the country 
are women-headed agriculture households, which represent 33 percent of agriculture households. 
 
4.  Angola is experiencing a major macroeconomic shock due to the dramatic oil price drop since 
2014. This is not surprising as oil represents about 30 percent of GDP, over 95 percent of export 
earnings, and 75 percent of government revenue. The country faces a scarcity of foreign exchange 
(FX), fiscal and external deficits, higher inflation and weakened economic activity. The impact on 
households are considerable. Lower government expenditures and a reduced public sector wage 
bill have resulted in reduced private consumption, compounded by the elimination of fuel 
subsidies. Because of the crisis, GDP growth is forecasted at just 0.9 percent in 2016, followed by 
a rebound of about 3 percent in 2017 . 
 
5. The government has implemented bold fiscal measures since mid-2015 to address the effects of 
the oil price drop, but challenges remain on the monetary front. A revised budget was adopted in 
March 2015 to reflect the major shortfall in revenue, with oil prices dropping from US$80 in the 
initial budget to US$40. The government cut capital expenditure by nearly half, and significantly 
reduced fuel subsidies. The Strategy to Exit the Crisis brought further fiscal consolidation 
measures such as the institution of a new tax on financial transactions and the cancellation of 
double payments to former combatants. The adjustment however has not progressed much on the 
monetary and external sector. Although interest rates have risen and the currency has devalued, 
inflation reached 29.2 percent in May and the spread between the official and parallel exchange 
rate has more than doubled. Imports have been contained and international reserves have been 
kept high due to strong administrative controls on access to foreign exchange (FX). As a result, 
companies are postponing investments and reducing production because they cannot import the 
inputs needed. 
 
6. Despite recent reforms, Angola➢❨ s investment climate remains challenging. The country 
underperforms in competitiveness, business environment, and governance rankings. For example, 
the World Economic Forum➢❨ s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2014-2015 ranked 

Angola 140th out of 144 economies while the country ranks 181st out of 189 economies in the 
Doing Business 2016 report, suggesting a complex regulatory environment. Angola lags other 
Sub-Saharan Africa countries in the 2015 Worldwide Governance Indicators. Recent reforms 
include a reduction in the costs and requirements to start a business, a new Labor Code, and an 
overhaul of investment policy. Other efforts are underway to modernize tax and customs 
administration, and the justice sector. Well implemented, they could contribute to a more 
effective and transparent government interaction with the private sector. However, institutional 
weaknesses and governance issues defy reform implementation. Overall, Angola➢❨ s business 
environment is characterized by cumbersome regulations, constrained competition and 
considerable government presence in economic activity. Limited access to finance, poor 
infrastructure, weak workforce skills and corruption are the main constraints mentioned by firms. 
 
7. Diversifying the economy away from oil is an urgent priority and part of the Government➢❨ s 
response to the oil price crisis. Dependency on oil leaves Angola vulnerable to price and 
production shocks. For years, an overvalued exchange rate contributed to reduce the 
competitiveness of the non-oil sectors. The government crisis response strategy, presented in 
February 2016, aims at reducing the reliance on oil to generate revenues, substitute imports and 
promote non-traditional exports. Agricultural production plays a large role in the government➢❨  
strategy. Diversifying the economy will require economic transformation and eliminating 
obstacles to private investment, as well as efficient use of government resources to address 
infrastructure bottlenecks, and invest in human capital.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8.  Angola➢❨ s agriculture potential remains largely untapped. The country has an abundance of 
land, water, and diversity of climatic and soil conditions for the production of a large variety of 
crops, but only 8 percent of its 58 million hectares of arable land is currently cultivated .  The 
agricultural sector in Angola currently represents around 5 percent of GDP, compared to 57.7 
percent for industry, including extractive, and 37.7 percent for services, and could contribute 
more to employment creation, especially for the youth. Nonetheless, agriculture is the main 
source of income for 90 percent of the 8.5 million Angolans living in rural areas (about 37 percent 
of the population). 
 
9.  Once a large exporter of coffee, cotton, sisal, sugar cane, bananas and tobacco, Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture sector suffered widespread destruction during the conflict and has not fully recovered 
since. Before the war the country was self-sufficient in all food crops except wheat. The exodus 
of Portuguese settlers after independence and the ensuing civil war that ravaged the country 
meant the loss of technical capacity and infrastructure destruction, cutting production areas from 
markets. Roads, bridges and other rural infrastructure were largely destroyed. Large-scale 
population displacement in rural areas and land mines➢❨ as many as 10 million➢❨ further 
constrained the sector recovery.  
 
10.  Production has been growing in recent years and the country has reached self-sufficiency in 
sweet potatoes and manioc, but Angola still relies on imports for most of its food consumption 
needs. For example, locally produced chicken supply only 40 percent of the local demand and 
production is limited by the lack of feed. In general, Angola has greater opportunities to compete 
with imports of perishable goods, including fruits, vegetables, and eggs, and local production of 
these goods has increased in recent years. Statistics on agriculture production are unreliable and 
outdated, but should improve with the planned agricultural census. According to MINAGRI 
2013/2014 production data, major crops based on volume include sweet potatoes, cassava, 

bananas, maize, pineapples, citrus fruits, beans, peanuts, and tomatoes. Agriculture exports 
represent less than 0.8 percent of total exports. Excluding fish, where little value is added in 
country, agriculture exports amount to just US$3.5 million. Coffee accounts for 43 percent, 
followed by non-alcoholic beverages (32 percent), beer (9 percent), fruit juice (5 percent) and 
medicinal plants (3 percent). The country is slowly opening new export markets including to 
neighboring DRC. It recently restarted exporting bananas to Portugal, 42 years later, with a 
shipment of 17 tons.  
 
11. Smallholders represent over 80 percent of agriculture production and 92 percent of land under 
cultivation. A small but growing formal distribution sector is establishing partnerships with local 
producers to ensure quality supply of primarily fresh produce. Still, most agriculture production is 
used for self-consumption or sold through informal channels. 
 
12. Macroeconomic conditions and the business climate constrain private investment in 
agriculture. An overvalued exchange rate in recent years and the current scarcity of foreign 
exchange affect the sector competitiveness and hamper private investment. The challenging 
business environment, including high cost of doing business, uncompetitive input markets, and 
insecurity of land tenure, as well as government crowding out the private sector, further reduce 
the sector➢❨ s attractiveness to private investors. However, based on discussions with private 
operators, investment opportunities exist in the production and processing for products such as 
horticulture, grains and beans, poultry and livestock, as well as aquaculture. While foreign 
exchange shortages are resulting in some of these investments being put on hold, they could 
materialize once macroeconomic conditions improve. New investment could bring much needed 
capital and know-how to the commercial agriculture sector. 
 
13. Access to finance is a serious hindrance to commercial agricultural development. 
Notwithstanding the high credit growth from 2004 to 2014 (going from 5 percent to 22 percent of 
GDP), the share of credit going to agriculture has remained very low at less than 5 percent of 
overall credit provided. Additionally, despite the general increase in access to finance over the 
five years between 2010 and 2014 (with an increase of two-thirds of branches, doubling of ATMs, 
and tripling of Points of Sale), there has been a clear urban/rural divide in access with Luanda 
accounting for the bulk of financial sector outreach. Specifically, Luanda, which has 27 percent of 
the population, accounted for 83 percent of credit, 94 percent of deposits and the majority of bank 
branches, ATMs and POS in 2015. Government programs such as the Angola Investe, offer 
subsidized credit, guarantees and a public risk capital fund, however most supported projects 
belong to non-agribusiness sectors and tend to be concentrated in Luanda. The Angola 
Development Bank also offers some lines of credit to the agriculture sector. Finally, the enabling 
environment for promoting agriculture finance (including agriculture insurance, warehouse 
receipts, equipment leasing, moveable collateral registry) is yet to be developed. 
 
14.  Infrastructure weaknesses hinder the creation of value addition through processing, and the 
integration of small producers into value chains. Market linkages are constrained by poor road 
and storage infrastructure. The total road network is about 76,000 km, many in need for 
rehabilitation, and the road density is 6 km /100 kmÂ², one of the lowest in Southern Africa. The 
rural access index is 42 percent, which is the fourth lowest in the world after South-Sudan, Chad 
and Mali (WDI). Although the government has heavily invested in improving the transport 
network over the last decade, including road and railways, limited budget is available for rural 
roads. Moreover, the limited reach of the electricity grid and the high cost of operating generators 

hamper the competitiveness of agribusiness, including agro-processing, irrigated agriculture, and 
livestock. The sector also suffers from lack of other adequate dedicated public services and 
infrastructure, such as phytosanitary and quality systems and commercial infrastructure. 
 
15.   Lack of technical knowledge and access to inputs further constrain commercial agriculture 
development. Poor agronomic practices, limited use of improved seeds, fertilizers, and irrigation 
technology, undermine productivity, growth and diversification. Most agricultural inputs, 
including fertilizers and machinery, are imported at high cost, and remain out of reach of small 
producers. These shortcomings are compounded by the very low technical capacity all along the 
value chain. 
 
16. Responsibility for agriculture policy and program development falls under the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MINAGRI). The Ministry is represented at the provincial level by the Provincial 
Directorates of Agriculture (DPA), and at the municipal level by the EstaÃ§Ã£o de 
Desenvolvimento AgrÃ¡rio (EDAs). MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity for program design and 
implementation has room for significant improvement. The World Bank Market Oriented 
Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), which closed in March 2016, and its follow up 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP), approved by the 
Board of Directors on July 5, 2016, include activities to strengthen MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity at the 
local, provincial and national levels. This project will build on and complement these efforts. 
 
17.   Other Government agencies are involved in the development of the agribusiness sector. 
These include the Ministry of Economy, which manages the Angola Investe program to provide 
subsidized credit to productive investments, the Angola Development Bank, the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, which is in charge of investment promotion (through APIEX) and  the 
agriculture commercialization program (PAPAGRO). Other relevant agencies include the 
Ministry of Construction (for road construction), Ministry of Transport, and Ministry of Energy 
and Water. The coordination among the various Government agencies in the implementation of 
complex multisectoral projects to support agribusiness development needs substantial 
strengthening. This is hindered by limited technical capacity and a centralized approach to 
decision-making. 
 
18.  In an effort to spur commercial agriculture, the government has invested in spatial approaches 
and infrastructure development. Government-sponsored projects range from integrated socio-
economic projects, following Israel➢❨ s Kibutz model (Aldeia Nova) to large-scale agro-
industrial poles such as the 400,000 ha Capanda development pole, as well as irrigated perimeters 
with plots for large, medium and small-scale producers. These projects are often financed by 
foreign lines of credit, and management is frequently contracted out to foreign firms, which bring 
the technology and know-how to run them. A state owned company, Gesterra, sponsors many of 
these projects. While some of these projects have achieved productivity close to international 
good practices , others are still not operational or have failed to attract private producers (e.g. 
Family Aviculture Project). Overall, the financial and economic viability of these projects on a 
purely commercial basis needs to be confirmed. Other government investments include 
distribution centers and cold storage, some of which remain underutilized. Support infrastructure 
is still insufficient and existing facilities need to be more effectively used. 
 
19.  Low and declining public spending in agriculture highlights the need for mobilizing private 
investment. The share of agriculture in the national budget declined from 1.10 percent in 2013 



(US$701.76 million) to 0.41 percent (US$543.9 million) in 2015. In the current constrained fiscal 
environment, there is a need to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures to 
develop strategic infrastructure, strengthen institutional capacity and improve research and 
extension services, and support smallholders. More efforts are needed to attract private 
investment and promote public-private partnerships under transparent criteria. The Commercial 
Agriculture Development project will contribute to these goals. 
 
20.  Weak public sector governance and poor capacity have considerably limited agriculture 
development efforts in the past. These issues affect resource allocation across a range of key areas 
in the agriculture sector, from access to land to financing of irrigation, agricultural infrastructure, 
and inputs. For example, one bottleneck for investment in agriculture is secured land access: land 
allocation procedures and coexistence of several legal systems for recognition and governance of 
land rights in Angola (state law and traditional rights) weaken legal certainty and hinder the 
sector➢❨ s development. To attract transformative private investments in the agriculture sector, 
particular attention will need to be paid to: (i) legal and regulatory measures; (ii) institutional 
mechanisms and delivery platforms; and (iii) transparency and social accountability. Besides 
involving several agencies/departments within the Ministry of Agriculture, the Project will need 
to work closely with, and reinforce the capacities of, several public institutions that have critical 
influence on agricultural investment generation.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
21. Supporting integrated national economic diversification is one of the pillars in the Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-16. Development of the agriculture sector, through productivity 
increases and market linkages, is seen as an important source of growth, employment creation and 
poverty reduction. Making progress toward the twin goals is found to be feasible building on the 
adoption of pro-poor growth strategies and policies. The draft Performance and Learning Review 
(PLR) envisions an extension of the CPS until FY18 and a reformulation of the objectives to 
respond to the macroeconomic challenges emerging from the oil price drop. The draft PLR 
maintains economic diversification as one of the key objectives of the CPS. A specific outcome 
related to enhancing productivity and competitiveness in the agriculture sector has been proposed, 
which is directly related to the activities of this project. 
 
22.  This Project will also build synergies with other World Bank Group projects, such as the 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SACDP, P154447) and 
Angola Statistics Project (P157671). Close coordination between the IFC and the Bank (IBRD) 
will play an important role to mobilize investment, sector financing and PPPs, where each 
institution will contribute on the basis of its respective mandates. 
 
23.  Economic diversification and the development of commercial agriculture are critical 
priorities for the government, as outlined in the National Development Plan (NDP) 2013-2017. 
The National Development Plan seeks to promote an enlargement of the productive base to 
increase employment, leveraging the country➢❨ s natural and human resources. It underscores the 
role of the private sector as the engine of economic growth, with the public sector playing a 
leveraging role. For the agriculture sector, the NDP objective is to achieve sustainable 
development building on the country➢❨ s natural resources and competitive advantage to ensure 
food security and self-sufficiency, as well as maximizing regional and international market 
opportunities. Developing a competitive agriculture sector, with increased private investment and 
market linkages for smallholders is an objective that will be supported by the activities of this 
project. The project also contributes to the objectives of Angola➢❨ s Medium Term Agriculture 



Development Plan 2013-2017, which seeks to foster agricultural and rural transformation, based 
on the development of smallholder agriculture, cooperatives and public-private partnerships, as 
well as contribute to the country➢❨ s industrialization.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
24.  The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to promote commercial agriculture 
development, increasing production and employment within selected value chains, in targeted 
areas in Angola.

Key Results (From PCN)
25.  The project strategy to achieve the PDO is to support the transformation of Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture towards a greater role for the private sector, building on existing programs, and 
focusing on value chains with the largest growth and employment creation potential. More private 
investment in agriculture is needed to increase production, productivity and commercialization, 
and to help create employment opportunities for the Angolan poor. This will be achieved by 
identifying and helping prepare Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs) ➢❨  private investment 
opportunities in selected value chains, and providing support to Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), including cooperatives, and producer organizations, in those value chains to increase 
their production, productivity and linkages with larger firms. In order to create the conditions for 
private investment the project will support investments in supporting infrastructure, as well as 
improvements in the regulatory environment and government capacity to play a catalytic role for 
the commercial agriculture sector development. 
 
26.  Success in achieving the PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level indicators: (i) 
increased investment in dollar terms; (ii) support infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated by the 
project; and (iii) jobs created in the beneficiary firms. 
 
27.  External factors may affect the realization of the PDO: (i) evolution of international markets 
(e.g., commodities prices, growth, and external financing), (ii) security and/or disease outbreak in 
Angola, and (iii) global warming, that may worsen droughts and lead to severe floods.

D.  Concept Description

28.  The overall approach is to foster commercial agriculture  through a set of integrated 
investments in hard and soft infrastructure, and developing an enabling environment for private 
participation in the sector. By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions, the project 
aims to remove key constraints to business formation and strengthen the platform for growth in 
high-potential value chains. World Bank support is required first to identify and prioritize these 
investments; and to develop the capacity to procure them and manage their execution. The project 
will also seek to mobilize private funds for the sector through PPPs and targeted investment 
promotion. At the same time, the project will support activities to create more conducive 
conditions for the future development of commercial agriculture, including regulatory reforms, 
and strengthening of research capacity. Strong coordination among the government agencies 
involved (agriculture, transport, energy, commerce, etc.) and building a constituency for the 
project among public, private and non-governmental stakeholders will be necessary, as suggested 
by previous experience in supporting integrated interventions along agriculture value chains. 
 

29.  Initially, two value chains will be supported and this would be scaled up during the life of the 
project to a maximum of five. Criteria for selecting value chains will be based on the 
competitiveness of specific value chain segments, potential impact (on jobs, food production, 
export diversification, and opportunities for upgrading), and readiness (existing production, 
necessary investments, and sector organization). Identifying competitive value chains in Angola 
will require a more in-depth analysis of demand, current cost structure and existing constraints. 
Two initial value chains will be selected during preparation, in consultation with the Government 
and private sector stakeholders. Existing studies of priority value chains for the Government, 
including horticulture, livestock, chicken and dairy, and by extension maize and soy, provide 
limited analysis on existing cost structures to assess their competitiveness. Preliminary work on 
the poultry sector inspired by the value chain segmentation methodology identified opportunities 
for competitive production of fresh chicken to supply the local market, provided reliable supply of 
local feed can be secured (see Annex 3). The Government has requested initial focus on poultry 
and by extension maize/soy as a priority due to growing demand, recent growth and the large 
share of chicken in the country➢❨ s imports. Support to export-oriented value chains, such as 
coffee, another government priority, also requires careful consideration of the competitiveness of 
Angola vis-➃❫ -vis other countries. Analytical work supported by the project will inform public-
private dialogue to agree on priority subsectors and constraints. The experience and capacity 
developed by the project will enable supporting other value chains in the future. 
 
30. The project will be geographically concentrated in the areas (to be defined during 
preparation), with the highest agricultural potential to meet domestic consumption (as would be 
the case for example in the poultry/maize/soy value chain) and export (e.g. coffee value chain). 
Other factors to select geographic areas include having a critical mass of potential commercially 
oriented producers, and access to downstream value chain activities and markets through 
proximity to agrologistical networks and platforms. 
 
31.  Moreover, the proposed project will ensure that: (1) equal opportunities and support will be 
provided to women➢❨ s and youth groups to participate in several aspects of the project; (2) 
training in gender awareness will be provided using appropriate media, language and gender-
sensitive approaches and methods; and (3) a gender informed M&E system will be implemented, 
will collect and present gender-disaggregated data on project beneficiaries. 
 
32. Given the institutional weaknesses, governance, and other risks, a flexible and modular design 
is called for. The project must remain flexible to potential delays in specific components, 
changing implementation realities, and to the response of private sector supply and demand. It 
should allow subcomponents to be removed or amended without compromising the overall 
project framework and the causal chain of activities.  Starting with a focus on existing investment 
opportunities and just two value chains will help test the approach while striving to deliver results 
early on in the project. In parallel, efforts to build client project implementation capacity and to 
improve the enabling environment will start.  Once key conditions   are established, such as: (i) 
progress in business environment reforms, PPD, analytical and implementation capacity (ii) 
selected area and pilot value chains under implementation, in compliance with all activities 
planned for the first two years of the project life, work on other value chain will be undertaken (to 
be defined during preparation). Therefore, the proposed time for the project implementation is 6 
years. 
 
33.  With an amount of $230 million,  the project will support commercial agriculture 


development through three interrelated components: (1) Agribusiness development by means of 
mobilizing investment, including PPPs, providing financial and non-financial support to value 
chain actors and developing support infrastructure (rural roads, storage, irrigation, and energy); 
(2) Support to create an enabling environment for commercial agriculture; and (3) Project 
management, coordination, and public-private dialogue. 
 
34.  Component 1 ➢❨  Agribusiness Development (US$ 190 million). This Component will 
address the following challenges: (i) underinvestment by SMEs in inputs, technology and skills 
development due to access to credit constraints and information failures; (ii) insufficient linkages 
among value chain actors due to coordination and information failures and (iii) underprovision of 
infrastructure oriented to underpin market-oriented agriculture. This component aims to mobilize 
investments in agribusiness and support improvements in productivity, quality assurance and 
market linkages through the following subcomponents: 
 
35. Subcomponent 1.1 Technical and financial support to SMEs development.  This 
subcomponent will have a value chain focus and will aim to (i) support SME development, 
including market-ready producer groups and cooperatives, and help them overcome constraints in 
access to credit and managerial/technical knowledge; and (ii) support links and partnerships 
between large, medium and small-scale producers and purchasers through business alliances. As a 
result of project investments, enhanced capabilities and links to larger firms, it is expected that 
SMEs will be able to grow their business, improve productivity and quality, strengthen market 
connections, and create jobs. An important aspect during preparation will be to assess the actual 
size of the SME sector in the pilot value chains and adapt the intervention design to uptake, 
capacity, and sustainability considerations. 
 
(a) This subcomponent will provide support through a competitive  matching grant facility: 
 
1. Provision of technical assistance for pre-investments. This window will provide financial 
resources for the development of innovative business and linkages between small producers and 
other actors along the value chain. 
 
The competitive grant will provide ➢❨ startup➢❨  capital for promoting the introduction of new 
sustainable practices and technologies, and processes that improve the competitiveness of 
agricultural production by SMEs. The grant will consider three main levels of support to be 
further defined during preparation. These could include: (i) extension and technology 
development; (ii) studies for business alliances, including the formulation of business plans and 
associated productive subprojects and pilots➢❨  investments; and (iii) capacity building for 
entrepreneurs, individually or as member of a formal group (e.g. associations, cooperatives, 
farmer organizations).  
 
2. Establish a Matching Grant facility for Value Chain Development.  . This window will 
finance investments based on the business plans directly linked to the selected value chains and 
will have a geographical focus.  
 
SMEs investments will be identified through a competitive process based on a review of feasible 
business plans and selected proposals identifying SMEs financial contribution through a matching 
grant (at least 60% of total investment, to be confirmed during preparation), and presenting social 
environmental and economic sustainability analysis.  


The grant will combine innovation with a focus on partnerships with the market and will consider 
to implement investments designed based on business plans agreed with their business partners. 
The objective of each proposal would be to reach the product specifications (quantity, quality, 
delivery, etc.) agreed and established in the business plan. Eligible activities that would be 
financed could include expenditures at the level of both individual producers and their 
organizations (e.g. cooperatives), such as: (i) minor on-farm infrastructure and working capital, 
(ii) technical assistance services, (iii) agriculture inputs, equipment, production facilities 
(nurseries, greenhouses), (iv) value addition investments (post-harvest processing and storage, 
packaging), soil and water conservation measures and (v) other minor infrastructure, e.g. off-farm 
infrastructure for storage specific to the needs of the business alliance. If needed, the project will 
provide additional training to improve their governance, organizational, managerial, business and 
risk-management skills and to facilitate adoption of good agricultural and environmental 
practices.  
 
Eligible applicants would include: (i) organized producer organizations associations and related 
farmers organizations with developed or developing linkages to agricultural value chains, and 
supporting the development of smallholder farmers; (ii) agribusinesses linked with smallholders, 
involved in processing, trading, and marketing of agricultural and food products/commodities 
which help to improve the growth and competitiveness of smallholder farmers either directly to 
farmers at the production stage, or further down the value chain as part of the processing chain of 
agricultural commodities; (iii) input suppliers; (iv) nucleus commercial farms working with 
smallholders; and (v) publicly and privately funded agricultural and industrial institutions and 
trusts.   
 
In addition, for mobilizing business alliance investments, the project will carry out a differentiated 
communication and dissemination campaigns to: (i) inform potential stakeholders about the scope 
and rules of the Project; (ii) the publication and dissemination of Project activities including, inter 
alia, information on demand, approvals, procurement and results; and (iii) promote investments 
and contract farming/buying contracts in agricultural sector value chains.  
 
 (b) This subcomponent will also provide support to mobilize and select larger private investors. 
 
1. Selected interventions will need to demonstrate (i) alignment with the value chain development 
and (ii) potential impact on job creation. The stakeholders jointly with the PIU will develop 
proposals to request select interventions that are not firm-specific but that benefit their segment of 
the value chain and the value chain as a whole (i.e. common goods). 
 
2. Following the Client➢❨ s and the Chamber of Commerce➢❨ s advice, the investors will need 
to be strongly involved in crafting these proposals for interventions to ensure their commitment 
aspect and consistency with the constraints faced by groups of firms in the VC. The project will 
support the creation of a national committee composed of public and private sector stakeholders 
that will be in charge of reviewing the requests for funds to finance catalytic activities, ensuring 
that they conform with the strict eligibility criteria that will be imposed (e.g. demonstrate direct 
contribution to the VC➢❨ s development and job creation) and selecting the best proposals that 
receive project support. 
 
36.  Subcomponent 1.3. Establish a Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) fund to promote access to 


credit for the project target groups. The fund is expected to lower the risk exposure of financial 
institutions through a PCG arrangement and thus increase the incentives for financing agricultural 
activities. The fund would target the agribusiness SMEs in the selected value chains for their 
financing needs whether these are for fixed assets or for working capital. It would therefore 
support matching grants beneficiaries to provide the contribution required to benefit from the 
matching grants. It is anticipated that the project PCG fund will utilize the existing structure 
established by the Angola Investe Program. However, a dedicated Fund for commercial 
agriculture will be created and will be governed in accordance with applicable Bank Group➢❨ s 
policies and the recently issued Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for MSME, with 
IFC support. For participating banks wishing to benefit from the guarantee coverage, a 
prequalification process will be undertaken.  
 
Financial institution eligibility criteria will be transparent and open to all institutions that have an 
interest to lend to the beneficiaries of the Project.  The PCG will cover 50 percent of the risk pari-
pasu for loans to and it will be priced to cover the administration costs and risks it covers. 
However, the PCG fees would be priced, so that the facility would remain sustainable after the 
project conclusion and would continue to serve this market segment following project conclusion. 
 
37. Eligibility criteria and selection processes for investment support may vary according to the 
type of support required, and will be detailed during the preparation phase and described in the 
Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 
 
38. Subcomponent 1.3. Develop critical infrastructure. This subcomponent aims to (i) address 
existing gaps in infrastructure (rural roads, post-harvest facilities, irrigation, and energy); (ii) 
strengthening the capacity of public agencies to formulate, prepare and promote medium and 
long-term public-private partnerships in the sector. Special focus will be given to the promotion 
of climate smart agriculture approaches and renewable energy technologies. 
 
39. This subcomponent will support infrastructure investments in selected value chains and 
geographic areas of focus. It will leverage existing transport, logistics, energy, and irrigation 
infrastructures to support improvements in agriculture production and productivity, reduce post-
harvest losses, and connect production areas with markets: 
 
- Construction and rehabilitation of feeder roads. Once geographic areas of focus have been 
identified during preparation, a mapping will be conducted of existing road links and current gaps 
between production areas and the main national road networks (for example, the Luanda-Malanje 
corridor for the poultry/maize/soy value chain). Maximum length of rural roads supported by the 
project will be no more than 50 km to the main road (to be confirmed during preparation). The 
project will build on the existing Strategic Plan for the Rehabilitation of Tertiary Roads and the 
National Integrated Plan for Accessibility, Mobility and Transport (PENAMT) by the Ministry of 
Transport. 
 
- Post-harvest facilities: support to landing docks infrastructure and rehabilitation/construction of 
storage facilities to facilitate collection of production. 
- Irrigation infrastructure: support to irrigation infrastructure including water storage facilities and 
main canals will be agreed during preparation. Private investors will finance the construction of 
secondary canals to their farms. 
 
- Energy investments will be further explored during preparation phase, depending on 
confirmation of targeted value chains and the degree of electrification of the selected geographic 
areas of focus. Other sources of clean energy will also be explored. 
 
40.  This subcomponent will also support the identification and assessment of existing 
government storage and agro-industrial infrastructure amenable to private sector participation, as 
well as other rural infrastructure and agribusiness services that could advantageously be 
developed and implemented by private entities as PPP or as purely private investment. Whenever 
the local conditions so require, opportunities for the use of PPPs for the integrated development 
and management of rural facilities and services should be identified, particularly when those 
facilities and services are apt to be co-funded by commercial and individual users. Following that 
initial assessment, the project will support pre-feasibility studies for the 3-4 most promising 
opportunities to enable the government to decide whether to move ahead with a PPP. This 
subcomponent can also provide support to strengthen the legal framework for PPPs in Angola and 
support capacity building efforts in this area. This would be done not as an isolated effort, but in 
order to guarantee an adequate environment for private investment, and conditions for effective 
definition of incentives for private investors to implement the government➢❨ s agricultural 
policy. 
 
41.  Component 2 ➢❨  Support to develop an enabling environment for commercial agriculture 
(US$ 25 million). This component will focus on addressing challenges related to (i) existing gaps 
in the Government strategy for commercial agriculture development and analytical capacity; (ii) 
limited government investment generation capacity (iii) constraints in the agriculture input 
markets; (iv) high costs and uncertainty of doing business, related to burdensome regulations and 
procedures; and (iv) weaknesses in the agriculture research and development capacity. The 
component will focus on strengthening the building blocks for creating a competitive commercial 
agriculture sector, including strategy and regulatory reforms, as well as support to enhance 
research and development (R&D) for the sector. 
 
42.  Subcomponent 2.1 Support sector strategy development and enhance client analytical 
capacity. This subcomponent will contribute to strengthen institutional capacity at MINAGRI to 
develop strategies for competitive and sustainable agriculture value chain development based on 
analysis of local, regional and global demand and existing competitive advantage. By doing so, it 
will complement envisioned support by SADCP to strengthen the capacity of local, provincial, 
and national units of the Ministry of Agriculture to provide services to smallholders in the areas 
of irrigation, extension, market information, statistics and policy analysis. Specific areas of 
support will be defined during preparation, but may include: (i) capacity building for evidence-
based economic research, value chain segmentation analysis, and M&E; and (ii) technical 
assistance to develop Climate Smart Agriculture Country Profile .  It could be an important 
mechanism to build awareness of country options, facilitate dialogue, and help prioritize 
investments to deliver on the ➢❨ triple win➢❨ , implementing agriculture and food production 
practices that not only boost productivity but also enhance resilience and lower greenhouse gas 
emissions, the three pillars that form the basis of climate smart agriculture. 
 
In order to support the thinking on Government strategy, the project preparation advance will 
fund the organization of a practitioners➢❨  forum on international experiences, including 
successes and failures, in developing commercial agriculture with a special focus on value chain 
approaches and agroindustrial poles. 


43.  As part of this component, the project will also support the establishment of a team of 
analysts at MINAGRI with strong skills in economic and market analysis. They will be in charge 
of reviewing and validating the outputs of consultants hired previously by the Government, and in 
assessing the experience of failed prior agribusiness initiatives. They will receive training on 
value chain segmentation methodology and will conduct additional analysis as needed to identify 
the most promising value chain segments for Angola and the existing binding constraints for their 
development. This analysis will inform the discussions in the public-private dialogue platform 
(Component 3). The team will formulate proposals for addressing such constraints in 
collaboration with the relevant government agencies. This activity will be developed in 
coordination with other Government efforts to develop skills to support economic diversification 
strategies. 
 
44.  Subcomponent 2.2 Promote investment opportunities. This subcomponent will work with the 
recently established Agency for Investment and Export Promotion (APIEX) and MINAGRI➢❨ s 
Technical Unit for Investment Promotion to strengthen investment promotion, facilitation and 
aftercare in agribusiness. In particular, the project will support the compilation of a pipeline of 
investment leads and build capacity for assisting investors during the process of establishing their 
operations. Additionally, the project will assess current investor aftercare functions and provide 
training and other capacity building activities to ensure client➢❨ s effective support to existing 
investors, with the goal to encourage reinvestment. Technical assistance will be provided to 
prepare information packages and implement targeted investor outreach efforts in the priority 
value chains. Finally, the project will include additional support to the implementation of the 
revamped Investment policy and legal framework, including an assessment of existing incentives. 
 
45. Subcomponent 2.3 Improving the regulatory environment. This component will support key 
regulatory and administrative reforms to remove barriers to private sector activity in agribusiness. 
Strong emphasis will be given to ensure capacity for implementation of amended regulations is in 
place and adequate monitoring systems are developed. In these, the project will focus on those 
areas (i) have been identified as key constraints by analysis and private sector actors in the 
priority value chains, and (ii) where there is clear government commitment. This subcomponent 
will be closely coordinated with efforts to support regulatory improvements in the business 
environment under the DPL series and other World Bank Advisory work, including support in the 
areas measured by the Doing Business report. Areas for support will be confirmed based on the 
value chains selected. The following four areas have been identified as problematic in initial 
consultations with agribusiness private sector actors: 
 
- Policy and competition barriers in agricultural inputs: limited supply and high costs of improved 
seeds, fertilizers, and equipment is a critical constraint to increased productivity and production. 
The project will support studies to assess existing constraints affecting input availability including 
sector policies, tariffs, entry barriers and market competition. Recommendations emanating from 
these studies will inform public-private dialogue and the development of actions to address 
existing constraints. The project will provide technical assistance for implementation of these 
actions. 
 
- Trade facilitation and identification, classification and removal of Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs): 
Given Angola➢❨ s dependency on imports for food and agriculture inputs and the country➢❨ s 
objective to develop exports as a way to diversify export revenues away from oil, an efficient 



trade environment is essential. Building on ongoing reform efforts, the project will identify 
activities that will further simplify trade logistics systems and services, focusing on reducing the 
time and cost associated with international trade, through coordinated agency efforts. In addition, 
NTBs in Angola severely hamper the import of key products and inputs. There is a strong need to 
streamline NTBs, especially those related to agriculture. This exercise would include building 
capacity for streamlining non-tariff measures (NTMs) and identifying and removing non-tariff 
barriers, effective simplification of import-export procedures, and strengthening risk-management 
approaches for SPS (Sanitary and Phytosanitary) and TBT (Technical Barriers to Trade) 
measures. 
 
- Land administration: This subcomponent will support targeted interventions to strengthen land 
management and administration. Land in Angola is owned by the Government and the 2004 Land 
Law (Lei de Terras de Angola, Lei 09/04) defines the mechanisms for the Government to grant 
transferable land use rights for rural and urban land. The law recognizes customary uses, and the 
Government can grant surface rights to individuals and entities. Land is a delicate issue in 
Angola. It is estimated that 85-90% of the land is not registered due to weaknesses in land 
administration institutions, among other factors. Given the magnitude of this challenge, the 
project will focus on local level interventions based on needs identified in the priority value 
chains and focus on transparent and fair procedures for land acquisition and regularization, 
protecting communities➢❨  rights to land use and natural resources. The project will build on the 
experience of the FAO implemented Land Project and will follow the ➢❨ principles for 
responsible agriculture investments➢❨ . 
 
- Regulatory reforms to promote agriculture finance: In addition to the catalytic interventions to 
promote access to credit, the project would support reform efforts to improve the enabling 
environment for agriculture finance. Activities will be defined during preparation, but may 
include diagnosis and support to reforms to enable agricultural equipment leasing, establish a 
moveable asset registry, warehouse receipts and commodities exchange development, and 
agriculture insurance (including weather base d index insurance). 
 
46.  Component 3 ➢❨  Project Management, Coordination and Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) 
(US$ 15 million). This component will support the costs of establishing and funding the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU), which will be comprised of a technical team, supplemented by 
external consultants, to manage the following activities: Project Manager, Financial Management, 
Procurement, Social and Environmental Safeguards, Monitoring & Evaluation, Technology & 
Information, among others. Lessons learnt from Bank operations in several weak and fragile 
environments suggest that both Borrower and Bank teams typically tend to underestimate project 
implementation costs, and run into associated difficulties. The team will re-visit the estimated 
costs of implementation during project preparation. In addition, this component will address 
existing weaknesses in implementation capacity, coordination, and public-private dialogue for 
development of commercial agriculture by (i) providing capacity building and technical assistance 
to the inter-agency working group to be created by MINAGRI to coordinate project activities, and 
(ii) creating and implementing a PPD platform. 
 
47. Subcomponent 3.1 Project Implementation Unit and coordination support. This component 
will fund the activities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Strong emphasis on capacity 
building based on the experience from MOSAP will be included in this component. The MOSAP 
PIU, which will remain in place for SADCP, will be used during project preparation, but the 


client has requested creating a separate PIU for this project. This component will also provide 
technical assistance and training to the inter-agency working group to be established by 
MINAGRI to coordinate project implementation. Support may include successful experiences 
from other countries in planning, development of action plans, and implementation monitoring, 
among others. 
 
48. Subcomponent 3.2. Establishing Public-Private Dialogue. The project will support increased 
public-private dialogue specific to the agribusiness sector. An assessment will be conducted on 
existing public-private dialogue mechanisms in Angola. Recommendations for establishing an 
inclusive public-private dialogue platform, including institutional arrangements, will be 
developed, followed by technical assistance for implementation. The objective of the dialogue 
will be to ensure private sector inputs to sector policies and programs, including the identification 
of priority value chains, identify specific constraints and remedy actions to increase private 
investment, and assess implementation progress, as well as avenues to improve the effectiveness 
of public investments. In addition to government and private sector, efforts will be undertaken to 
ensure the maximum representativeness of the PPD including farmer organizations, as well as 
other stakeholders as relevant, such as academia or civil society. Special attention will be given to 
ensure the voice of women is well represented and the specific constraints for women in 
agribusiness are discussed in the PPD.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
49.  The project is expected to be at national scale however, specific geographic details of the exact 
project footprint and its impacts will be determined during project preparation and will be reflected 
in the safeguards documents (ESMF, ESIA, MP, RPF, and RAP, PMP, etc.).

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
50.  At the framework level, there are no relevant gaps between the Angolan environmental 
legislation and the World Bank➢❨ s Safeguard policy and guidelines. The environmental legislation 
in Angola is quite recent and inspired by the international Conventions that Angola takes part. In 
regard to the environmental impact assessment, the existing Angolan regulatory framework covers 
the most relevant principles and best practices, including public consultation and participation, 
monitoring and licensing procedures. 
 
51.  The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) through the Institute for Agriculture Development 
(IDA) will be the lead implementing agency. IDA will have the responsibility of coordinating 
implementation by hosting a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with sub PIUs at Province level, 
tasked with the responsibility of project coordination and management using Technical Assistance 
(TA) when needed. MINAGRI has acquired reasonable experience in handling World Bank projects 
that require Safeguards attention, such as MOSAP. Hence, Commercial Agriculture Development 
Project will build up from the experience in safeguards management acquired by IDA-MINAGRI 
during MOSAP implementation. Nonetheless, substantial capacity building and training will be 
required to deal with this project Safeguards requirements, particularly in ensuring adequate 
subproject screening and subsequent preparation of ESIA/ESMP and RAP as necessary.

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The construction of rural roads, electricity and water 
infrastructure for irrigation , including a series of 
land administration reforms, under component 2.3, 
may have adverse impacts on soil, water, air quality, 
flora and fauna. Some of the adverse impacts may 
include land right conflicts, soil erosion and water 
logging, alteration of water flows due to irrigation 
schemes, vegetation loss and fauna disturbance for 
access road and power transmission construction, 
risks to the human health by those handling 
pesticides. Consequently the OB/BP4.01 is triggered 
to comply with the Environmental Assessment 
safeguard requirements. Specific geographic details 
of the exact project footprint and its impacts are not 
yet know and will be determined during project 
preparation.  Hence, the recipient will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to help mitigate the potential environmental 
and social impacts by the direct and indirect 
investments in the project selected areas and to guide 
the preparation of ESIA and ESMP. The ESMF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and at the 
Infoshop prior to appraisal.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project is not expected to invest in activities that 
may have direct impacts on natural habitats. 
However, rural roads improvements and water 
infrastructure may happen in proximity to national 
parks or protected areas and therefore lead to 
downstream impacts that may affect ecosystem 
services and functions provided by natural habitats. 
Hence, OP/BP 4.04 is triggered and the ESMF will 
include the specific provisions to prevent or mitigate 
impacts on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The Project will not have any direct or indirect 
negative impacts on health and quality of forests, or 
the health and safety of people who depends on 
forests. However, clearance of vegetation for rural 
roads improvements and water infrastructures may 
require compensatory reforestation and tree 
maintenance along the rehabilitated roads. OP/BP 
4.36 is triggered and the ESMF will include specific 
provisions to address the requirements.


Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes Promotion of agriculture activities may include the 
use of small quantities of pesticides, though expected 
only at a small scale, to treat orchards and crops 
against pest and infestations to enhance agriculture 
productivity of project beneficiaries. Hence, OP/
BP4.09 is triggered and a Pest Management Plan will 
be prepared to help mitigate potential risks to human 
health and to the environment using the integrated 
pest management approaches.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

Yes The policy is triggered as project investments 
involve infrastructures (roads, irrigation, electricity) 
that may require large movements of earth in areas 
likely to contain sites deemed physical cultural 
resources by communities living there (e.g. holy sites 
sacred graves, sacred forests, etc.). To ensure due 
diligence, the ESMF will include a Chance Find 
procedures that will be detailed in the ESIA/ESMP 
then reflected in the constructor contracts.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will finance activities associated with 
construction/ rehabilitation of small scale irrigation 
infrastructures, rural roads, electricity transmission 
lines that could necessitate involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in physical of people and/or loss 
of assets, means of livelihoods or resources. The 
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to adequately deal with issues of 
land acquisition resulting with compensation and/or 
the physical displacement of peoples. The RPF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and by 
the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF will include 
detailed guidance for the preparation of site specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prior or during 
project implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD The proposed project is not expected to engage in 
large scale irrigation activities or other activities that 
would adversely affect the quality or quantity of 
water flow within shared waterways. 
Notwithstanding, triggering this policy will be 
determined once specific details of the project are 
known.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No This policy is not triggered. The area in which the 
Project will be implemented is not known to include 


BP 7.60 any disputed areas, at this stage.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
15-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: September 2016 to 
March 2017

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 9

.

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18482
.

Project Name Tanzania: Resilient Natural Resource Management for Tourism and 
Growth (P150523)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Project ID P150523
Borrower(s) United Republic of Tanzania
Implementing Agency Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 30-Jan-2017
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Jul-2017
Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

21-Sep-2017

.

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context

1. Tanzania has experienced strong and rapid economic growth, with its annual GDP growth averaging 
around seven percent in the last decade. Despite the strong economic growth, Tanzania is one of the 
poorest countries in Africa with approximately 13 million people (28 percent of the population) still 
living below the basic needs poverty line.

2. A rapidly expanding population will require continued growth, translating into the creation of 
employment opportunities and household wealth, just to keep pace. The population is growing at an 
average rate of 2.9 percent, one of the fastest in the world, with about 1.3 million people being added 
to the population annually (NBS, 2009). Economic expansion must be accompanied by creation of 
quality jobs if poverty rates are to continue to drop.

3. Tanzania's growth and economy depend heavily on its renewable natural assets such as water, 
forests, and wildlife. Almost half of GDP is harnessed from natural resources in agriculture, energy, 
and tourism.  An estimated 89 percent of the country's water withdrawals are for irrigation, which 
contributes to 20 percent of agricultural production from 6 percent of the land. An estimated 90 
percent of Tanzania's energy needs are satisfied by water and wood fuels: hydropower generates 39 
percent of the installed 1,438MW electricity generation capacity, while charcoal and fuel wood serve 
as the overwhelming source of energy for urban and rural households. Tanzania's tourism industry - 
which is largely based on the country's unique natural resources and wildlife - is an important driver of 
the national economy, generating $1.88 billion in revenues in 2013, or 13 percent of GDP, in 2013. 
Tourism contributes approximately 28% the total export earnings in 2013.

4. The majority of the population lives in rural areas, and is dependent on natural resources in the form 
of food, fuel, and fodder. In 2010, an estimated 73.6 percent of Tanzanians were rural residents. These 


people largely comprise 80 percent of Tanzanian households who depend on agriculture, the majority 
of which is rain fed, as their primary economic activity. Food security is often supplemented by bush 
meat protein. They depend overwhelmingly on forests for their energy; only 3 percent of rural 
populations have access to electricity, with most households being dependent on charcoal or fuel 
wood.

5. Rural poverty remains pervasive and deep. All data sources suggest that Tanzania has not made 
adequate progress in raising incomes in rural areas, where the majority of the poor live. Lack of access 
to technology, credit, water, and power resulted in stagnant productivity and high vulnerability to 
shocks, leaving many rural households in the same or weaker position as at the beginning of the 
century.

6. Slowing agricultural growth is a challenge in the rural space. The agricultural sector has seen its 
share of the economy decline from 48 percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 2010. Agricultural GDP grew at 
around 4 percent per year since 2000, or only around 1 percent in per capita terms, with acute droughts 
in 2004 and 2006. Yields of staple crops, which are the livelihood of small farmers, appear to have 
been flat or declining, with agricultural growth primarily driven by extension of cultivated areas, along 
with modest shifts in the composition of crop production.

7. Addressing rural poverty will require the creation of new off-farm jobs. The share of goods and 
services exports of GDP has grown from 13.4 percent in 2000 to 23.2 in 2009. In 1998, minerals and 
non-factor services, mainly tourism, accounted for 47 percent of exports, while they rose to 66 percent 
by 2010. In 2013, tourism represented the largest source of foreign exchange. At the same time, the 
share of traditional agricultural exports declined from 60 percent of total exports in 1998 to 12 percent 
in 2009, replaced mostly by tourism and minerals such as gold. Manufacturing exports have grown by 
about 17 percent annually since 2005, but account for less than 5 percent of GDP and 25 percent of 
total merchandise trade. Efforts to promote rural development must look to expanding off-farm 
employment opportunities. Tanzania's tourism industry, which is predominantly wildlife-based, 
provides an important potential source of new rural jobs and household revenues, provided linkages 
with local communities are in place.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

8. Tanzania's natural resource-based economic sectors such as wildlife-based tourism have strong 
potential for generating economic growth, creating jobs, and improving livelihoods. Tanzania is one of 
the world's mega diverse countries with its outstanding wildlife, ecosystems, and other natural assets, 
and represents a prime global tourist destination with significant potential for growth. It is the 
abundance of wildlife and unique ecosystems that have made Tanzania a prime African tourist 
destination, generating significant revenues. In fact, Tanzania is very successful in attracting high-
expenditure tourists; Tanzania earns more money per tourist than any other country in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Notably, despite significantly fewer tourist arrivals, its tourism sector earned as much as 
neighboring Kenya before the recent decline of tourism in the latter due to security concerns. 
Tanzania's "low-volume high-value" approach has significant economic, social and environmental 
benefits, particularly in ecologically sensitive areas such as the greater Serengeti eco-system and other 
areas.

9. Tourism today is largely concentrated on a few areas, in and around the Serengeti, Ngorogoro 
Crater, and Mount Kilimanjaro (i.e., the "Northern Circuit") and Zanzibar. While there are many high-
potential tourism sites, ranging from high mountains to spectacular landscapes and coral-fringed 
beaches, there are signs of over-crowding. Pressures on the carrying capacity of key ecosystems such 
as the greater Serengeti lead to concerns that future expansion of visitors in some of Tanzania's key 



Page 3 of 9

attractions may soon undermine the quality of the tourism experience. As highlighted in a recent 
World Bank study (in draft), the expansion of the tourism sector must consider options to ensure that 
growth in tourism does not compromise the natural asset base; that is, efforts to increase tourism 
numbers and revenues must not undermine the quality of the very resource base that tourists are 
attracted and paying to see.

10. The Government of Tanzania (GOT) is keen to develop new tourism products to expand the 
tourism sector while in core areas maintaining the low-volume high-value approach that has been 
successful in capturing the highest per capita revenue in the region. Specifically, it is interested in 
developing a more diversified tourism sector that balances the focus on the "Northern Circuit" with 
developing the "Southern Circuit", which includes a number of parks (i.e., Ruaha, Katavi, Mahale, 
Kitulo), game reserves (Selous being the largest), two Rift Valley lakes (Nyasa and Tanganyika), and 
other areas of cultural interest. Such elements would be a core part of an updated tourism policy.

11. The sustainable management of natural resources is fundamental to Tanzania's economic growth. 
Natural resources are among the few assets that Tanzania's poor access and utilize. Sustainable 
management of natural resources is therefore an integral part of development, poverty alleviation and 
growth. This suggests that depletion of the natural resource base will inevitably compromise poverty 
alleviation efforts unless there is rapid and exponential growth in employment to absorb labor 
surpluses and provide high quality jobs. Already, poor land use and watershed management practices, 
which lead to degradation of forests and watercourses, are threatening the very natural resource base 
upon which Tanzania's economy and poor depend on, while rampant wildlife poaching threatens to 
reduce the assets that are key to current and future tourism potential. Recent GOT studies point to the 
need to ensure that decisions on development initiatives are supported by robust data and information 
in order to avoid unintentional externalities, which can in turn lead to constrained future development 
opportunities. Given the strong links with poverty, livelihoods, and food security, particular care 
should be taken to ensure sound management of land, water, and wildlife are a core focus of any rural 
intervention.

12. Water is at the heart of the sustainable natural resource management imperative. Tanzania, long 
considered a water-rich nation, is increasingly struggling with local incidences of water insecurity, 
driven by unsustainable levels of agricultural abstraction and poor watershed and land management. In 
some areas, such as the Pangani, Rufiji, Wami-Ruvu and the Internal Drainage Basins, conflicts over 
water among different users - farmers, hydropower plants, wildlife - are already undermining 
economic potential of sectoral investments in agriculture, energy and tourism, and may curtail 
Tanzania's ambitious growth plans. Notably, some of the areas targeted for increased irrigation under 
various government programs are already known to suffer from some degree of water conflict.

13. For example, the Great Ruaha River provides about 56 percent of flow to the Mtera and Kidatu 
power plants, which together are responsible for 50 percent of the country's total hydropower capacity. 
Within the Great Ruaha basin, expansion of (mainly rice) agriculture in the Usangu Plains from about 
14,500 ha in 1986, to 24,000 ha in 1998, to 115,000 ha in 2013, 87 percent of which is small-scale 
informal irrigation farms. As a result of this irrigation expansion, the Great Ruaha River has since 
2005 gone from a perennial river, serving as the lifeblood of Ruaha National Park, and a key input to 
the Mtera/Kidatu power system, to a seasonal river, leading to impacts on tourism and wildlife, power 
production and Tanzania's economy.

14. The sustainable management of natural resources across users at the watershed, landscape and 
ecosystem levels is a key condition to the success of the government's plans. Responding to this 
challenge requires strong cross-sectoral coordination and action. Improved watershed management, 



Page 4 of 9

including promoting sound landscape management and conservation practices, is needed to ensure the 
long-term productivity of key basins. Recent studies by the GOT suggest that while achieving 
important short-term goals in target sectors, these programs may unintentionally lead to negative 
consequences in other sectors and over the longer term.

15. Specifically, the impact of unplanned irrigation expansion in the Great Ruaha sub basin on 
downstream flow, has led to significant negative impacts on tourism (in Ruaha National Park) and 
energy generation (at Mtera and Kidatu dams) as noted in the Ministry of Water's Integrated Water 
Resources Management and Development Plan for Rufiji Basin. Likewise the Strategic Regional 
Environmental and Social Assessment undertaken for the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor 
points to the need for careful planning of agricultural development in order to avoid unintended 
downstream impact on water quantity and quality.

16. Climate change represents an additional important risk for Tanzania's natural asset-based growth. 
Tanzania is already experiencing changes in its climate: the average temperature rose by 1°C between 
1960 and 2006, and models indicate future increases in average annual temperatures between 1°C to 
3°C by the 2050s. Likewise, precipitation is increasingly unpredictable with studies showing a shift in 
the onset of the rainy season(s). Changes in timing and quantity of rainfall are also predicted, with 10 
percent annual precipitation decreases possible in the south, decreases up to 26 percent in the north, 
and heavier, more concentrated rain events along the coast.  Water security, which is already under 
threat from current climate variability and social, economic and environmental change, is likely to be 
under greater threat from future changes in the climate. Increasing temperatures and changing rainfall 
patterns will have multi-dimensional effects on the Tanzanian economy, affecting agricultural 
productivity, energy use, water dynamics, and the wildlife upon which tourism depends. Efforts to 
promote climate resilience in these key natural asset-based sectors will have important longer-term 
effects on food security and livelihoods.

17. To achieve the GOT's goal to expand broad-based tourism in a sustainable way, a long-term 
concerted effort is needed.  The following deserve special attention:
- Managing water resources. Water is an increasingly scarce resource in many areas critical for 
wildlife and tou rism, including the Rufiji Basin, which is dominated by the Great Ruaha River. This 
has far reaching consequences for the ecology of parks, such as Ruaha.
- Developing the value proposition and strategy for tourism, with a focus on the "Southern Circuit". 
Market research, positioning, planning, and focused development are needed to utilize and 
commercialize the area's tourism potential. Strong public and private sector partnership would be 
important to leverage respective roles.
- Providing an enabling environment for the private sector. There are many obstacles for private 
operators to enter and operate in the tourism sector in Tanzania, particularly for local operators. The 
policy and regulatory environment, including a comprehensive look at the licensing requirements, 
would need to be reformed.
- Developing visitor infrastructure. Infrastructure, such as air strips, visitor services, logistics, 
hospitality, and park management investments, are essential elements of enhancing accessibility and 
the overall quality of the tourism product.
- Curbing wildlife poaching. One of the key threats to the management of existing and potential 
tourism assets is the recent unprecedented increase in wildlife poaching. Elephant populations in 
Tanzania have declined precipitously: between 2009 and 2013, populations in the Selous -Mikumi 
Ecosystem declined by 66 percent, while in the Ruaha-Rungwa ecosystem, populations declined by 
36.5 percent. The crisis has been fueled by the rising price of ivory in the illegal destination markets, 
which provides a strong incentive to local populations who do not otherwise see direct benefits from 
wildlife.



Page 5 of 9

- Linking tourism with local economies and communities. Despite the national economic importance 
of tourism, at the local level communities in and around protected areas are some of the poorest in the 
country. While in other African countries (such as Namibia, Mozambique and parts of Kenya), tourism 
is providing an important source of revenue and employment to local communities, Tanzania's current 
policies, which aim to promote local benefit from tourism, have not been as effective. Rather, local 
populations, which are highly dependent on natural resources for food, fodder and fuel, generally 
consider wildlife to be worth more dead than alive. Sustainable tourism development would need to 
rely on stronger connection with local economies through training and job creation, supply chain 
development, and other forms of benefit sharing.

Relationship to CAS

18. The proposed Project is consistent with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
(CPSPR) FY12-15 (Report No. 80313-TZ) for the United Republic of Tanzania that was discussed by 
the Board on July 3, 2014. The CPSPR has two strategic clusters: (i) Productive investments for 
growth of labor-intensive industries and job creation; and (ii) Programs that target reduction of 
extreme poverty and improvements in quality of social services and six strategic objectives. The 
proposed project contributes to CPSPR strategic cluster one - Productive investments for growth of 
labor-intensive industries and job creation. The proposed project contributes to the CPSPR's second set 
of activities under cluster one which addresses key infrastructure gaps and promotes sustainable 
management of natural resources. In particular, the proposed project enhances ecosystem resilience 
and improves the environmental services of natural resources through development of infrastructure to 
better protect environmental assets. The project would also enhance capacities of government 
institutions at the national, districts and village levels as well as park and wildlife management 
authorities.

19. The proposed Project is one of the initiatives which contribute to the TerrAfrica Platform for 
Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM). It also supports the African Wildlife for 
Development Program in support of the Elephant Protection Initiative supported by the Bank and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) along with other development partners.

20. The proposed project also contributes to the GOT's strategies and plans, in particular current jobs 
creation initiatives, tourism development and tourism growth, and rural economic development.

.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)

21. The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environment Objective (GEO) of the 
proposed project are to improve natural resources management in priority areas of Southern Tanzania. 
By achieving the proposed PDO, the Project will assist the GOT in addressing rural poverty which has 
been persistent in and around the country?s parks and game reserves, home to globally significant 
biodiversity. The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical 
assistance and capacity building for communities living in and around the priority areas, and 
government institutions at the national, sub-national and local levels.
Key Results (From PCN)
22. The achievement of the PDO and key results will be measured by a set of key outcome indicators. 
Proposed key outcome indicators are listed below.

a. Land area brought under an improved and climate resilient catchment system (ha).
b. Protected area management effectiveness enhanced (%);
c. Number of visitor bed nights in targeted areas with tourism potential (%); and



Page 6 of 9

d. Direct project beneficiaries (#), of which XX% are female.
.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description

23. The PDO will be achieved through the following four project components.

24. Component 1 - Improving management and development of priority tourism assets (Total Cost 
US$50m). This component will focus on investments that aim at improving the management of natural 
resources inside priority protected areas in southern Tanzania to increase tourism. The expected 
outcome of this component is an increased number of tourists and bed nights in priority tourism sites. 
Expected outputs include (i) an adopted tourism strategy for Southern Tanzania; (ii) an adopted 
tourism master plan for southern Tanzania; (iii) number of roads, enhanced airstrips, viewing 
platforms, and visitor centers built; (v) a strengthened monitoring system in place to improve wildlife 
protection; (vi) number of trainings conducted; and (vii) strengthened policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 1.1: Improve the knowledge base at (i) the sub-national level by assessing tourism 
potential and investment needs, developing a new tourism strategy, and a tourism master plan for 
southern Tanzania; and (ii) the site level through ecological monitoring and conservation planning and 
integrated planning for key tourism aspects.

Sub-Component 1.2: Improve tourism infrastructure to enhance accessibility and the overall quality of 
the tourism product, including through, e.g., building unpaved roads inside protected areas to provide 
improved access to viewing areas, enhancing airstrips to allow for planes to safely land, and building 
viewing platforms and visitor centers. Develop Public Private Partnership (PPP) model to help 
enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 1.3: Improve the capacity for management of tourism assets. Improve the capacity for 
management and development of tourism assets through training and supplying of goods including for 
wildlife monitoring.

Sub-Component 1.4: Strengthen policy and institutional framework including through private-public 
dialogue.

25. Component 2 - Enhancing local economic benefits from tourism (Total Costs US$20m). This 
component will support investments that ensure local communities in vicinity to the protected areas 
benefit from tourism. The expected outcomes of this component are increased community employment 
levels in tourism and wildlife related sectors, while expected outputs include: (i) creation of PPP 
ventures in priority areas; (ii) number of micro-finance groups operational; (iii) number of tourism 
infrastructure outputs to promote local benefits built; and (iv) an adopted policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthen supply value chains for local communities and businesses that are 
linked to tourism (e.g., vocational training to enhance skills in communities to better participate in 
improved labor market such as hospitality industry and guide services), and infrastructure to promote 
local benefits may be supported (e.g., building schools).

Sub-Component 2.2: Build awareness and capacity to engage with the private sector including through 
nurturing SMEs and enabling PPPs. Develop model and associated processes to help ensure local 



Page 7 of 9

economic benefits when using PPP to enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 2.3: Build capacity for communities to manage wildlife and tourism (e.g., 
investments in community co-management initiatives).

Sub-Component 2.4: Provide access to finance (e.g., piloting targeted support in the form of micro-
finance or grants to support alternative livelihood development including activities linked with tourism 
supply and support).

Sub-Component 2.5: The policy and institutional framework will be strengthened.

26. Component 3 - Improving landscape management (Total Cost US$20m). This component will 
support investments and technical assistance to promote the integrated management of landscapes with 
an aim to securing environmental services within priority sub-basins in Southern Tanzania.  The 
expected outcomes for this component are improved land management in watersheds that are critical 
for agricultural productivity and/or priority tourism assets. Expected outputs include (i) number of 
watershed management plans prepared, (ii) number of improved soil and water management measures 
in place; and (iii) number of incentive programs established.

Sub-Component 3.1: Support activities to sustainably manage watersheds through a participatory 
process.  Depending on the size of the watershed, a planning unit will be micro-watershed of XX ha.  
The key activities include inter alia (i) planning, implementation of micro-watershed plans, and related 
capacity building (e.g., link village land use planning with watershed planning, studies), and (ii) 
communication and awareness raising activities.

Sub-Component 3.2: Strengthen small-scale water and land management through (i) implementation 
of measures developed in planning process referred to in component 1.1 above; (ii) check dams, 
control gates, and erosion control measures to reduce run-off and improve water use efficiency; (iii) 
reforestation and reduced deforestation; and (iv) sustainable incentive programs such as payment for 
environment services to promote water use efficiency and upper watershed management for protecting 
water sources.

Sub-Component 3.3: Strengthen policy and decision-making capabilities to support the protection of 
key natural assets. Activities will include (i) an inventory of key wetland, wildlife and tourism areas; 
(ii) improved monitoring; and (iii) capacity building for analytics to inform decision-making.

27. Component 4: Project management (Total cost: $10m). This Component will focus on project 
management arrangements and mechanisms including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 
implementation. In addition, funds under this Component will be used to support the procurement of 
essential goods and equipment such as vehicles, office equipment and furniture, imagery, software and 
other accessories, etc. To strengthen project management, funds would be available to finance selected 
technical assistance such as for safeguards, fiduciary management, and monitoring and evaluation. The 
expected outcome of this component would be the effective implementation of the project activities 
with due diligence and efficiency.

IV. Safeguard Policies that Might Apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 X



Page 8 of 9

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 X

Forests OP/BP 4.36 X

Pest Management OP 4.09 X

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 X

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 X

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 X

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 X

Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 X

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 X
.

.

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00

Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 150.00

Total 150.00
.

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 


Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19772 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P159382  Livestock and Fisheries 
Sector Development 
Project (P159382) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 24, 2017 Sep 05, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development, 
Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia 

Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in Ethiopia. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  150.00  

Total Project Cost  150.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country. It is the 11th poorest country in the world by 
income per person, and home to Sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest population of about 92 million people, the 

vast majority of which are rural dwellers. The natural resources base remains the foundation for most 

livelihoods, and is subject to considerable climate risks. Despite past progress, a historic legacy of 

underinvestment still bears its mark as more than half of the adult population is illiterate and the country’s 

infrastructure deficits remains one of the largest in the world. Ethiopia is undergoing a faster demographic 

transition than the rest of Africa and the rapidly rising working-age population presents opportunities as well as 

challenges. 

 

2. Ethiopia has experienced a sustained period of rapid economic growth and progress towards the 
achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDG), however it retains a very high poverty rate, high levels 

of chronic under-nutrition and continued vulnerability of households and communities.  The “development 

state” model, put in place following the overthrow of the repressive military regime in the early 1990s, has seen 

high levels of government-led investment in infrastructure, a commitment to decentralization of service delivery 

and devolution of authority and some liberalization of the economy.  While these reforms have progressed to 

different degrees, the impacts on the economy have been broadly positive, with strong and generally broad-

based economic growth averaging around 10 percent over the past 10 years.  

 

3. The services and agricultural based economy is relatively stable, but the private sector remains nascent. 
Agriculture accounts for most jobs and about 40 percent of output and exports. Services accounts for close to 

half of output and half of exports. Manufacturing shares of output, jobs and exports have remained stagnant at 

around five percent, but the sector holds the promise of a takeoff. The economy is relative stable though high 

inflation presents occasional challenges. Substantial external deficits arise largely as a result of very low exports 

and high public capital imports. Supported by a system of financial repression and other heterodox macro-

financial policies, Ethiopia has the third highest public investment rate in the world, but the sixth lowest private 

investment rate. This reflects a fledgling private sector with state owned enterprises dominating several key 

services sectors. 

 

4. Albeit from a low base, the country has seen solid progress on a range of human development 
indicators. Poverty in both rural and urban areas has been reduced substantially though remains high by 

international standards, with 78 percent of the population living below US$2 per day. Despite high levels of 

public resources channeled to the sector, the MDG targets for universal primary education would likely not be 

met, though gender parity is on course. With respect to health and nutrition, Ethiopia is on track to reach the 

child mortality, HIV-AIDS and malaria MDGs as a result of the expansion of health infrastructure and service 

delivery systems.  Under-nutrition remains a major challenge: despite reductions, levels of underweight and 

stunted children remain very high, and is prevalent in both food secure and food insecure districts and within all 

but the highest wealth quintile.  

 

5. The vision of the country, as expressed in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP, 2009/10 to 
2014/15), and in tvhe Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII, 2015 to 2020) is to reach the level of a 

middle-income economy by 2025.  This is an ambitious goal, and would require the country to move to a higher 


 

growth trajectory and address persistent challenges including ensuring macro-economic stability, the lagging 

quality of social services, the weak capacity of the public sector and encouraging a higher level of private 

investment. Further opening of the economy would be vital to achieve increased productivity and 

competitiveness in the industrial and services sector and to achieve the government’s ambitious plans for 

agricultural transformation.  

 

6. The challenges of moving to higher growth need also to be set in the context of significant external and 
internal risks that may need to be addressed. External economic shocks could impact on growth, including the 

decline in prices for export commodities, while issues with neighboring countries could increase domestic 

instability, including tensions with Eritrea, instability in Somalia and South Sudan, and the on-going water 

related dispute with Egypt.  Internally, vulnerability to natural disasters, mainly drought, would continue to 

undermine development efforts, with trends suggesting an increase in rainfall variability. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in Ethiopia and contributes significantly to economic 
growth. Although the Ethiopian economy is undergoing a structural transformation, (from agriculture to 

services), agriculture comprises 45 percent of total output and employs 78 percent of its labor force. In addition, 

the sector is a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports (including coffee). 

Despite its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Based on official statistics, 

the sector grew on average by 7 percent per year over the past 15 years. Although there is debate about the 

reliability of these figures, with some studies showing a slower growth rate, there is consensus that the sector 

grew at fast pace over the past decade. The key sources of growth include: (1) increased area under cultivation; 

(2) increased productivity, largely driven by large public investments in agricultural extension and rural roads 

among others, and (3) some advances in public policy including improvements in land tenure security. In 

addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth correlates with poverty reduction 

through positive impacts on farming and non-farm rural economies.  

 

8. Livestock (including fisheries) is emerging as a priority focus area for the Government. It is as part of its 
ambitious plans under the GTP2, which would support the country to move towards middle-income status by 

2025. Despite the neglect and lack of attention to date, the livestock sector is seen as significant in achieving 

multiple goals of the government including: (i) contribution to overall economic growth, including an increase 

in the volume and value of exports; (ii) contributing to poverty reduction in both highland and lowland areas; 

(iii) contributing to improved food security and nutritional outcomes for rural and urban households; and 

(iv) supporting the country’s green growth priorities. In this context, the Government has laid the institutional 

and analytical basis for the sector with the creation of the new Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (MoLF) in 

October 2015, and the recent approval of the Livestock Master Plan (LMP) based on a rigorous Livestock 

Sector Analysis.  

 

9. Ethiopia has 55 million head of cattle, 78 million goats and sheep, 28 million chickens and 5 million 
beehives. It has the largest livestock population in Africa and ranks fifth in the world

1
. In addition, there is 

potential to better utilize water resources to develop the fisheries and aquaculture sector. In spite of this 

potential, food, nutrition and livelihood securities remain a challenge for many households. Approximately 44 

      

10. Spurred by population growth, increasing urbanization and incomes, domestic demand for meat and 
dairy products continues to grow. The meat and dairy markets present huge opportunities for business, and 

increasing the availability of animal sourced products can address food and nutrition security challenges in 

Ethiopia. However, key challenges continue to undermine the performance and potential of the livestock sector. 

The sector as a whole is characterized by low production and productivity levels. For example, the average milk 

yield of Ethiopian cows is 1.5 kg per day, which is lower compared to other countries in the region such as 

Kenya (3.6 kg per day) and Rwanda (3.6 kg per day), and significantly lower compared to major milk producing 

countries such as China (7.8 kg per day) and the US (25 kg per day)
3
. Several factors undermine livestock 

productivity and production. Inadequate feeds, poor animal health due to disease prevalence, low livestock 

genetic make-up, weak adoption of improved livestock practices and weak livestock support services are major 

sources of low productivity levels. The public sector dominates livestock support service delivery, and service 

delivery systems for animal health, breeding, feed, finance and extension are weak.   

 

11. Livestock disease incidence is high and to limit its impact, especially economic losses for producers, 
animal health and veterinary services need to work more effectively both in terms of quality of service and 

institutional management. Often rural farmers are underserved -- one health post covers three Kebeles – and 

complain that service provided do not meet their needs. There are over 5000 health staff in the public sector and 

the private sector engagement is limited to urban and peri-urban areas.
4
 There is also dissatisfaction with the 

quality of drugs and vaccines available. The National Veterinary Institute produces 12-17 vaccines for 

transboundary and for some endemic animal diseases. Other vaccines are imported.  Counterfeit and 

substandard drugs are sold next to quality drugs and over 90 percent of animal drugs are imported.
5
 VDFACA is 

responsible for regulation and control of veterinarian vaccines and drugs but is a new agency and building 

capacity.     

 

12. Poor animal nutrition due to feed scarcity, quality and affordability is another key challenge to livestock 
productivity in Ethiopia.  In dairy, only 0.2 percent of cattle holders use improved feed

6
. Limited use of 

improved fodder production and underdeveloped feed preservation practices result in feed shortages in the 

highland mixed crop livestock system, while bush encroachment and rangeland deterioration due to lack of 

sustainable resource management  limit feed availability in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas. Overall, grassland 

coverage of Ethiopian land has been reduced from 30 percent (1980) to 12 percent (2000)
7
. This has 

significantly reduced the amount of roughage available for livestock feed. Extension work in feed has not paid 

significant attention to improved conservation and use of crop residue and by products. In addition, the 

imposition of a 60 percent VAT tax on imported feed pre-mix, concentrates and other inputs combined with 

high custom duties (53 percent) on feed mill ingredients significantly raises the cost of production
8
. These 

factors hinder the use of improved feed and fodder, limiting nutritional health and productivity of livestock.    

 

13. Over 90 percent of Ethiopia’s livestock population is of indigenous breeds (cattle 98 percent and poultry 
95 percent) with low productivity levels. For an average laying period, indigenous chickens lay on average 12 

                                            
2

eggs per hen compared to 107 eggs for exotic breeds
9
. Improving the genetic potential through crossbreeding 

and improving indigenous breeds is paramount in raising livestock productivity. The National Artificial 

Insemination Center (NAIC) produces and distributes semen at heavily subsidized cost ($0.23 cents per 

insemination)
10

. However, conception rates remain very low (less than 40 percent on average). AI service 

delivery is weak: producers often do not obtain the service at the right time and the NAIC collects and processes 

inadequate semen. There is a need for policy to encourage competition among alternatives AI service providers, 

while the national breeding policy focuses on guiding the choice of breeds and monitor breeding materials.  

 

14. Markets of livestock products are largely unorganized and fragmented. In dairy, only 2 percent of 
marketed milk supplied from the highlands is handled by the organized sector concentrated in urban areas. The 

rest is sold through informal channels, which are characterized by no licensing requirements, limited 

compliance with safety standards and high risks of contamination. For meats, there is inadequate control and 

inspection of abattoirs. Backyard production characterizes the poultry sector, yet the potential of backyard 

poultry remains untapped. Per capita consumption of milk and poultry in Ethiopia are low, compared to those in 

other East African markets
11

. However, Ethiopians regularly consume dairy products
12

, and the projected 

increase in demand in response to population growth, urbanization presents business opportunities in milk and 

meat markets
13

, especially opportunities that can include more women (e.g. milk and poultry).  

 

15. To increase the potential of the livestock product markets, including export of livestock products, 
several improvements are needed including, strengthening market linkages, increasing per capita consumption 

and greater awareness of the nutritional value of milk and livestock products, increasing value addition, and 

improving food safety and quality measures. Most of all, there is a need to rethink the roles of the public and 

private sectors: there is considerable scope to increase private sector investment in production, processing and 

service provision, while strengthening national programs’ capacity and government’s regulatory roles.   

 

16. The main elements justifying increased investment in the sector are as follows: (i) Ethiopia has the 
largest livestock population in Africa, which can be a major asset for economic growth, poverty reduction, 

improved food security and nutritional outcomes; (ii) the livestock sector is underperforming despite its 

enormous potential; (iii) public services to the agriculture sector have prioritized the crop sector over livestock. 

The main service delivery with respect to the feed, animal health and animal breeding has faced systemic and 

operational challenges limiting the sector to develop; (iv) low participation of the private sector in livestock 

sector limits private investments and opportunities for intensification and commercialization. Weak market 

linkages and high cost of basic inputs and low access to appropriate financial products are major features of the 

smallholder livestock systems; and (v) weak institutional capacity throughout the sector, including in private 

and public organizations is a further hindrance to the growth of the sector.  

17. It is in this context that the Government is now giving greater attention to the sector. The  Government 
of Ethiopia has recently completed the LMP, which provides an ambitious vision for the transformation of the 

sector. In view of this, there is a clear and strong rationale to design a livestock project to address the challenges 

of overall weak performance of the sector, limited access to quality livestock services and markets, limited 

participation of the private sector and institutional and policy gaps and challenges existing in the sector.   

                                            
9

18. Key guiding principles underpinning preparation of the proposed project include: 

a. The needs are long term and require policy and institutional reforms, coupled with public and 
private sector investments. The requested IDA support would therefore need to be positioned in a 

broader, longer term support to the sector. The proposed project, likely to have a six year timeframe, 

would aim to invest in addressing some immediate needs in the sector, while supporting key 

institutional building blocks for the longer term development of the sector. 

b. The team would aim to bring in leading global technical knowledge to the preparation process, 
including a close collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

(FAO), the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) and the World Organization for Animal 

Health (OIE). In this regard, it has been agreed with FAO that its staff would join the preparation 

team and provide substantive inputs for the project design process. 

c. The preparation process would seek to collaborate with IFC, IFAD and on-going WB-financed 
projects to ensure alignment and where appropriate to seek opportunities for more formal 

collaboration and/or co-financing. 

The project would engage with multiple stakeholders in the sector. From the Government side, this would 

stretch beyond the MoLF, and include further relevant Ministries and Agencies, including the Ministry of 

Natural Resource Management (MoNRM), Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, the Agricultural 

Transformation Agency (ATA), etc., at both Federal and Regional levels. It would also include private sector 

participants and associations, and farmer/herder/professional representatives. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

19. The Ethiopia Country Partnership Strategy dated August 29, 2012 was completed at the end of FY16 
and the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) is under preparation. It will be based on the Systematic 

Country Diagnostic (SCD), which was completed in March 2016. The SCD identifies the most critical 

constraints and opportunities facing Ethiopia to accelerate progress towards the WBG twin goals. It emphasizes 

the leading role that agricultural growth (including livestock) has had in driving the reduction of poverty. The 

predominance of agriculture as a source of income for the poorer households in Ethiopia suggests that growth in 

the sector will remain important for poverty reduction in the coming years. The SCD identifies eight binding 

constraints to the achievement of the twin goals, including poor market access for farmers and an uncompetitive 

private sector. These resonate with the aims of the LMP, which emphasizes the need for private sector 

investment with approaches that link livestock producers better to markets. Although still in draft, the new CPF 

will likely include objectives to develop the institutions, services and infrastructure to increase private sector 

engagement in the economy, and to increase agricultural and livestock productivity and commercialization. The 

project would be closely aligned to these goals, as it would aim to increase smallholder productivity and for 

selected products to improve the linkages for smallholders to value chains, and would support the improved 

functioning of these value chains. 

 




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in 
Ethiopia. 

 

20. Strategic approach. The principal aim of the project is to support the government’s strategy for livestock 
growth and transformation as articulated in its GTP2 and LMP in adding value to the existing investments in 

support to the sector. It also supports the fisheries sector, not included on the LMP but newly added by the 

government as a clear priority. The proposed project would follow a dual approach of: (i) supporting immediate 

and long-term capacity building of the newly established MoLF and its strategic national programs; and (ii) 

targeting strategic commodity value chains through a comprehensive support to smallholder producers, in line 

with the government cluster approach.   

 
21. Direct beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries of the project would include smallholder farmers 
inclusive of family, traditional and small-scale producers; smallholder farmers with improved husbandry 

practices; and producer organizations. Smallholder producers are being considered around four different levels 

of advancement (para. 23). Other direct beneficiaries would be: (i) livestock farmer’s organizations and their 

apex institutions; (ii) small and medium scale private livestock operators and enterprises; (iii) vulnerable groups, 

particularly women and youths; and (iv) livestock support services institutions, including public livestock 

research and extension services, NGOs, and service providers involved in the targeted livestock value chains in 

the project areas.  

22. Indirect beneficiaries. Secondary beneficiaries would include other livestock producers not directly 
involved with the project activities who would indirectly benefit from the national programs (e.g. improved 

animal diseases service delivery). Value chain actors (buyers, processors, and exporters) would benefit from 

increased provision of livestock products. On the consumption side, consumers in Ethiopia would benefit from 

increased and better quality of national animal sourced products supply. Other indirect beneficiaries would be 

livestock service providers, including private veterinarians, and inputs providers, including feed, veterinary 

medicines, and genetic material suppliers. 

23. Transformation pathway. In order to address the actors in holistic and systematic manner, the 
identification mission developed a transformation pathway for improved livestock productivity and 

commercialization. In this pathway, the project envisions the smallholder farmers to move through stages (Stage 

1: Smallholder farmer, Stage 2: stage 1 with improved husbandry practices, Stage 3: stage 2 organized into 

producer organizations and Stage 4: stage 3 in productive partnerships along the value chain) for them to 

achieve the goals of increased productivity, commercialization, and market access, in an inclusive and 

sustainable manner. Each stage requires a specific set of interventions tailored to the beneficiary present status 

in the transformation pathway. Therefore, the project would simultaneously intervene in all four stages of the 

transformation pathway, but with a differentiated focus: stage 1 and stage 2, where most of the Ethiopian 

smallholders are present, would require fundamental access to quality services, inputs and organization and 

management skills; stage 3 and stage 4, where fewer actors are currently present, would require more 

specialized support. Figure 1 below elaborates about the transformation pathway in more detail.  

24. Target Value Chains. The project would target three priority value chains considered strategic both for 
food security/national supply and for their potential for growth and innovation. The primary target value chains 

are: (i) dairy with small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems in wet highlands and dairy belts, including peri-

urban areas; (ii) poultry with small-scale broilers and layers systems in all highlands, urban and peri-urban 

production zones; and (iii) fish with improved inland fisheries and aquaculture in selected suitable areas. In 

addition, the project would support the red meat value chain nation-wide through its support to the strategic 

national programs on animal health, access to feed and traceability system, as well as through its direct support 

to the dairy value chain in small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems through specific income generating 

activities such as fattening. The latter would be supported through the capacity building of national programs.  

There is a strong rationale for the selection of the dairy, poultry, and fisheries and aquaculture value chains for 

the project. These commodities are important for the food and nutritional security of the country. Milk is a 

remunerative commodity which can have a significant impact on poverty alleviation efforts for the estimated 8 

million households in Mixed Rainfall Sufficient (MRS) and Mixed Rainfall Deficient (MRD) regions that have 

dairy cattle as primary livestock. In addition, improving the productivity of the dairy sector would have positive 

effect in reducing GHG emission intensity and climatic sustainability. Poultry meat and eggs are important 

sources of protein. Successful poultry interventions would enable the sub-sector to move to improved and more 

organized family poultry with semi-scavenging crossbreds, better access to services, inputs and markets, and 

expand its scale of more specialized dual purposes breeds, and layer and broiler operations. Such a 

transformation would contribute considerably to reducing poverty and increase national income. In addition, 

improving the productivity of the poultry sector would have positive effect on the feed conversion ratio (kg feed 

per kg product), and help meet the Climate Resilience Growth Economy target of increasing the share of 

chicken meat to total meat consumption from the current 5% to 27% by 2030, by substituting red meat with the 

chicken meat. This substitution can have environmental benefits as red meat comes from larger high-emitting 

ruminant. Fisheries and aquaculture are important to address the food and nutrition security. Fish is a 

remunerative commodity and can play a significant role in poverty alleviation efforts for the 100,000 

households who largely depend on fishing, with the potential to increase the number of households to half a 




million. Sustainable investment in fisheries would enable Ethiopia to exploit the ample potential of its 

renewable fisheries resources found in many lakes, reservoirs and rivers. Investors are eager to enter the 

aquaculture sub-sector. But some major hurdles including high quality fingerling and fish-feed production, need 

to be removed for such investment to actualize. 

 

25. Geographical targeting: The primary geographic focus area of the project would be the rural and peri-
urban areas of the highland regions where the dairy, poultry, fisheries and aquaculture value chains dominate. 

Furthermore, the project would follow the Government cluster approach and intervene in the existing or planned 

clusters of dairy, poultry and fisheries and aquaculture. This would enable the project to benefit from synergistic 

gains which might arise from other investment (infrastructure, private sector, etc.) coming in these clusters. 

Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis 

Ababa, Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
26. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified : 

(i) Number of direct project beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender (core indicator) and age 
group (18-35 yrs., representing the youth); 

(ii) Percentage increase of productivity of targeted small-scale productions (by selected commodity);  

(iii) Percentage increase in the sales of targeted small scale production (by selected commodity); and 

(iv) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with livestock services delivery systems supported by the project 
(disaggregated by gender and age group). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 

27. The project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by an IDA credit for 
US$150 million over six years (to be confirmed). At this stage, it was agreed with the Government to consider 

structuring the project around the following four components: (A) Strengthening National Programs; (B) 

Farmer’s Access to Productive Services, Inputs and Assets; (C) Farmer’s Access to Output Markets; and 

(D) Project management, coordination and monitoring and evaluation. This structure would be further reviewed 

and revised if necessary during the preparation period.    

28. The first component is crosscutting and designed to build immediate and long term human and 
institutional capacity of the key actors in the livestock and fisheries sector, as well as support key Strategic 

National Programs (SNPs), notably on animal health, feed and genetic [in order to improve the delivery of 

livestock services to small scale livestock producers]. The second component is designed to support sustainable 

productivity increase in the selected commodity value chains, through improved smallholders’ access to 

effective livestock and fisheries services, inputs and productive assets. The third component is designed to 

allow better access to markets for smallholders, through collective actions and productive partnerships, by 

supporting business linkages between livestock producer organizations and/or cooperatives, buyers and 

financial institutions and value addition at producer organizations/cooperatives levels where business 


 

opportunities exist. The fourth component would support implementation of the first three components and 

inform the project execution and performance monitoring, reporting and knowledge management. 

 

Component A: Strengthening National Programs.  The first component of the project would be designed to 

building immediate and long-term human and institutional capacity of the livestock and fisheries sector key 

actors, as well as supporting key selected strategic national programs (SNPs). In addition, this component 

could support the development of a contingency emergency response plan, to increase preparedness in the 

event of a crisis affecting the livestock sector (subcomponent A4). 

 

This component would have the following four sub-components:  

 

29. Sub-component A1. Policy development, investment planning and sector coordination. This sub-
component would strengthen staff capacity in the MoLF to carry out its core responsibilities of sector analysis, 

policy preparation and implementation, and sector monitoring and evaluation, and coordination. Activities 

could include: identification of short-and long-term training and education needs, improvement of the MoLF 

information system, development of a communication strategy and implementation plan to improve the relation 

between the ministry and key stakeholders involved in the targeted value chains, including private investors and 

financial institutions, supporting ongoing modernization and implementation of the sector legislation including 

the development of norms, quality and safety standards of inputs and animal sourced products.  

 

30. Sub-component A2. Sustainable animal health and advisory services. Strengthening Veterinary 
Services (VS) would enhance the government long-term capacity to detect and respond quickly to major disease 

outbreaks (PPR, CBPP, FMD, HPAI and NCD to name a few). It would further contribute to the control of 

‘diseases of production’ (parasitic, vector-born or bacteriological diseases) that negatively affect animal 

productivity. This component would build on the recent results from the OIE Performance of Veterinary 

Services pathway. In conjunction with the SNP2, it aims to promote partnership between the public authorities, 

the private veterinarians, and the associative actors, especially through: (1) re-focusing the official VS towards 

its core public functions, (2) scaling up of the sanitary mandate approach (delegating, under the oversight of the 

official VS, public tasks to private veterinarians), (3) progressive transfer of private tasks to the private and 

associative actors, and (4) supporting the veterinary statutory body (auto-control of the veterinary profession).  

 

31.  Strengthening Extension Services (ES), especially animal husbandry management practices, would 
require a transition from a public system of technical subjects delivery to a public-private system of 

comprehensive and adapted (basic or specialized) advisory services. In conjunction with the SNPs, the specific 

path for such a transformation would be defined during project preparation.  

 

32. Strengthening Producer Cooperatives (PCs), would be the necessary complement to the VS and ES, to 
improve the capacity of the smallholders in formulating their needs and evaluate the services they receive. 

Ultimately, the growth and transformation of the livestock and fisheries sector would require a strong and well-

balanced institutional tripartite: the Public, Private, and Cooperative sectors working together to deliver the 

fundamental functions of the sector. Support to the VS, ES and PCs would have a national coverage, although 

specific activities would be targeted towards the selected commodity value chains, in conjunction with 

subcomponent B2.  

   

33. Sub-component A3. Strategic national programs (SNP). Five major national programs were 
considered during identification. They would be further developed during project preparation.  

a. Animal identification, traceability and performance recording (SNP1) 
b. Animal health program

14
 (SNP2) 

c. National forage development (SNP3) 
d. Dairy-meat and poultry breeding program (SNP4) 
e. Sustainable fisheries management and biodiversity conservation (SNP5)  

 

The World Bank Group is supporting b) Animal health and d) Dairy/poultry breeding policy in the L-MIRE 

project. The proposed project will build on this work.   

 

34. Sub-component A4. Contingency emergency response (US$0 million). Following an adverse natural 
event that results in a major natural disaster, the government of Ethiopia may request the Bank to reallocate 

project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the 

unallocated expenditure category and /or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and 

reallocate financing from other Project components to partially cover emergency response and costs. This 

component could also channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 

emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the bank for their implementation of the Contingency 

Emergency Response Plan, would be prepared during the first year of project implementation. Should this 

component be triggered, all expenditures would be made in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and 

would be reviewed and accepted by the Bank before any disbursement is made. In accordance with paragraphs 

11 and 12 of OP 10.00, this component would provide immediate, rapidly disbursing support to finance goods 

(positive list agreed with governments), works, and services needed for response, mitigation, and recovery and 

reconstruction.  

 

Component B: Farmer’s Access to Services, Inputs and Assets. The project would support smallholders’ 

access to critical knowledge and information, services and inputs, and investments (technologies and 

equipment) focusing on the three targeted commodity value chains of (1) dairy (dairy-meat in mixed crop-

livestock systems), (2) poultry (broilers and layers) and (3) fisheries (cultured-based fisheries and aquaculture). 

The project would link and work with Federal and Regional Agriculture Research Institutes to facilitate access 

to new technologies, innovations and management practices. 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

35. Sub-component B1. Access to knowledge and information. This component would support capacity-
building activities of smallholders and their organizations on good management practices tailored to each 

selected commodity value chain, as well as on organizational skills towards the establishment of future and 

strengthening of existing producer organizations. It would design and pilot an information system accessible by 

smallholders and their organizations for the selected commodity value chain, in conjunction with SNP1.  

 

36. Sub-component B2. Access to services and inputs. This component aims to improve smallholders’ 

                                            
14

 During identification, the following five building blocks were discussed: (i) Creating a conducive and coherent policy environment; (ii) Strengthening diseases 

surveillance capacity; (iii) Strengthening diagnostic capacities and laboratories; (iv) Supporting diseases prevention and control programs; and (v) Including one health 

and food safety considerations. 

access to advisory services, animal health services, Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) and quality forage and 

feed. While it complements sub-component A2, it focuses on each selected commodity value chain and would 

support the establishment of a public-private collaboration to develop a comprehensive (inclusive of all 

services) and differentiated (tailored to the level of advancement of the smallholder or his/her organization) 

system of service, input and advice delivery.     

     

37. Sub-component B3. Access to productive investments. This component aims to improve the 
smallholders’ access to investments linking smallholders and/or their organizations to public and private 

providers of basic equipment and new technologies, and to financial institutions. Production-oriented 

investments could include: feed production and processing, improved animal husbandry techniques, small-scale 

products’ collection or processing units/equipment, waste management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 

emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens, renewable energy (bio and solar energy) supply. To 

minimize a farmer’s risk of accessing improved technologies, the component would establish a matching grant 

mechanism to co-finance strategic investments, i.e. investment linked with the adoption of new technologies 

and practices associated with the SNP or investments aimed at increasing the participation of women and youth 

in the selected value chains.   

 

Component C: Farmers’ Access to Output Markets.  The project would support smallholders and their 

organizations to improve their access to output markets with a broader engagement of local entrepreneurs in the 

three priority commodity value chains. Depending on the beneficiary level of advancement in the 

transformation pathway, several options for project support would be explored further during preparation. 

Lessons from recent experiences in similar conditions would be considered. These include the existing USAID-

parallel financed AMDe and Livestock Market Development projects, which support improved market linkages, 

and regional initiatives such as the Hub Approach in Milk Collection Centers. The component would establish 

“Productive Partnerships” (PPs) between livestock and fisheries Producer Cooperatives (PC) and buyers (Agri-

Businesses: agro-industries, small and medium enterprises, etc.). These PPs would be supported through the 

provision of matching grants, contingent upon contractual arrangement between producers and buyers, and 

would facilitate access to rural financing for investing in various PC Sub-Projects (SPs). The selection criteria 

and mechanisms for PPs and SPs would be detailed during project preparation. The overall aim of this 

component is to create an enabling environment for direct and sustainable commercial relations between 

producers and buyers of products in the targeted value chains, and with Financial Institutions (FIs). 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

38. Sub-component C1. Support to Producer Cooperatives (PCs). The sub-component would support the 
establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted PCs and Financial Institutions (FIs). To 

facilitate the involvement of FIs and the provision of adapted financial services, the subcomponent would 

support capacity building of PCs in the area of preparation of viable Sub-Projects (SPs). Capacity-building 

activities related to PCs’ business and administrative skills could be conducted in partnership with IFC through 

its Business Edge 
TM

 training system. Additional 

activities in support to PCs could include: (i) supporting market studies and surveys to characterize market 

opportunities and product requirements, organizing communication and dissemination campaigns to inform 

stakeholders about the project, and creating an online-based market information system; (ii) the establishment 

of a dialog platform between the government and key stakeholders, and (iii) mobilizing financial institutions 

(FIs) by negotiating a co-financing agreement for the SPs, and providing technical assistance on the design of 



tailored financial services and products to meet the financing needs of eligible SPs.  

 

39. Sub-component C2. Establishment of Productive Partnerships (PPs). This sub-component would 
promote partnerships between PCs and buyers of selected commodities (milk, poultry meat and eggs, fish). 

Financial Institutions (FIs) would be included in the PPs as they are expected to co-finance the sub-projects to 

be developed by the PCs. The partnerships would be based on the following principles: (a) agreement on 

product quality and characteristics; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c) modalities of delivery; (d) 

payment modalities and price; and (e) buyer’s contribution, such as Technical Assistance (TA), specific inputs, 

and arrangements for input reimbursement. 

 

40. Sub-component C3. Access to Financial Institutions (FIs). This sub-component would finance SPs, 
which have been developed by PCs under the Productive Partnerships established under sub-component C2. 

Based on a PC’s business plan, investment would cover collective investments through a Matching Grant aimed 

at improving the market reliability (commercial and safety standards) of the selected commodities. Collective 

investments would include post-productive investments (including processing technologies and facilities), as 

well as the associated technical assistance and training. A conditionality mechanism would be built into the 

Matching Grant to ensure that the Sub-Projects promote health and environmental services or at least do not 

generate negative externalities, and would be screened for potential adverse effects on the environment and 

public health. Selected SPs could be financed through a combination of an IDA-financing, a contribution from 

PCs, and short to medium-term credit provided by participating FIs. 

 

Component D: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation. The component 

would support project management at federal, regional, zonal and woreda level. In addition to routine 

functions, emphasis would be placed on a number of critical cross-cutting issues: 

 

41. Gender. The project would support the Government’s policy to mainstream the participation of women 
(both female headed households and women in male headed households) and youth into the livestock and 

fisheries sectors. This would include both targeted interventions (including support to women groups for 

appropriate enterprises) and ensuring inclusion in all project activities, backed up with an M&E system with 

disaggregated data.  

 

42. Nutrition. Although improved nutrition is not an explicit or measurable outcome of the proposed 
project, there would be many activities that would support aspects of the National Nutrition Program. For 

example, the support to the three selected commodity value chains would be coupled with extension/advisory 

services to increase households understanding of the high nutritional value and best uses of animal sourced 

foods (milk, meat, eggs and fish).  

 

43. Greenhouse gas emissions / Climate smart livestock (CSL). Livestock production critically 
contributes to the 3 outcomes of CSL: (i) it contributes directly and indirectly to food production and food 

security, (ii) it offers adaptation strategies, through assets diversification, coping mechanisms and water 

management, and (iii) it offers great potential for GHG emission intensity reduction and carbon sequestration. 

In terms of livestock production systems, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) translates into four essential 

objectives: resource use efficiency, reduced conversion of natural habitats into agriculture, buffering and 


 

connection to markets. Most technical and institutional interventions would have effects on more than one of 

the CSA outcomes. 

44. Capacity building. The design of the proposed project would include capacity building for a range of 
actors and organizations and through a number of approaches, including training. In a recent project (e.g. AGP 

1), the effectiveness of training was found to be relatively weak. A more focused and structured approach to 

capacity building would be developed for the project, drawing upon both good experience in Ethiopia (such as 

under the Productive Safety Nets Program or the Farmer’s Filed School in the Integrated Pest Management and 

forage development Programs) and international experience. This would emphasize strengthening core skills for 

delivering training and stronger processes for training needs assessment, continual training where appropriate 

and adequate follow up.  

 

45. Linkages and Coordination. The project would be one of the primary government program to support 
investments to achieve the strategic goals set out by the LMP. However, it would not function in isolation and 

coordination and complementarity with other initiatives would provide opportunities for increased impact. This 

is particularly important because Ethiopia is hosting a number of active projects in the sector –implemented by 

various ministries- that the new MoLF would have to monitor. Coordination mechanisms would need to be 

strengthened with a number of other on-going and planned programs, including the following IDA-financed 

projects and programs: Agriculture Growth Project 2, Productive Safety Net Program, Sustainable Land 

Management Program, and Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP) and the WBG’s Ethiopia 

Livestock-MIRA project. 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis Ababa, 

Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The MoLF is a new ministry with a significant capacity weakness. Therefore, efforts would be required throughout the 

project, in particular in the areas of safeguards due diligence. Given the institutional and management innovations that is 
expected from the project, three distinct value chains are targeted, including the newly supported fisheries sector, and 
the multiplicity of actors involved from the public, private and associative sectors, capacity constraints are likely to 
represent the biggest challenge of the project. To address these gaps, it has been proposed to formulate a capacity 
building strategy for the MoLF during the preparation phase. The Bank would undertake a safeguards capacity 
assessment as part of the project preparation, which would outline the detailed risks and mitigating measures. The 
project would further explore to provide systematic and regular training to targeted the Regions and Woredas as well as 
undertake regular supervision to ensure that challenges with regards to environmental and social safeguards are 
identified and addressed in a timely manner. Overall, the project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, 
land and other economic resources and on livelihoods; will prepare both a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address potential scope of impacts, since the project sites 
are not known. The ESMF and RPF will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project appraisal. Site specific Resettlement Action Plan and ESMPs, will be 
prepared, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, as needed based on the guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, 
prior to implementation of any compensation actions or civil works. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as a Category B project, given 
that it would finance activities, especially those related 
to veterinary services to detect and respond quickly to 
major disease outbreaks, improved animal health 
services, production of quality forage and feed, 
including feed production and processing, small scale- 
products’ collection/ processing units, waste 
management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 
emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens. 
Since the scope and nature of the sub-projects and 
their site-specific locations are not known at this time 
of preparation, the specific instrument proposed for 
analyzing potential environmental risks is an ESMF. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Project funds may be used to purchase and distribute 
pesticides for control of vectors of livestock /animal 
diseases and agrochemicals for improved production 
of forage and feed, and it is likely that more generally 
support through the Project will encourage small 
holder farmers, and veterinary service providers to use 
more pesticides and chemicals. The ESMF will contain 
a section on PMP/IPMP that would elaborate on what 
actions need to be undertaken to minimize 
environmental, health and safety impacts. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the lowland area of the project area meet 
the criteria for the Indigenous People or underserved 
groups.  The project will conduct Social Assessment 
and enhanced public Consultation with the affected 


persons and communities to reflect the policy 
requirements. The key findings of the social 
assessment including the process used to foster free, 
prior, and informed consultations and broad 
community support for the project, including the 
provision of grievance redress, and benefit sharing 
issues; and the identified mitigating measures will be 
incorporated in the design of the project and 
summarized in the PAD. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Since the project sites are not known, therefore, to 
address potential scope of impacts on loss of 
economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation, 
the project will avoid adverse impacts on people, land 
and other economic resources and on livelihoods by 
preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
RPF will be consulted upon and reviewed and cleared 
by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project 
appraisal. In cases where impacts are known, the 
project will Resettlement Action Plan, based on the 
guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, and the 
RAP will also be reviewed and cleared by the World 
Bank prior to implementation of any compensation 
actions or civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 24, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project’s safeguards instruments (ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be prepared, reviewed and approved by the World Bank and 

disclosed in Ethiopia by the GoE and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18646 

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P158810  Cashew Value-Chain 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158810) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Mar 01, 2017 Jun 22, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of 
Agriculture,Ministry of 
Mines and Industry 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  175.00  

Total Project Cost  175.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Following its independence, Côte d’Ivoire occupied a unique place in Africa. For two decades, the country experienced political stability, high 

growth and sustained poverty reduction.  Ample natural resources and favorable terms of trade for its main agricultural exports helped the 

country achieve a strong economic performance which, by the end of the 1970s made Côte d’Ivoire the major player of the West African 

Monetary and Economic Union. By 1980 the country was the world's leading exporter of cocoa and Africa's leading exporter of pineapples, 

palm oil, rubber and bananas. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew steadily during that period at average 6 percent per year. The surpluses 

generated by agriculture alone have enabled the country to have a relatively large industry, whose contribution to GDP reached 23 percent in 

1982. It is also principally due to agriculture that Ivoirians enjoyed the highest annual per capita income in the West African sub-region, 

including Nigeria. A sharp reversal began in 1980 as terms of trade deteriorated precipitously and the CFAF became increasingly overvalued. 

From 1981 to 1992, annual GDP growth averaged -0.2 percent and Côte d’Ivoire slipped from the rank of middle income countries into the low 



income group. The devaluation of the CFAF in 1994 triggered an economic rebound, but this was soon undermined by the political crisis which 

began in 1999
1
. During this period which lasted until 2011, the increase in the depth and severity of poverty was dramatic all over the country. 

Côte d’Ivoire’s economic performance over the past four years has been impressive. Renewed political stability, concurrently with structural 

reforms
2
 to improve the business climate

3
 and supportive fiscal policy enabled a strong pickup in economic activity. Over the last 4 years, 

economic activity expanded by 9 percent a year on average translating, into an increase in real per capita income of more than 20 percent. In 

2015, real GDP grew by 8.6 percent driven by strong investment and private consumption. Inflation remained subdued, reflecting ample 

domestic food production and imported consumer products. In response to the rebound of economic growth, the poverty incidence in the 
country slightly diminished from an estimated 51 percent in 2011 to 46 percent in 2015

4
, but other human development indicators have been 

slow to improve. Efforts were made during the period 2012–15 to make growth more inclusive by increasing the farm price for coffee and 

cocoa and other agriculture products and improving basic infrastructure in rural areas. Nevertheless, the country is still facing several 

challenges, including significant disparities across the country in terms of education attainment, heath services, employment, and income.  

Challenges ahead – poverty and inequality. Poverty continues to be overwhelmingly rural with disparities in access to basic services, and 

gender disparities across wealth and urban-rural groups. People living below the poverty line tend to be unemployed and are from large 

households, the agricultural sector, and weak educational background. Poverty is also found to be more common among the young: 51.4 

percent of Ivoirians younger than 25 years are classified as poor, while poverty rates in other age groups vary from 35 to 39 percent. The 

recently concluded Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) shows that poverty is significantly concentrated in rural areas and in the 

Northern parts of the country (where the potential for agriculture has not yet been realized), while greater Abidjan is becoming ever more 

dominant in the country’s economy. Poverty rates are 69 percent in North versus 25 percent in the South (within the southern regions, poverty 

rates tend to increase from East to West). While spatial inequality worsened during most of the crisis period, the rural-urban divide continued 

to grow even during the recent recovery. Such unbalanced - mostly Abidjan centric - development is unsustainable; both economically, because 

it relies on too few sectoral and regional drivers and socially, because it does not tackle the roots of fragility in the cou ntry. The 2015 Human 

Development Report ranked Côte d’Ivoire at 172 out of 188 countries (far below neighboring Ghana in 140
th

 place), with an overall Human 

Development Index below the average for sub-Saharan Africa. 

Côte d’Ivoire ambitious development agenda - making the country an emerging market economy. Following last October’s peaceful 

presidential elections, political uncertainties have diminished, paving the way for continued economic progress. The medium-term outlook is 

favorable. Economic activity is projected to remain strong at 8.5 percent in 2016, and 7.4 percent per year on average in 2017–20. The 

Government has recently adopted a new 2016–20 National Development Plan (NDP)
5
 aimed at achieving strong and inclusive growth - halving 

poverty and fostering structural transformation. To support the structural transformation foreseen under the NDP, the Government intends to 

pursue further reforms to improve the business climate and strengthen the private sector contribution in the economy, including in the form of 

a public-private partnership. This will involve creating new opportunities for diversification based on the country’s comparative advantages and 

fostering sustainable integration into regional and global value chains. A greater impetus will be given to stimulating industrial production - 

moving to higher domestic value-added products through the local transformation of a larger share of agricultural products (especially cocoa 

and cashew). The Government has set a target of at least fifty percent of cacao beans domestically processed and eventually more for cashew 

nuts by 2020. In attaining this targeted, the Government is also seeking to increase the participation of nationally domiciled entities in cacao 

and cashew processing, and is assessing options regarding policies that could encourage growth of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 

in both sectors. Successful NDP implementation will depend on the pace at which the main structural barriers are removed and productivity-

enhancing reforms are carried out, as well as on financing conditions and how domestic and external risks are addressed.  The authorities have 

expressed an interest in a new Fund arrangement to support the NDP objectives, including the IBRD-Enclave financing mechanism.  

 

                                            
1
 Between 1985 and 2008, the estimated share of the population living below the poverty line increased from around 10 percent to about 49 percent. 

2
 The Government has undertaken a number of important economic reforms and reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries completion point in June 2012. 

3
 According to the World Bank “Doing Business Index”, Cote d’Ivoire has gained some 25 places in the world ranking, from 2011 to 2016 and ranked among the 10 best 

reformers in 2014 and 2015. Côte d’Ivoire was also ranked among the fastest improving countries on Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index, rising 
from 154

th
 in 2011 to 115

th
 in 2014. Comparing the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, the country has shown the largest improvements in overall governance 

on the continent over the last four years. 
4
 2015 Living Standards Monitoring Survey (LSMS – ENV2015). 

5
 The NDP is based on four strategic pillars: (i) enhancing the quality of institutions and governance; (ii) stepping-up the development of human capital and promoting 

social well-being; (iii) speeding up structural transformation and industrialization; and (iv) strengthening the infrastructure base while preserving the environment.  




Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Cote d’Ivoire’s economy and growth have been driven by commodity-based exports and this will remain the key in the medium-term. The 

most important export crops – cocoa, rubber, palm oil, cotton and cashew – are also the main sources for smallholders’ income as well as the 

center-piece of the country’s major farming systems. Cocoa, rubber and oil palm are at the center of the forest zone’s diversified production 

mix with smallholders generally maintaining a wide variety of cash and food crops (rice, cassava, plantain). Cotton and cashew are the main 

cash crops and drivers of the savanna economy and farming systems (which include maize, rice and livestock), where cotton in particular has 

important spill-over effects on food crop productivity through the use of improved technology.  

The agricultural sector currently accounts for 22 percent of GDP, over three-quarters of non-oil exports, and provides employment and 

income to two-thirds of all households. Côte d’Ivoire is the world’s largest producer of cacao and has become the largest producer and 

exporter of raw cashew nuts (RCN). The country remains also the largest exporter of rubber, oil palm, bananas, pineapples and copra in Africa 

and is self-sufficient in a variety of staple foods – maize, sorghum, millet, yam, cassava, plantain banana – with some small exports to the sub-

region. The impact of production of export commodities extend to several other sectors through forward and backward linkages - inputs, 

processing, transport, financial services, taxes, energy and final consumption and therefore play a key role in the country for the creation of job 

opportunities and poverty reduction. In fact, the domestic trade and transport industry (trucking and port) depends to a large extend on 

agriculture for its business. Similarly, agro-processing industries such as cotton ginneries, rubber, palm oil and sugar factories provide the base 

for rural industry, while an important component of urban industry is made up of cocoa processing plants, textile cottonseed oil operations, 

packaging materials, second stage transformation of oil palm into soaps, cosmetics, etc.  

While significant results have been achieved in improving the agriculture sector’s performance in recent years, it is facing several constraints 

that negatively impact its sustainable development. These include a range of technical and circumstantial issues, such as limited access to 

inputs; weak extension services; considerable post-harvest handling, transportation and storage losses; inadequate exposure to modern 

farming techniques, and aging and poor maintenance of existing plantations. These limitations are compounded by structural economic factors, 

such as access to finance (in particular for SMEs), deteriorating physical infrastructure, and limited public goods, all of which have contributed 

to the long-term stagnation of productivity and low value addition. Tackling these constraints can unleash the agricultural sector potential and 

increase its participation into global value chains involving many agro-food items and agro-industries in high demand regionally and/or 

worldwide - attracting major investments which can stimulate economic growth along with creating value, scaling-up innovation, and achieving 

the country’s overarching objective to ensure the population’s wellbeing by reducing poverty and inequality, through structural transformation 

of the economy. 

THE CASHEW SECTOR: COTE D’IVOIRE – AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ORIGIN FOR RCN AND PROCESSING. In 2015, Côte d’Ivoire became 

the world’s largest producer of RCN, with a production of 702,000 tons, or 21 percent of the world’s total production. The value of 2015 

cashew exports is estimated at over US$ 650 million, which makes cashew the third most important export commodity after cacao and refined 

petroleum products, but ahead of rubber, cotton and coffee
6
. The importance of cashew production is even more critical when viewed in a 

regional and poverty reduction context. It is grown by about 250,000 households (about 1.5 million persons) in the poorer, northern half of the 

country, where cashew has become the most important source of rural cash income. It is clearly an exciting source of growth with the added 

advantage of having the potential to generate better and inclusive rural employment through farming and rural industrialization. Provided that 

a comprehensive strategy addressing the Ivoirian cashew value chain competitiveness constraints is put in place, overall growth in the value of 

cashew exports by 15 percent p.a. over the next decade seems feasible
7
.  

However, the cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire faces several constraints hindering its development. Figure 1 below summarizes these 

constraints and their level of intensity. They concern: (i) the governance of the value-chain; (ii) the quality of the nuts that are heterogeneous in 

size and often of bad quality due to inadequate harvesting and post-harvesting methods; (iii) the high investment cost, including equipment 

and spare parts; (iv) the lack of technical and managerial skills and the low productivity of the labor force; (v) the difficulty in accessing credit, 

for both investments and working capital, and the high cost of this credit when available; (vi) the international buyers’ perceived risk of 

sourcing kernel supply from African processors; (vii) the investor’s perception of a relatively unfriendly sector policies and business 

environment; and (viii) the poorly developed rural infrastructure. 

 

                                            
6
 Gross farmer receipts in 2015 are estimated at US$ 400 million (CFAF 250 billion), now way ahead of those of cotton (US$ 180 million), the traditional cash crop of 

the north. A comparison in terms of net farmer receipts would be even more favorable, since cotton involves much higher input costs (about 1/3 of gross receipts). 
7
 World Bank, 2012. Côte d’Ivoire, The Growth Agenda: Building on Natural Resources and Exports. Report No. 62572-CI.   



The past expansion of Cote d’Ivoire cashew production has been extraordinary. Production has been growing by over 20 percent per annum 

over the last two decades (from 6000 tons in 1990 to 63,000 tons in 2000 to over 702,000 tons in 2015). However, this rapid increase in RCN 

production has been largely driven by an expansion in the planted area rather than by productivity gains. Although plantations are in general 

relatively young (66 percent less than 25 years old), they have been established with low-productivity planting material (unimproved tree 

varieties from home saved seeds) and farmers tend to apply virtually no inputs apart from family labor. Treatment for disease and insects is 

rare, harvesting practices leave much to be desired, and drying and storage are poorly done. As a result, productivity is low (300kg/ha) 

compared with other producers in South and South-East Asia (India 850kg/ha and Vietnam 1,000kg/ha) and Ivoirian cashew nuts suffer an 

average price discount of about 15 percent compared to the average price for African cashew exports to India. While this low intensity 

approach is well suited to low income, risk adverse decision making processes, there is clearly room for significant improvement in productivity 

as knowledge is shared and internal market linkages strengthen. In addition, low productivity at the production base increases aggregation 

costs over poor road networks. Low levels of pruning and tree maintenance increase harvesting time and negatively impact nut size and 

quality.  

Despite being a major producer of RCN, Cote d’Ivoire only processes around 5 to 7 percent of its production. The vast majority of RCN 

exported goes to India and Vietnam with 85 percent exported by foreign owned companies based in India, Singapore and Vietnam. The balance 

is traded by 10 domestic cooperatives/enterprises who in turn have pre-finance links with foreign companies
8
. While some competition 

between buyers may exist, there are also suspicions of anti-competitive practices, and this dependence on two countries could be a problem. 

The existing installed processing capacity of RCN in Cote d’Ivoire is estimated at 75,000Mt (with an actual use of only 50 percent). Moreover, 

nearly all processed cashew in 2015 came from two factories with a combined capacity of 42,000Mt. These numbers highlight not only the 

huge imbalance between RCN exports and processed quantities but, the socio-economic losses to the Ivorian economy. If only 50 percent of 

the harvest was processed locally, over 100,000 jobs could be created (of which at least 60 percent women), delivering more than $100 million 

                                            
8
 The dominance of foreign based companies is explained by the historical significance of India as a processor of RCN from origins worldwide. Foreign processors and 

trading companies are often multi-commodity and spread trading/market risk and overheads over a number of value chains. Larger companies have international 
credit lines that underwrite borrowing from local banks for working capital needs through the buying season. Companies trading into India have established links to 
large domestic consumer markets as well as developed trading relationships with roasters and retailers in the US and Europe.   




in wage per years to the local economy and primarily in the impoverished north
9
. Other gains will be obtained for the country in the form of 

foreign exchange value of exports
10

 and the cashew shells could be processed into biofuel and used for electricity generation in rural areas.  

It is time to move from raw cashew exports to domestic processing. Clearly there are solid socio-economic reasons for expanding the 
processing sector in Cote d’Ivoire on a number of fronts, including a vibrant market and a strategic cashew supply chain context: (i) The high 

dependence on Vietnam (70 percent) is seen as a risk factor for international buyers of cashew kernels
11

. An alternative is needed accentuated 

by the loss of supply from India (exports falling as domestic consumption grows) and Brazil (falling production); (ii) the growing weight of Cote 

d’Ivoire in the overall supply of the market and its proximity from both the European and US markets, are focusing the attention of processors 

and end-users on Ivoirian producers; (iii) the possibility to create shorter, more traceable value chains, is a very powerful incentive for 

consumers to source their kernels directly in Cote d’Ivoire. Currently, kernels processed in India and Vietnam come from a variety of sources 

and reach the European and US markets indirectly, after a long and largely untraceable chain. Local processing means a significant cut in 

transport costs by eliminating the shipping of raw cashews to Asia for processing and shipping the kernels back to the European and US market. 

The more direct route, and the sourcing from a unique producer also permit to better meet the European market’s increasing emphasis on 

traceability from farm to fork. Downstream in the supply chain, food manufacturers and retailers are generally shortening their chains as well 

(in terms of supply networks and relations), thus operating increasingly with a limited number of preferred suppliers (importers and producers) 

to which they transfer the responsibility for traceability and product safety and quality
12

. In addition, shorter transportation lines diminish the 

carbon footprint of the cashew value chain, which is an interesting environmentally-friendly proposition and a definite competitive advantage 

of Ivoirian processors; and (iv) there is yet an untapped potential opportunity in organic cashew certified production. The current lack of use of 

chemical inputs would facilitate a fast transition to organic production and make Cote d’Ivoire unique in the World with premium product at 

lower cost.  Finally, in term of RCN production, future impact of climate change on crops such as cacao is expected to lead to a reduction of the 

areas suitable for cocoa which will then become suitable for cashews as it is drought and wind resistant. 

However, even with an abundance of raw material, levels of investment in processing have been very low and existing capacity 

underutilized. The debate about the competitiveness of the processing cashew in Cote d’Ivoire has evolved over the past 10 years. The broad 

conclusion drawn by sector experts is that processing locally could be competitive provided a number of key criteria are met. These include: 

selection and use of efficient semi-mechanized processing equipment, management by experienced and specialized staff and a well-trained, 

disciplined workforce. Studies also highlight potential competitive risks to a domestic processing sector in the form of high labor costs, lower 

productivity, access to and cost of capital, food safety and traceability standards, constantly evolving improvements in technology at processing 

centers of India and Vietnam driving competitive advantage and un-hedged risks in differentials between RCN and processed kernel prices
13

. 

Promoting domestic processing will therefore require implementing a comprehensive value-chain development approach with some 

incentives, carefully managed to avoid penalizing the farmers or protecting inefficient enterprises. If an export tax is used, its proceeds should 

be channeled into a program not only to promote domestic processing, but also to raise crop yields which are far below those of competing 

Asian countries. Public research and extension should be strengthened as well as the regulatory framework which is needed to improve 

coordination without hampering the dynamism of the private sector.  

THE CASHEW WORLD MARKET CONTEXT. The international global trade in both raw and processed cashew nuts has evolved greatly over the 

last 15 years.  Trade in processed nuts (kernels) has grown from around 234,000Mt in 2000 to over 680,000Mt in 2015. This represents an 

annual growth rate of 9.3 percent over the period. The main consumption markets are India, the USA and Europe that account for 75 percent 

of total consumption.  Demand is driven by a combination income-economic growth and dietary trends related to health and lifestyle. Global 

kernel demand is predicted to increase over the following decade, albeit at lower rates than the recent past. The US and European markets 

where cashew is essentially a snack food are price sensitive and are substituted with nuts such as almonds. Indian consumption is largely as a 

cooked food ingredient where broken nuts are widely used and increasingly as a festival related gifts. Demand in East Asia is predicted to 

remain strong as a growing middle class consumes higher value food products. Raw cashew nuts are produced in four main geographical 

regions: South East Asia, West Africa, East Africa and Brazil. World production reached an estimated 3.5 million Mt in 2015 with around 45 

percent originating in Asia, 45 percent in West Africa and the balance from East Africa and Brazil. Global RCN production is estimated to grow 

                                            
9
 Calculation based on 350,000 MT of RCN. It is estimated that RCN processing creates around one full time job per 3-4Mt of nuts processed.   

10
 The raw cashew nut accounts for 34 percent of the final product value, while shelling adds another 8 percent and roasting and salting an additional 16 percent. 

11
 Today Vietnam depends on imports for 70 percent of its needs of RCN. There is a highly risky chain where the US for example buys 70 percent of its needs from 

Vietnam which in turn buys 70 percent of its needs in West Africa. The US buyer depends on the West African farmer but has no influence in that market.   
12

 Although they don’t require full traceability, EU buyers expect suppliers to know and document their own buyers and suppliers (one step forward and one step back 
in the chain), which products are used during production process, and to label final products for traceability in case of a food safety problem. 
13

 Increasing quality and traceability demands are not being met by Vietnamese processors. There are multiple quality problems and food safety issues (especially 
foreign matter) and much confidence has been lost among buyers. In addition, labor conditions in Vietnamese factories constitute a risk for buyers. 


to around 4.5 million Mt by the year 2020.  RCN production has been growing at an annual rate of around 5.7 percent per annum, noticeably 

slower than that for processed kernels.   

Future predictions of supply and demand suggest continued growth in both parameters.  However, two key factors are likely to impact 

significantly on Ivorian (and West African) growers and processors. Firstly, it is expected that demand for processed kernels will out-strip supply 

of RCN globally. This will continue to drive RCN prices higher with increased volatility as the gap widens. Secondly, production of RCN is either 

flat or declining in other origins with the result that Africa, and in particular Cote d’Ivoire, will become increasingly a dominant player in RCN 

production. West Africa RCN production is rising in response to higher prices internationally although will inevitably lag behind due to the four-

year establishment period of the crop.  

The international price for cashew kernels (quotes in USD/Lb) is a “spot price” derived through open market negotiations between buyers 

and sellers. There is no formally quoted futures market contract and there no derivative or proxy hedges available. International prices have 

been stable over extended periods but with two significant upward spikes in 2008 and 2011. The first spike was brought to an end due to the 

turmoil in financial markets worldwide and the second resulted from concern about RCN availability due to poor crops in east and west Africa. 

In 2011 prices peaked at over $4.00/Lb ($8,800 per Mt) only to fall back to the current range of $3.50-3.90/Lb or $7,700-8580 Mt for 

benchmark grade WW320. The international kernel price in processing countries is translated back to a farm gate RCN price at origin though a 

series of complex interactions. The current supply/demand situation appears to be driving up RCN prices to levels where highly efficient 

processors in India and Vietnam can make adequate profit margins. Processors at origin in West Africa operating at lower processing efficiency 

and poorly developed relationships with consuming markets, claim to be in negative gross margin territory when RCN prices reach 500 CFAF 

per kg (or $841 Mt).   

CASHEW SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT. The Government of Cote d’Ivoire has recognized the potential for job creation and value addition 

through expansion of domestic cashew processing. It has included the development of the cashew sector, and cashew processing in particular, 

as a national priority in its NDP 2016-20 and its National Agricultural Investment Plan (NAIP). In 2013, the authorities has adopted a reform of 

the sector and the main lines of a strategy for the promotion of domestic cashew processing (prepared jointly by the Ministry of Industry and 

Mines, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Environment).  

The 2013 reform focuses on improving on-farm productivity, marketing of RCN and strengthening the management of the value chain. It 

includes the following main pillars: (i) The establishment of a public Agency “Council for Cotton and Cashew - CCA”
14

  in charge of coordinating 

and promoting the development of the cashew (and cotton) sector, by providing the necessary regulations of all activities in the sector, 

organizing the provision of  critical services, supporting the strengthening of producer associations and the creation of a strong 

Interprofessional body for the management of the value chain; (ii) Programs for strengthening research, the production and distribution of 

improved planting material, the improvement of advisory services for providing technical support to farmers on good agricultural practices and 

harvest/post-harvest methods to improve quality of RCN; (iii) The establishment of efficient quality control and traceability mechanisms; (iv) 

The establishment of a new producer price mechanism guaranteeing a farm-gate price of at least 60 percent of the CIF
15

 price of RCN; (v) The 

rationalization of domestic marketing through the establishment of a network of licensed warehouses; and (vi) The rehabilitation of rural roads 

in the main producing areas. Most of these activities are already under implementation, financed by the levies imposed on the value chain (and 

with the support of the IDA-financed PSAC
16

 and IFC). However, the implementation of these activities remain unfunded and should be 

accelerated to be able to respond to the Government’s objective of increasing the percentage of domestically processed RCN by 2020. 

Especially attention must also be paid to building the capacity of the CCA and improving the governance of producers’ organizations. There are 

many cooperatives and other village-level groups, but they are mainly focused on collecting the harvest. They offer few other services, have 

little knowledge of the market, and are generally poorly governed. There are also several federations of producers’ organizations but they do 

not do much better, so that producers’ interests are poorly represented in the inter-profession. A considerable effort will be needed to build a 

legitimate structure to support improved practices and to speak on behalf of farmers, starting with a census of sector. 

The Ministry of Industry and Mines is implementing a parallel set of reforms and policies aimed at developing the processing sector.  These 

include clarification of the regulatory framework, public infrastructure development, assistance in processing technology procurement and 

                                            
14

 The CCA was created in 2013 to take over the functions of two previous bodies: The Autorité de Regulation du Coton et de l’Anacarde, created in 2002 as the sector 
regulatory body, and Intercajou, the value chain Interprofessional body responsible for the management and coordination of value chain private actors.  The CCA has 
the mission of developing the productivity of the entire value chain from production to the processing sector. It plays a regulatory role in the sector, in addition to its 
development and price stabilization mandates. 
15

 CIF: Cost Insurance and Freight - Seller must pay the costs and freight includes insurance to bring the goods to the port of destination. However, risk is transferred to 
the buyer once the goods are loaded on the ship. 
16

 Agricultural Development Support Project (P119308) 

facilitating access to finance. Specific measure taken include reduction of duty on imported capital equipment and spare parts, exemption from 

“Benefice Industrial et Commercial – BCI” and land acquisition taxes, reduced costs of environmental and social impact assessment studies, 

plans for the creation of agro-industrial parks in Yamoussoukro, Bouake and other regional centers, developing a cooperative research Centre 

with FHB Technical Institute and Ho Chi Minh University for the transfer of technologies, technical staff training and technical assistance to 

private sector investors. Furthermore, CCA and the Ministry of Industry and Mines are working with commercial banks and IFC to establish a 

“Risk-Sharing” guarantee fund to provide working capital to processors primarily for RCN purchase and inventory funding. IFC and WB are also 

working with Government Agencies to finalize laws regulating the issue of warehouse receipts that will lower the cost of holding processing 

inventory.   

The need for additional incentives and reforms. The measures already taken to improve the incentives in favor of cashew processing, although 
a necessary and significant first step, may not be sufficient to mobilize the volume of private investments necessary to achieve Government’s 
very ambitious objective. At the present time, Côte d’Ivoire is not competitive with India and Vietnam in the processing of raw cashew nuts. 
Operating large processors in the country, although using the most efficient technology, are facing difficulties to make a profit at the price they 
have to pay in order to be competitive with raw nut exporters. Lack of technical and managerial skills, labor productivity, building and utility 
costs, interest rates, and taxes (official and unofficial) provide part of the explanation. But a bigger problem is the need to constitute a large 
stock of raw material, and finance it at prevailing high interest rates, in order to keep the factory running during the eight months between the 
end of one harvest and the start of the next one. Indian firms can avoid most of this expense by purchasing from different regions of the world 
at different times.  
 
Promoting more processing of raw cashew nuts in Cote d’Ivoire - the way forward. The Government has reviewed what other measures may 
be taken to spur the development of the Ivorian processing industry, on the basis of the lessons learned from other cashew processing 
countries. It is a fact that all other countries with a significant processing capacity have provided some protection in order to promote value 
addition. Brazil has adopted a ban on the export of raw cashew nuts while India, Vietnam, and Mozambique have relied on export taxes on raw 
cashew nuts in the range of 18 to 40 percent, combined with other fiscal incentives. Once such reforms and policies are in place in Cote 
d’Ivoire, a number of significant barriers to entry will be removed. However, some of the main issues causing a lack of competitiveness such as 
labor cost and productivity, technological/processing efficiency and inventory management will take time to overcome. To address these 
issues, CCA is proposing a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels of 80CFA per kg ($135 per Mt) to generate sufficient margins to 
bridge the competitiveness gap and provide a return on invested capital. This processing subsidy is to be funded from a 30 CFA per kg tax on 
RCN exports (about 4 percent of 2016 CFR prices

17
) which will be passed down the value chain to the farm gate. As a result, it will be RCN 

growers who are in effect funding the establishment of the processing sector. There are equity issues associated with this transfer of value 
between a large number of poor rural families to factory owners and their workforce that policy will need to balance. It would thus be 
necessary to use part of these proceeds for the benefit of the producers (who are financing them) to mitigate the negative impact of the levy 
on farm-gate prices and rural incomes. Factories located in the production areas may well employ family members of producing households. 
Higher disposable income from processing workers will also increase other economic activities in the immediate rural economy. But, additional 
investments in the value chain should be considered such as:  (i) boosting agricultural productivity by distributing improved planting material 
and promoting GAPs; and (ii) reducing marketing/transport costs by rehabilitating/constructing rural roads and/or financing other rural 
infrastructure (storage, access to water, etc.)

18
. These investments will increase producer’s productivity (yields and quality) and will lower 

transaction costs in aggregation. This assumes an institutional structure capable of managing significant sums in a transparent matter and 
accountable to the farmers, avoiding the neglects experienced in the coffee-cocoa sector. The industry should be also monitored closely to 
ensure that firms are becoming competitive and that the tax is not serving to protect inefficiency. Ideally, this form of infant-industry 
protection should decline over time to keep the pressure on its beneficiaries to improve their productivity. This principle should be retained, 
especially as the investment climate improves and the profitability of this activity is confirmed.  
 
Ultimately, the development of a processing industry through limited protection and support may be justified as a risk-mitigation measure 
in view of the fact that the alternative is continued dependence on two importing countries. Not to build up local processing capacity could 
mean jeopardizing the entire sector, a sector in which Côte d’Ivoire has proven its comparative advantage in producing the raw material, and 
where it should be competitive in processing under the right conditions and with appropriate incentives in place. Against this background, the 
proposed World Bank loan aims to support the Ivorian Government’s plan to expand RCN processing in Cote d’Ivoire from the current estimate 
of 5-7 percent of production to over 30 percent. Crop production estimates foresee the national crop levelling at around 1.2m Mt of RCN per 
year which implies domestic processing of 400,000 Mt RCN or about 80,000-96,000 Mt of processed kernels depending on the outturn of 
cashew nut kernels

19
.  

                                            
17

 Cost and freight (CFR) is a trade term requiring the seller to arrange for the carriage of goods by sea to a port of destination, and provide the buyer with the 
documents necessary to obtain the goods from the carrier. 
18

 This practice is already being implemented in the case in the cacao, the rubber and the oil palm sectors.  
19

 The outturn of cashew nut kernels is equal to the amount of usable kernels after shelling the cashew nuts. Generally, outturn ranges between 20 and 24%, but can 
be

Succeeding on achieving the Government objective of enhanced value-added transformation will depend not only on increased domestic 

processing, but most importantly on improving the whole cashew value-chain performance and competitiveness. This will entail priority 

setting and funding to increase on-farm yields that remain low, continued strengthening of sector institutions, modernization of marketing, and 

prepare and adapt cashew processing industries and their environment to the requirements of the international markets. Specifically, the 

following key factors will need to be taken into account: (i)  Supply of cashew nuts to processing at competitive costs and adequate quality 

which will depend on overcoming on-farm production challenges and developing basic rural and post-harvest/marketing infrastructure; (ii) For 

domestic processors (and for exporters), clarity of vision on how on-farm productivity will evolve – geographically and with what pace - impacts 

the efficiency of subsequent value chain activities and the profitability of investment decisions. Scale and location of additional processing 

facilities, and building of input supply networks, depend on whether farm production remains low productivity and dispersed, or will begin to 

concentrate geographically and amongst fewer, more professional farmers. Bringing the current spectrum of views closer together therefore 

offers the potential for lower risks and higher interest in additional processing investment, or at the least, lower risks of inefficiently placed 

investment (in space and time); (iii) Local processing industries and enterprises will require to be modernized with the aim to improve their 

competitiveness in terms of price, quality and innovation and also their ability to follow and assimilate the development of technologies and 

markets. This will involve promoting a process of upgrading, modernizing of production tools and industrial subsystems, strengthening 

managerial capacities, developing quality and adopting international standards; (iv) Support measures tailored to SMEs (including taxes and 

other policy adjustments) will have be promoted to enhance their contribution to domestic processing and to boost the creation of jobs for 

young people. Innovation and skill development will contribute significantly to this process by making the most of the demographic dividend; 

and (v) Support in the improvement of other essential infrastructure for industrial activity (access to energy, roads networks, technology 

centers, etc.) is also essential, particularly in disadvantaged regions in northern Cote d’Ivoire. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed Cashew Value Chain Competitiveness Project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Cote 

d’Ivoire and supports the achievement of the WBG’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Côte d’Ivoire 

wants to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work in agriculture, 

manufacturing and selected services. To help the country reach its potential as world‐class agricultural commodity producer, the CPF program 

FY16-FY19 proposes to address low productivity and jobs in the agriculture, agribusiness and manufacturing value chains, among other within 

the cashew value-chain, which offers high potentials for economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction.  

In this respect, the proposed project supports the CPF main Focus Area 1 “Accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth in Cote d’Ivoire” 

and its Strategic Objective 1 “Improve productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness value chains” to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty. 

It supports also the Strategic Objective 3 “Improve business regulatory framework and access to finance” to promote investment in 

agriculture/agribusiness, help spur entrepreneurship and growth opportunities, especially for SMEs.  

The proposed project addresses also the World Bank Africa Region priorities of Agri-business and is well aligned with the Agriculture Global 

Practice’s key priorities areas of inclusive value chains, jobs and partnership with the private sector. It is also consistent with the IFC‐WB Joint 

Agribusiness Strategy, which supports agriculture and agri‐business competitiveness in selected value chains, by improving access to markets, 

provision of technology and training of smallholders, and sector governance reforms.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
To increase cashew productivity, quality and value-added focusing on small farmers and SMEs in producing areas of 
Cote d'Ivoire. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

PDO-level expected outcome indicators are: 

• Increased cashew productivity (kg per hectare) in the project area. 

• Improved storage practices and technology adopted at cooperatives and warehouses. 

• Increased volume of domestically processed raw cashew nuts (MT). 

• Direct beneficiaries reached, of which female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core). 

• Targeted beneficiaries are satisfied with specific project intervention (desegregated by gender) 

 

Intermediate Output (results) indicators for the project include: 

 

• Number of farmers trained in GAPs, harvest and post-harvest best practices. 

• Quality criteria and standards applied in production and processing. 

• Increased quality, as measured by the price premium of RCN sold by beneficiary farmers. 

• Km of roads constructed/rehabilitated.  

• Number of loans and volume of finance to cashew industry supported by the facility. 

• Number of jobs created within the cashew processing industry. 

• Improved business environment indicators as measured by the ease of access to finance by the cashew industry (survey), percentage of 

cashew processing industries that have an internationally-recognized quality certification, and streamlining administrative procedures for SMEs 

in the value-chain (taxation, licensing and regulations). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
Cote d’Ivoire is the largest exporter of RCN in the world but only process 5-7 percent of this volume into higher value edible nuts. The Ivorian 

processing sector has remained small in the face of intense competition for RCN supply from established processors in India and Vietnam. This 

processing competitive disadvantage is compounded by the presence of internationally financed foreign trading companies who are deeply 

integrated into to processing sector in Asia. The proposed interventions under this loan aim at reversing the current situation by achieving 

transformational changes in the whole Ivoirian cashew value chain in a manner that accelerate its development and performance with a focus 

on increased domestic processing and added-value.  

The Government of Cote d’Ivoire recognizes that expansion in processing capacity will be driven by private sector investment facilitated by a 

clearly defined enabling environment. Key steps have already been put in place to achieve this in the form of an export tax on RCN to fund 

investments in the value chain, a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels that addresses immediate factors of low competitiveness, 

laws and regulations to facilitate working capital requirements and numerous fiscal incentives to reduce investment costs – for instance, the 

WRS regulations adopted recently by the council of Ministers (decrees specifying the terms of application of Law No. 2015-538 of 20 July 2015). 

This Concept Note proposes interventions complementing existing sector policies that tends to lower the barriers to investment in new 

processing capacity and enhance the competitiveness of existing processing capacity. It supports additional investments at critical point along 

the value chain that will: (i) increase RCN productivity on-farm, improve quality and lower aggregation costs; (ii) accelerate private investment 

in new processing capacity through the provision carefully designed and located physical infrastructure that increases operational efficiency 

and significantly lowers the initial cost of investment; (iii) improve the policy and regulatory framework for the sustainable development of the 

cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire, including build capacity in all functions along the value chain (technical and managerial skills, knowledge 

and innovation); and (iv) facilitating market development and trade. It is taking into consideration the lessons learned from the WBG 

agriculture portfolio experience and analytical work recently completed in Cote d’Ivoire. These include: (i) learning from the PSAC/IFC and 

related analytical work; (ii) the findings of the study “Overview of the cashew sector in Cote d’Ivoire:  Current situation and development 

potential” which provided critical insights and inputs for the preparation of the proposed project; and (iii) other key analytical work carried-out 

by development partners and the Government related to the sector diagnostic, reform and development strategy (see Annex 2 of list of 

references).  

COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING THE ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNANCE OF THE CASHEW VALUE CHAIN ($14.5 MILLION). This component aims 

at improving the organization and governance of the value chain to be able to reduce costs of marketing (from producer to port and to 

consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This also includes the strengthening of the various organizations that are 

engaged in the governance of the chain. Building on PSAC/IFC on-going program, the main investments under this component will include the 

following:  

(i) The assessment of existing capacity for public/private sector dialogue (PPD) on the cashew sector, contribution to/co-funding of 

relevant discussion fora, and capacity building of value-chain actors in advocacy for improved business environment. A particular focus will be 

on strengthening: (a) the capacities of the CCA in managing the cashew sector. This would involve measures of organizational development, 

capacity building on leading and managing stakeholder processes, lobbying for a better endowment with staff and financial resources, and 

training on quality control and marketing so staff is able to provide better services to producers, processors and traders. Emphasis should be 

less on control and regulation and more on guidance, advisory services and support; (b) the Ivoirian cashew interprofession, including the 

Union of Cashew Processors
20

. This would also engage measures of organizational development, promotion of benefits to members (e.g. 

political lobbying, service provision and sourcing of equipment in bulk), and capacity building in administration; and (c) the cashew 

cooperatives and their unions and enable them to provide more effectively services and benefits to their members. This involves capacity-

building in all aspects of technical and managerial skills - from good governance, the structure and principles of a cooperative, operational 

management, financial and auditing techniques, business development, marketing plans, and creditworthiness (so that participants can more 

easily obtain loans).  

 

(ii) Promoting an improvement of the relationships between producers/cooperatives/groups and processors/buyers through the 

introduction of more elaborated contracting. This would require sensitization of all actors about the benefits of such contracts, the 

development of contract documents fitted to the conditions in the chain, and support in monitoring compliance. 

 

(iii) Exploring options for combined finance of production and processing. This would involve setting up contractual relationships between 

producers and processors, use of the warehouse receipts as collateral, and educating bankers on the nature of the businesses in the value 

chain. 

 

(iv) Promoting the provision of value chain support services such as technical and business advice and R&D with a focus on cashew 

processing and value-added. Measures to improve such services include fostering the setting up of a network of private service providers, their 

training and their accreditation. 

 

(v) Establishing a geo-referenced information system for the sector to allow for better planning and management of the value-chain - 

collection of reliable information on the number of producers, number of trees/age, volume of production, market evolution and other socio-

economic and ecological factors to facilitate decision-making). 

The actors to be engaged in the implementation of this component include the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Industry and Mines, CCA, 

the Union of Cashew Processors, cooperatives, potential private training and advisory service providers, and the Banks. 

COMPONENT 2: PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT AND IMPROVED MARKET ACCESS TO RCN PRODUCERS (US$48.5 MILLION). This component 

intents to boost cashew farmers’ productivity on an economically and environmentally sustainable basis. Main outcomes here are in the form 

of an increase in volume and quality of marketable produce in the project areas so as to increase incomes and employment and reduce 

poverty. Direct beneficiaries of the component are 250,000 smallholder cashew producers, mainly in the northern impoverished regions of 

Cote d’Ivoire. To this end, the project will support investments focusing on: (i) support to smallholder production; and (ii) improvement of 

feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure. Specific interventions will include the following: 

Sub-component 2.1: Support to smallholder production (US$28.5 million). This sub-component will aim at increasing the production (including 

quality) and productivity of cashew producers in the project areas. This will primarily be achieved by facilitating access to: (i) improved planting 

                                            
20

 Syndicat de transformateurs d’anacarde. 


materials, fertilizers and agro-chemicals; (ii) training in good agricultural practices; and (iii) extension services to advise on harvest and post-

harvest practices. The following major activities will be implemented: (a) providing support to the national research institutes and nurseries for 

preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties and production of new higher yielding varieties for replacement of old plantations and the 

establishment of new acreage. This will include facilitating access to equipment and inputs, and building the capacity of the national 

agronomists in preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties, handling, storage and distribution; (b) capacity building and training of 

extension staff and cashew producers on improved on-farm practices such as establishment techniques, plant nutrition, planting densities, 

ideal inter-cropping combinations, pruning plans, harvesting, post-harvest storage and quality control, pest and disease management, soil 

conservation/mulching/green residues, book keeping/farm accounts; and (c) launching a fertilizer and phytosanitary treatment program. Given 

the considerable area to be covered by the project, an efficient training scheme across a large population of farmers will need to be 

established. While emphasizing the importance of skills development and capacity building for increased agricultural productivity, the project 

will identify and strengthen potential training and advisory service providers. Capacities among trainers will be also strengthened and these will 

be motivated and equipped to reach farmers. The training content will feature good agricultural practices and environmentally safe use of 

pesticides and will be adapted to local needs, and farmers will be encouraged to organize field days and training events.  

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, CCA, farmers, cooperatives, agricultural development 

officers on the district and village level, potential private training and advisory service providers, research institutions, seed and plant 
multipliers, and input providers.  

Sub-component 2.2: Improvement of feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure (US$20 million). This sub-component will aim at improving 
the connection of the main cashew production areas to markets and promote forms of improved storage technology and management of 

stocks based on the Warehouse Receipt System (WRS) being implemented under the PSAC/IFC. Activities related to the feeder roads 

rehabilitation/construction will take into account the national strategy for roads maintenance which includes a partnership between the State 

and private operators (Inter-professional bodies) for the selection of priority roads for rehabilitation/maintenance or construction and the 

parallel co-financing of these activities. Following an inventory of the existing network of rural roads in project areas, a rural road improvement 

program will be developed jointly with the CCA and AGEROUTE (the roads management national agency). The Project will rehabilitate/maintain 

around 1000 km of existing feeder roads and eventually construct about 200 km of new roads. It will also rehabilitate/construct required 

infrastructure representing a critical bottleneck in selected spots (small bridges and culverts). A community-based road maintenance strategy 

will be developed and related road maintenance associations strengthened/formed at community level. In addition, low-cost hand tools and 

equipment will be provided to the community to undertake routine maintenance. The project will learn from the outcome of the joint WB-AFD 

project (PSAC) implementing similar activities in the project areas.  

Activities related to post-harvest technologies will involves an assessment of existing storage facilities
21

, identification of best practices and 

development of a store keeping manual for practitioners, and upgrading and/or developing new storage facilities. To the extent possible, the 

rehabilitation of existing “public” warehouses will reply on public-private-partnership business models. 

COMPONENT 3: SUPPORT TO PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN PROCESSING CAPACITY AND MARKET LINKAGES (US$95 MILLION). This component 

aims at increasing the volume and value-addition of RCN locally processed. Project interventions consist of an integrated mix of activities at 

four different levels: (i) improving the business environment; (ii) facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to 

producers and domestic processors; (iii) supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the establishment of the cashew 

industry; and (iv) market development and trade.  

Sub-component 3.1: Improving the business environment (US$10 million). The cashew industry operating in Cote d’Ivoire faces market failures 

that need to be addressed if this “nascent” industry is to develop and contribute to economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction. 

Cooperatives and SMEs are affected more than large firms are by regulation and transaction burdens (business environment constraints), have 

little access to credit (finance constraints), and have limited access to information, advisory services, technology, and innovation (knowledge 

constraints). Under this subcomponent, the project will:  

(i) Revise the existing regulations on cashew nut levies so that their distribution could strengthen CCA and be reinvested into the 

development of the processing sector - for example in capacity strengthening of processors and R&D on technical solutions. 

 

(ii) Assess the regulations and licenses that are required to sell, buy and trade cashew products with the objective to reduce the costs of 
marketing (from producer to port and to consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This involves a revision of the 

                                            
21

 Updating the inventory of warehouses and of storage facilities needs which was carried-out under the PSAC/Veritas in 2015.  


current procedures in relation to other sectors and practices in other countries, the identification of opportunities for simplification, 

digitalization and streamlining and the testing and implementation of such measures. The project will also support the implementation of the 

new WRS regulations recently adopted through capacity-building benefiting the WRS Regulatory Authority.  
 

(iii) Promote other improvement in the business environment such as: (a) fiscal incentives defined in terms of duration, duty exemptions on 

processing CAPEX, and duty exemption on spare parts and consumable; (b) regional payroll tax exemptions to lower employment costs in 

production zones; (c) subsidy based on kernels produced/exported which should be clarified and defined in terms of duration (currently set by 

the CCA at 80 CFA per kg of RCN processed); and (d) a Fast-track “window” for processing investment incentives. 

 

(iv) Support the creation of new and/or improvement of existing business development services and technology centers that are targeted 

at cashew ago-enterprises for the provision of services such as technical and business advice, R&D, etc. In particular, the project will strengthen 

the Cashew Technology Center currently being established in Yamoussoukro, in partnership with the FHB Technical Institute and the Ho Chi 

Minh University, for the transfer of technologies, the training of the labor force and the provision of technical assistance to private investors. 

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Industry and Mines, Ministry of Commerce, 

CCA, Union of cashew processors, the Warehouse Regulatory Authority and national technology centres and business development services.   

Sub-component 3.2. Facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to domestic processors  (US$33 million). This 

sub-component will aim at improving access to term finance for investments as well as working capital for the cashew domestic industry and 

will consist of a Financing (line of credit) and a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). Targeted end-beneficiaries will include new and domestic cashew 

enterprises in need of financing to upgrade/modernize their technology or establish new processing plants (including financing for capital 

investment, capacity expansion and working capital). Selection of PFIs for the line of credit and RSF would be based on clearly defined eligibility 

criteria that would ensure minimum performance and capital, profitability and portfolio quality standards of the PFIs and their ability to 

promote cashew industry development at national level. The volume, lending rates and arrangements of the line of credit and RSF will be set 

appropriately to minimize any potential market distortion, and in compliance with OP requirements for lines of credit. 

 

The project will combine the provision of appropriate financing instruments to banks (line of credit and risk sharing facility) with commitments 

from participating banks to strengthen their lending capability over time to the cashew processing industry. A technical assistance will be 

available under both facilities to support: (i) training for the banks that will benefit from the credit line or RSF, in order to help build capacity in 

lending services to the cashew industry (and agro-industry in general) and ensure that benefiting industry has sufficient capacity to effectively 

utilize loans from the banks for the growth of their businesses; and (ii) advisory services at the industry level to increase their “bankability” – 

preparation of sound business plans (including choice of technology and support for procurement) and loan applications.  

 

Based on preliminary discussions with the stakeholders (government officials, local banks and cashew industry) as well as prior studies, there is 

an acute shortage of financing availability; and the volume of the proposed line of credit as well as RSF is relatively modest yet adequate to 

have meaningful impact and create momentum for Cote d’Ivoire to move up the cashew nut value-chain.  Access, modalities and financial 

terms would include features such as competitive interest rates and maturities in line with on–going commercial practices and consistent with 

the OP10 guideline for LOCs, to ensure that no market distortions are created. The availability period of the LOC as well as RSF would be [5] 

years, and the maturity of loans would be set accordingly, based on further consultation with the stakeholders, to address the shortage of 

financing in particular for investments in the sector and the current gap in the financing offered in Cote d’Ivoire. The RSF will be used to reduce 

the banks’ risk of lending to cashew industry borrowers.  There are other past cases in the region where RSF was deployed effectively in 

agriculture sector (e.g., Mali) and the project will also draw lessons from these experiences.  

 

Sub-component 3.3. Supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the cashew industry (US$42 million). This sub-

component aims at addressing important lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment and hinder the development of competitive and 

inclusive cashew processing industry in the country. It will complement on the forthcoming PIDUCAS project
22

 which plan investments in key 

economic and social infrastructure in Bouaké and San Pedro. It will particularly support the development of a concentrated agro-industrial zone 

in the main producing area of northern Cote d’Ivoire, mainly focused on value addition/agro-processing services of cashew products and by-

products (cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL)
23

, juice, biofuel, etc.). The zone will be developed based on a public-private partnership scheme aiming 

                                            
22

 Infrastructure for Urban Development and Competitiveness of Secondary Cities Project (P151324). 
23

 The cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL) has important properties which make it valuable for automobile brake linings and paint and varnishes. These by-products are fully 

used in the main processing countries (Brazil, India) and can bring as much revenue as the cashew nut itself. 



at facilitating:  (i) access to basic infrastructure; (ii) shared common services and facilities and creation of economies of scale in service 

provision, including storage facilities, transport, quality control services, waste management, etc.; (iii) improved access to technical support and 

information and management services; and (iv) a platform for business linkages between and within value-chain actors through effective 

network between primary producers, agro-processors, traders, retailers and end markets.  

 

Under this sub-component, the project will finance the agro-industrial zone site development and promotion which will include the following 

investments: (i) site identification and assessment based on specific criteria including access roads, site-specific risks, key cost factors, private 

sector interest, etc.; (ii) in-depth technical and economic feasibility studies for the zone development, including a market demand assessment, 

sizing of necessary industrial land, master planning and development, business development plan, environmental and social safeguards, etc.; 

(iii) the construction of the zone’s critical infrastructure (access and internal road network, electricity, communications, and water supply) and 

common services (such administration building, storage facilities, workshop, quality control laboratory, waste disposal, etc.); (iv) investment 

promotion campaign for the site; (v) establishment of its management structure; and (vi) a network of linked sub-regional storage and primary 

processing satellite centres feeding into the agro-industrial zone. 

 
Sub-Component 3.4. Market development and trade (US$10 million). A sustainable outlet for RCN and kernels is a prerequisite to the 
realization of growth potentials in production and processing. Therefore, this component aims at an effective development of domestic, 

regional and international markets for cashew products, particularly kernels. The following interventions are planned: (i) A study related to the 

opportunities for marketing of cashew products (and by-products) locally and internationally. This would engage in a detailed analysis of 

existing domestic and international marketing channels and a projection on most viable options for marketing cashew products with the 

associated standards and quality requirements. Quality control needs to be introduced to the purchase of processed products for local and 

international markets; (ii) Launching a branding and marketing campaign through various channels of mass media (telephone, television, radio, 

billboards, newspapers) to promote cashew consumption among consumers in Cote d’Ivoire. An Ivoirian brand of kernels, eventually to be 

issued by the CCA, will also be promoted on international trade fairs; (iii) Introducing and promoting the application of principles of quality 

control and food safety into processing and marketing of cashew nuts including Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good Hygienic 

Practices (GHP) as well as food safety standards such as Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP). This implies promotion of and training 

in good practices in cashew nut production and processing and enforcement of application of quality criteria at the buyer’s level (warehouse 

and retailers); (iv) establishing a market information system that provides efficiently information on prices for raw and processed cashew nuts 

to all stakeholders. This will involve the collection of price data at farm gates, factory gates, warehouse gates, at ports, at major trading places 

(e.g. India), and setting up of a price information service reachable by everybody via telephone and internet, and the continuous analysis and 

publishing of market intelligence; and (v) improving the efficiency in marketing/auctioning raw cashew nuts. This would require working out 

modalities to enable producers and processors getting more direct access to international buyers for raw nuts and kernels and vice versa.  

 

COMPONENT 4: PROGRAM COORDINATION, MONITORING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (US$17.5 MILLION). This component will 

facilitate: (i) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; (ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure 

efficient flow of information and support to all value chain actors, in particular the small cashew growers and the processing industry; (iii) 

effective contractual arrangements with key implementing partners (CCA, CNRA, etc.) and other private sector operators; (iv) monitoring and 

evaluation of the performance and the financial, environmental, and social impact of the project; and (v) development of communication 

activities to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories. 

 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
The project main interventions will be mostly located in the Northern regions of Cote d'Ivoire, where cashew has 
become the most important source of rural cash income. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects. There are 
considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards 
policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Environment, and Sustainable Development 
(MINEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with national 
environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of Environment (ANDE, 
Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the country. The unit is 
well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. With regard to the PCU, capacity building efforts to support project 
implementation will be done by implementing recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared 
for the project. The project will also receive guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the 
Project team. 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This project is planning to finance roads 
rehabilitation/construction with the aim to establish 
the connection of the main cashew production areas 
to markets. For instance, about 200 km of new roads 
will be built and other 1000 km will be rehabilitated 
(see sub-component 2.2). Besides, the project is 
going to support the development of a concentrated 
agro-industrial zone including basic infrastructures 
and storage facilities as well as waste management 
(sub-component 3.3). Based on all potential adverse 
impacts which may be significant and irreversible, the 
project is rated as a category A project. 
 
While the exact locations of these investments are 
not yet known, the proper safeguard instrument to 
be prepared in compliance with this policy is an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 


(ESMF). This ESMF will be reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in Cote d’Ivoire and at the 
Infoshop at least 120 days before the board 
presentation. 
 
In addition, the project aims at addressing important 
lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment 
and hinder the development of competitive and 
inclusive cashew processing industry in the country 
through the development of agro-industrial zone 
based on a public-private partnership scheme. 
Regarding potential environmental and social adverse 
impacts associated with such an investment, the 
appropriate safeguard instrument to develop is a 
sectoral Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA). The terms of reference for such a 
SESA will be developed, consulted upon and disclosed 
within Cote d’Ivoire and at the Infoshop at least 
120days prior to the board date. But the sectoral 
assessment itself will be carried out as part of the 
project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will be implemented on areas where 
forests still exist. This kind of environment 
concentrates various insects and others types of 
animals, whose natural habitat could potentially be 
affected by the project’s activities mainly with the 
opening of new road (200 km). However, there is no 
specific safeguard instrument to be prepared. This 
issue will be taken into account by the ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Areas where the project’s activities will be 
implemented comprise forested areas. That factor 
could possibly impact the health and quality of 
forests or the rights and welfare of people and their 
level of dependence upon the interaction with 
forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. So, special attention may be 
paid in order to avoid or unless minimize adverse 
impacts on forests resources. The ESMF that will be 
prepared in accordance with OP4.01 will provide 
guidance to address matters related to forests 
protection. During the implementation phase, a 
management plan will be prepared if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 
The sub-component 2.1 will aim at increasing the 
production (including quality) and productivity of 
cashew producers in the project areas. That means 



even if the project does not purchase fertilizers and 
agro-chemicals directly, It will induce the use of those 
chemical products by cashew producers for pest and 
disease management. Furthermore, the project 
intends to launch a fertilizer and phytosanitary 
treatment program. Consequently an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared, reviewed, 
consulted upon, approved and disclosed in the 
targeted areas, mainly in the north of Cote d’Ivoire 
and at the Infoshop at least 120 days before board 
date. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as roads construction/rehabilitation; 
agro-industrial zone, water supply facilities will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to underscore Physical cultural resources. However, 
the triggering of this policy does not entail the 
preparation of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a 
specific chapter will be included in the ESMF to 
provide guidance in case physical cultural resources 
will be discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no indigenous people as defined by the 
policy in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The planned interventions such as rural roads, agro-
industrial parks, storage facilities are expected to lead 
to land acquisition or restriction of access to sources 
of livelihood. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12 as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of planned physical 
investments are not known. The RPF will be prepared 
by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the team 
and disclosed in country and at Bank InfoShop prior 
to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a guide to 
conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as 
needed, as well as compensation measures to 
minimize negative impacts on Project Affected 
People (PAPs).The RAPs will be submitted to the Bank 
for approval prior to the commencement of the civil 
works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 



E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        
 

Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

Dec 30, 2016 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: (i) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), (iii) an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) and (iv) a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework (PCRMF) . All these safeguard 
documents will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and by 
the World Bank’s Infoshop  at least 120 days prior to presentation of the Project to the Board. 


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC3519

Project Name Nigeria Staple Crop Processing Zones Support Project (P148616)
Region AFRICA
Country Nigeria
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Transmission 

and Distribution of Electricity (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Ro ads and 
Highways (15%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry 
(10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural 
policies and institutions (25%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148616
Borrower(s) Federal Republic of Nigeria
Implementing Agency Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Jul-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

14-Jul-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

08-Oct-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

18-Dec-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Since 2003, Nigeria has continued to record high, sustained economic growth driven by non-oil 
sector, whereas the performance of the oil sector has slowed down.  Over the last decade, reported 
GDP growth rate has consistently remained between 6 to 8 percent. Key drivers of this strong 
growth are trade (retail and wholesale), agriculture, and telecommunications sectors.  These three 
sectors alone accounted for about 80 percent of GDP growth during 2009-2012. However, annual 
GDP growth rate declined from 7 percent in 2011 to 6.6 and 6.4 percent in 2012 and in the first half 
of 2013 respectively.  Growth has slowed in oil and gas, agriculture and trade but growth in the oil 
sector is slower than in agriculture.  The slowdown in agriculture and trade is related to the impact 
of 2012 flooding which disrupted crop production calendar and growing security problems in some 

parts of the country that continues to restrict flows of trade. Oil production has stagnated or declined 
since 2010 due to increasing oil theft in the Niger Delta, and destruction of pipeline infrastructure. 
As a result, oil output in the first half of 2013 was about 10% lower than during the same period of 
2012.   
Rising oil prices ushered in surplus Balance of Payments (BoP) since 2011.  Reserves declined 
however to US$45 billion between April and early October, 2013, reflecting lower oil output,  
weaker oil prices, and more cautious attitudes of investors. While these inflows have strengthened 
Nigeria’s balance of payment and reserve position, they also pose major risk because of its 
vulnerability to shocks or swings in oil prices. Therefore, diversification of the economy is critical if 
Nigeria is to sustain a strong balance of payment position. The Nigerian Government has achieved 
significant budget consolidation since 2011, but dwindling oil production outlook presents fiscal 
uncertainties.   Government fiscal consolidation program is yielding results. Government  deficit 
reduced from an estimated 5.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 1.9 percent in 2012.  While oil output 
appears poised to recover somewhat in the second half of 2013, Nigeria faces an important 
challenge in that oil revenues are not expected to increase in the medium term at the nearly the pace 
of GDP or the population of the country, reinforcing the need to deepen  significantly other sources 
of Government revenues. 
Nigeria needs effective institutions and good governance to achieve sustainable and inclusive 
growth.  Good governance is critical for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public 
expenditures and services. Although, some pockets of effectiveness and capability in actually 
implementing reform have emerged, as reflected, for example, in the macroeconomic consolidation, 
consolidation of the banking sector after 2009 crisis, progress in implementing the power sector and 
the agricultural reforms. Important weaknesses and risks that still need to be addressed include the 
enforcement of regulations, inter-agency coordination and supervisory capacity.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The competitiveness of the agriculture value chains and diversification of the productive base of the 
economy away from oil is a key pillar of the Federal Government’s Agricultural Transformation 
Agenda (ATA). The ATA represents the Government’s renewed focus on value addition to targeted 
commodities for enhanced food security, employment creation and sourcing of raw materials for 
industries and generally for agriculture to serve as engine for a broad-based economic development 
in Nigeria. The ATA is designed to focus on self-sufficiency via import substitution, lowering of 
food costs, increasing real wages and driving down inflation, engendering a rapid transition to an 
export-oriented agricultural economy. It is also to diversify the economy thereby increasing foreign 
exchange reserves, stabilizing the exchange rate and significantly increase the level of foreign direct 
investment (FDI). Key policies and institutional reforms are aimed at: (a) broadening the reach of 
the fertilizer subsidy program and making it more efficient and business oriented; (b) improving the 
investment framework through the development of Staple Crop Processing Zones (SCPZs); (c) 
improving the marketing of agricultural products; (d) promoting investment in productivity-
enhancing technologies. In parallel, the Government seeks to expand and improve large-scale dam 
and irrigation infrastructure which has significant deficiencies that negatively impact agricultural 
productivity, notably in the North where the bulk of Nigeria’s dam and irrigation infrastructure is 
located. 
The agricultural sector is considered an engine of growth capable of generating broad-based 
development outcomes needed for rapid economic transformation. The sector has been central to 
Nigeria’s poverty reduction and employment generation efforts, and retained this importance in 
recent times as the largest contributor to  non-oil growth (40.2% and 34.5%  of GDP in 2011 and in 
the first quarter of 2012 respectively) and important in overall economic growth as well. Self-



sufficiency and import substitution are explicit policy goals of agricultural development strategies in 
Nigeria, resulting from the growing and substantial food import bills  (US$ 2 billion) and policy 
responses (export bans) from a number of exporting countries witnessed during the recent global 
financial and food price crisis.    
The agriculture sector has been growing over the last decade, but not fast enough to meet the food 
security, employment and poverty challenges. Indeed, in recent years, food imports have been 
growing at a faster pace than the population growth (about 11% against,  2.8%) , and though the 
country has met the MDG1 on hunger, still 8.5% of total population were leaving below the  
minimum level of dietary energy consumption in 2011. Low productivity of major staple crops  – 
measured as average yield per hectare - as a result of  very low use of improved inputs , limited 
access to extension services by farmers) and limited investment by the private sector confine the 
sector well below its potential for growth. Power and road infrastructure, low-cost and long term 
financing, access to competitive inputs and supplies, as well as inconsistent policy environment are 
consistently identified by the private sector  as major challenges to their engagement in the sector. 
Rather than trying to drive the entire agricultural sector forward at the same time as in many past 
strategy documents, the ATA focuses on a few key first moves - priority food staples and traditional 
export crops, and intends to develop these for growth and employment creation, with the 
expectation that the rest of the sector will subsequently follow. Within agriculture, a major driver of 
growth is staple food crops, which contributed 35.8 percent to the agricultural GDP in 2011. 
Although in Asia irrigated agriculture was more prominent than in Nigeria, the ATA approach is 
similar to the Asian Green Revolution (GR) strategy, where an initial focus on import substitution 
for wheat and rice in high potential irrigated areas led the successful rural transformation that 
followed. Like the Asian model, the ATA assigns a lead role to the state in driving and orchestrating 
the strategy within each of the selected value chains, and in using financial incentives and import 
charges to encourage this growth. Unlike Asia, however, the ATA aggressively promotes private 
sector-led growth and is relying on public-priva te partnerships rather than state run marketing and 
financial institutions.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed SCPZ Support Project is fully aligned with the World Bank group Agricultural Action 
Plan 2013-2014, and features in the mix of instruments proposed under the New CPS (2014-
FY2017). Indeed the WBG new Agricultural Action identifies agricultural productivity, linking 
farmers to markets, and increasing non-farm income as key areas to put emphasis in order to help 
countries meet the MDG1, in one hand. in the other hand, the overarching objective of the Bank 
new CPS is to support the Government's Visions 20:2020 and Transformation Agenda for inclusive 
economic growth,  through a strategic focus on energy and agriculture sectors as cornerstone to help 
the country reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity. More specifically,  and under the first 
pillar (Federally led structural reforms for growth and jobs), the new CPS aims inter alia at boosting 
agricultural productivity, improving farmers' linkages with agro-processors, and scaling up Nigeria's 
resilience to current and future climate variability. 
The proposed SCPZ support project would contribute to the achievement of Pillar I of the new 
Country Partnership Strategy on growth and competitiveness. The CPS recognized that diversified 
growth and increased productivity is a prerequisite for accelerated poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity. With the dwindling fortune of the oil sector in Nigeria, agriculture offers a sure pathway 
to a diversified and sustained economic growth. However, low productivity and lack of 
competitiveness of the agriculture sector is inextricably linked to poor infrastructure and limited 
access to the market that increases transaction cost and limit margin to the farmers. This project 
would therefore contribute to laying foundation for diversified growth by providing critical public 




infrastructure necessary for improved market access and to attract private sector investment in 
agribusiness; a subsector that can offer inclusive and broad development impact. 
The Proposed SCPZ support project will be complemented by ongoing and upcoming operations in 
the World Bank portfolio such as Fadama III/Additional Financing, CADP, WAAPP, RAMP, the 
irrigation project (TRMING), the Development Financing support project, as well as non-Bank-
funded projects supporting  ATA (AfDB-ATASP2, IFAD- Cassava and Value chains support 
project). Those operations are mostly oriented toward improving productivity and ramping up 
production in the SCPZ catchment areas, critical to improving competitiveness of the processing 
segment of the value chains, recognizing that addressing the challenge of low productivity in the 
agriculture sector requires targeted investments in technology, irrigation, rural roads, market 
information, and increasing access to finance. It will also take advantage of sector reforms initiated 
under the series of DPOs; with the second operation focusing inter alia on improving the 
institutional framework and business environment for SCPZ through the preparation of SCZP 
Policy, legal and Institutional framework to foster a predictable business environment for the private 
sector. 
An effective institution is necessary for managing sustainable and inclusive growth and 
competitiveness. Governance represented by deficient institutions can explain the under-
performance of agriculture sector, and its lack of competitiveness. Governance represents the 
foundation for the two pillar of the CPS. The CPS emphasized the fact that the ways in which public 
functions are carried out, public resources are managed and regulatory powers are exercised 
strongly influence the performance of the main sector actors, the focus of sector policies and their 
concrete outcomes. The SCPZ project would support an aspect of this by providing institutional 
development as part of the project design.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project development objective (PDO) is to increase market linkages for farmers and strengthen 
the institutional framework for inclusive public and private investment in selected agribusiness 
clusters. 
 
The Project will contribute to the broader objectives of the FGN’s SCPZ Program consisting of 
‘increasing food production and reducing the demand for imports, adding value through processing, 
reducing cost of doing business for processors, and attracting new investment to create jobs, 
especially in rural areas, and to drive the economy’.  The expansion of the agribusiness- farmer 
linkage models under the SCPZ program through the right mix of public and private investments 
will ultimately, improve agricultural productivity, generate shared growth and substantially reduce 
poverty in rural areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
The mandatory corporate indicator on beneficiaries is as follow: Number of direct beneficiaries 
(directs: benefiting farmers, workers in the SCPZ processing area, and  holders of small and 
medium businesses along value chains in the SCPZ; disaggregated by gender). Indirect beneficiaries 
include family members of and beneficiaries from ancillary activities, estimated as the total 
population in hosting communities.   
PDO level results and indicators 
i. Total amount of  investment financing brought by private sector into the  SCPZ (NGN, $);  
ii. Increase in sales of agricultural products by project supported farmers within the SCPZ area 

(disaggregated by gender). 
Intermediate results and indicators (disaggregated by gender as relevant) 
i. Units measurement of infrastructure  (power generated, roads constructed, water supplied) 
constructed or rehabilitated in the SCPZ area; 
ii. Number of agricultural businesses  established and operating in with project support ; 
iii. Number of farmers groups with off-take agreement in project intervention areas; 
iv. Number of  businesses successfully implemented in the SCPZ with Project support (with 
the aim at strengthening agribusiness-farmers linkages and creating economic opportunities for the 
communities along the value chains, disaggregated by gender).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The concept of the Staple Crop Processing Zones under ATA as proposed by the Federal 
Government of Nigeria  is based on the following three guiding principles: (i) take an integrated 
approach to the value chain by addressing critical upstream and downstream bottlenecks and 
facilitating market linkages; (ii) offer a superior operating environment that reduces the cost of 
doing business, and iii) take a private sector-led approach. The Operating Principles are the 
following; (i) investment-driven strategic partnerships with the private sector; (ii) integrated value 
chain approach; (iii) Self-sustaining, government-support and private sector managed. 
  
The SCPZ program aims to channel infrastructure investments to facilitate efficient value chain 
linkages and reduce the cost of doing business, and improve the competitiveness of Nigeria’s agro-
industrial production. By creating an enabling business environment around selected value chains 
clusters, the FGN and State Governments seek to attract private sector investors to set up processing 
plants in high food production areas, in order to boost import substitution, create wealth 
opportunities for farming communities, reduce post-harvest losses, create sustainable employment 
in agro-production, processing and related activities, and drive rapid rural development.  
 
The proposed Project will support the FGN to implement the first model SCPZ and assist in 
building blocks for its sustainable expansion. The project approach to the Government's SCPZs 
Program consists of test running the concept gradually in limited number of sites, as an integrated 
agribusiness supply chain project, with strong farmers –agribusiness linkages aim to overcome the 
multiple, interlocking constraints in infrastructure provision and productivity growth along 
agricultural supply chains. Project will focus its support on Cassava supply value chain in Kogi 
State (at least 70% of project funding), with an open window for limited support in the form of 
technical assistance for up to three other sites/States with strong business case, and  based one 
following minimum criteria :  alignment with Government priority value chains and located in one 
of the SCPZ sites, existing or ready-to-implement  private investment project(s) with sizable 
financing,  high potential for improving agricultural productivity and  generating benefits for 
farmers,  strong support of state Government and local communities, existence of other Bank 
assisted project or partnership with other Donors funded project, and possible IFC intervention. 
 
Project activities will be clustered around the following areas of intervention :  
 
(a) Support to public infrastructure development for the model SCPZ in Kogi State (around 
75% of project total cost) :  consists of  support to Government to develop off-site infrastructure and 
subsequently identify and attract private sector investors willing to invest in on-site development, 




operations and maintenance of the zone. The Project is also considering  to  support part of the on-
site infrastructure to guarantee minimum utility services (internal roads, water, gas, power) for up to 
3 private investment projects (covering up to 40% of the 250 hectares of the core zones).  
 
(b) Support to farmers-agribusiness linkage and to economic opportunities along the value 
chains (around 15% of total project cost). In coordination with FADAMA III Additional Financing 
( FADAMA III AF) and other relevant operations in the portfolio, the project will provide support 
to link  farmers, SMEs and communities in the catchment areas with the processing units as  
follows: (i) Improving Farmers productivity: the project will work with agro-processors to 
develop off-take agreements with farmers , aimed at structuring their organizations, and facilitating 
their access to inputs and services, such as  financing, extension, mechanization, land clearing, 
equipment and small scale production and marketing infrastructures,  grading, quality and standards, 
as well as skills development. Project will partner with Fadama III Additional Financing which will 
provide on-farm support to assist farmers deliver on the contracts; (ii) Promotion of economic 
opportunities for the community: The Project will establish a matching grants scheme to support 
activities aim at strengthening agribusiness farmers linkages which could  create jobs and increase 
income for the communities, thus contributing to reducing poverty in the project intervention areas. 
This will include support to women and youths and their groups, promoting development of 
mechanization services, transport, application of chemicals, business planning for SMEs, training , 
financial literacy, and ancillary activities of the value chains. 
 
(c) Institutional development in SCPZ (around 10% of total project cost): (i) Structuring of PPP 
for zone development, operation and maintenance: project will provide support for the 
establishment of a Specific Purpose vehicle (SPV) with a Board inclusive of all relevant 
stakeholders (Federal Government, State Government, Local Government, Developer, and Tenants). 
It is envisioned that the PPP transactions will result in specific contracts between the SPV and 
private investors; (ii) Land and safeguards management: for appropriate management of farm land 
allocation to the nucleus farms and for coordinated implementation of the SCPZ Master Plan in the 
catchment areas, the project will assist the State Government in developing responsible land 
allocation and management procedures following World Bank and international guidelines and 
standards, as well as adequate instruments and M&E system for environmental and social 
safeguards; (iii) Technical assistance to FMARD: The proposed Project will provide institutional 
support to FMARD and the SCPZ-Authority being established to regulate the SCPZS, in terms of 
technical assistance (TA), training, and experience sharing of best practices from across the world, 
and for scaling up the program to other sites based on lessons learnt from the pilot SCPZ in Kogi 
State; (iv) Technical assistance selected States for development of agribusiness clusters: 
Specific TA might include market assessment, SCPZ detailed feasibility studies, attracting private 
investor and structuring PPP, promotion of the program within the country and abroad, etc. The 
project will also support FMARD to support selected States, and upon their request, in developing 
their SCPZ projects. 
 
(d)  Project coordination: dedicated project management and coordination structure will set up 
and early as before negotiations, to initiate the implementation of the project and until the SCPZ 
institutional framework is established and fully operational.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD



Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 300.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 165.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 35.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
 Total 135.00


























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17290

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya Project ID: P154784
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Oct-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): The National  Treasury
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 29.70
International Development Association (IDA) 250.00
Total Project Cost 279.70

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1. Kenya's economy is larger and growing faster than previously estimated. Rebasing of its 


Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reveals that Kenya?s economy is the ninth largest in Africa and 
fifth largest in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, and Sudan)  . Kenya?s 
growth compares favorably with other countries. It no longer lags behind its regional peers or 
other lower-middle-income countries. Average growth between 2010 and 2013 was 6.2 percent?
significantly higher than the 5.3 percent average for Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya?s 2013 growth 
rate of 5.7 percent was above the 5.0 percent average growth rate for lower-middle income 
countries.  In December 2014, Kenya?s GDP was estimated at US$55.2 billion (up from US$44.1 
billion before rebasing), with GDP per capita standing at US$1,246 (up from US$994). Kenya is 
now a lower-middle-income country, according to the World Bank classification, with Gross 
National Income (GNI) per capita of US$1,160 in 2013.   The economy was estimated to have 
grown 5.4 percent in 2014 and expected to grow by 6 percent in 2015 on the backdrop of 
significant improvement in external and internal balances, such as falling oil prices; and public 
investment, mainly in infrastructure (energy and the standard gauge railway). The World Bank 
projects that Kenya?s GDP will grow 6.6 percent in 2016, and 7.0 percent in 2017. 
 
2. Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing 
poverty and increasing shared prosperity, in particular in rural areas, remain. Poverty reduction 
has been driven by solid growth across most sectors of the economy. But improvements in 
income are not evenly shared amongst people and inequality appears to be rising among regions.  
According to the World Bank Group Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2014-2018), 
Kenya?s poverty rate has been falling?from 47 percent in 2005/06 to about 39 percent based on 
best estimates in 2012/13. But in the remote, arid, sparsely populated north-eastern parts of the 
country (Turkana, Mandera, and Wajir), poverty rates are above 80 percent.  The scale of 
consumption poverty in Kenya is staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas. Based on the last 
national household budget survey, close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was 
poor in 2005. The vast majority of the poor lived in rural areas and were more likely to depend on 
income and consumption from crops and livestock, as their main source of livelihood. Revised 
poverty estimates indicate that in 2013 nearly 4 in 10 Kenyans continue to live in extreme 
poverty.  
 
3. As the roles of national and county governments are restructured, and new county 
institutions are created, a fundamental challenge is to maintain the delivery of agricultural 
services. Under the new constitution adopted in 2010, the central government is devolving 
responsibility for multiple functions to 47 elected county governments and providing a minimum 
of 15 percent of national revenues to counties to carry out those functions. The main functions for 
agriculture (crop and animal husbandry services, extension, agricultural marketing and other 
related services) were transferred in August 2013 (the national government remains in charge of 
policy and research). With some exceptions, County agricultural services are in an embryonic 
state, with limited and in some cases no technical and/or operational capacity.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. In Kenya, agriculture remains one of the most important sectors of the economy. But 
about 83 percent of Kenya?s land area is in the Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs), which are 
mainly pastoral areas and the remaining 17 percent (where 80 percent of population lives) is 
classified as medium to high agricultural potential zone. In 2013, the sector contributed almost 27 
percent to the national GDP . The crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors contributed 
approximately 78, 20 and 2 percent to agricultural GDP respectively. The sector employs more 
than 75 percent of the workforce (also accounts for more than one-fifth of formal employment), 
generates most of the country?s food requirements, and plays a key role in poverty reduction. It 


also generates nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of merchandise exports and roughly 60 percent of 
foreign exchange earnings.  
 
5. Overall, Kenya?s agricultural sector performance has been highly volatile with growth 
rates dipping into negative territory in nine years between 1980 and 2012 (Figure 1 below). 
Kenya?s agricultural growth rate has averaged between 3.4 percent during 1995-2003 and 
decreased to an average of 2.1 percent in 2003-2011 period. Recent years have witnessed 
increased volatility in agricultural growth rates with debilitating impacts on rural households 
incomes and employment; urban and rural food security, poverty reduction and the country?s 
overall economic growth. The sector?s growth in real gross value-added decelerated in 2013 to 
2.9 percent from a revised growth of 4.2 percent in 2012. The lowest agricultural GDP growth 
rate and value-added was noted in 2008, during a period which Kenya experienced the post-
election violence following the country?s 2007 general elections. 
   
6. Extreme weather events, largely droughts and to a lesser extent floods, have been the 
principal driver behind the volatility in the agricultural sector?s performance in Kenya.  The 
frequency and intensity of severe weather events have increased and this trend will be further 
amplified in the future as temperatures rise due to climate change . The World Bank?s agricultural 
sector risk assessment (2014) highlighted that recurring drought has profound effects on the 
agricultural sector, particularly in maize (main staple food) and livestock (in pastoral systems) 
production. Frequent drought events resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock deaths, spikes in 
food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor and led to rural population 
displacement (temporary migrations).  
 
7. Kenya?s strong reliance on rain fed maize production system in meeting its food needs 
and growing consolidation of production toward maize (and dry beans) has rendered the country 
increasingly vulnerable to supply disruptions and food shortages. Amid declining yields, 
productivity gains have come largely through land expansion into marginal areas that receive 
lower and more variable rainfall. This trend, coupled with Kenya? increasingly erratic rainfall, 
has made the country?s maize production more susceptible to moisture stress and year-on-year 
yield variability, with significant implications for national food security.  This has contributed to a 
growing structural deficit in maize/food production, a gap currently filled by rising imports, 
aggravating the country?s exposure to globally-driven commodity price shocks. Emergency food 
aid and other ex-post responses has helped fuel growing dependency and declining resilience, 
particularly among the poorest and especially those in the ASALs. 
 
8. Livestock production plays an important socio-economic role in many areas across 
Kenya, particularly in the ASALs where it accounts for as much as nine-tenths of employment 
and family income. Extensive livestock systems and pastoralists in Kenya?s northern rangelands 
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of drought. Estimated losses to livestock populations 
from droughts that have occurred within the most recent decade amount to more than US$1.08 
billion. Ancillary losses related to production assets and future income and the costs of ex-post 
response measures are likely several times that figure. The increased incidence of droughts across 
the ASALs in recent years means that affected communities have less time to recover and rebuild 
their assets. This has weakened traditional coping mechanisms and handicapped household 
resilience against future shocks. 
 
9. Climate variability is already having an impact on agriculture and food security in Kenya, 


as a result of increased prevalence of extreme events (especially droughts) and increased 
unpredictability of weather patterns.  For example, severe droughts that occurred in 1991/92, 
1995/96, 1998/2000, 2004/2005, and 2008-11, resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock 
deaths, spikes in food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor, and led to 
rural population displacement (temporary migrations). Two noteworthy extreme climate events 
are the 1998 El Nino and the 2009 drought, which resulted in a combined total cost of US$2.8 
billion (about 7 percent of the 2010 GDP equivalent).   Frequent droughts also make Kenya 
significantly food insecure.  In 2015, it ranked 83rd of 109 countries, on the Global Food Security 
Index (GFSI).   Kenya is also highly vulnerable to climate change risks. The Center for Global 
Development ranks Kenya 13th out of 233 countries globally for ?direct risks? due to ?extreme 
weather? and 71st out of 233 for ?overall vulnerability? to climate change, even when adjusted 
for coping ability.  
 
10. Kenya?s average annual temperatures increased by 1Â°C between 1960 and 2003 , and 
by 1.5Â°C in the country?s drier regions.   Climate change is projected to reduce agricultural 
yields and livestock productivity, worsening the effect of climate shocks on the food system. 
Agriculture in Kenya is largely (98 percent) rain fed and thus extremely vulnerable to increasing 
temperatures and droughts.  Estimates of crop yield and livestock losses will vary greatly, but 
most global climate models project severe and adverse consequences, especially for the most 
food-insecure regions.  In Kenya, studies also show that by 2030, under a business as usual 
scenario, climate change will most likely reduce yields of staple crops (by 12 percent in maize, 23 
percent in rice, and 13 percent in wheat).  Crop land suitability is also expected to change, 
especially in wheat and maize. Depending on the region and types of production systems, water 
scarcity will result in less productive pastures, lower dairy yields, and higher risk of the spread of 
diseases.   
 
11. Climate change will exacerbate the vulnerability of Kenya?s agricultural sector as 
projections show increases in mean annual temperature of 1Â°C to 1.5Â°C by 2030. 
Consequently, changes in rainfall distribution and more frequent extreme events, such as 
prolonged drought and floods are predicted to result in more water shortages, especially in ASAL 
regions. While precipitation is projected to increase between 0.2 and 0.4 percent per year in 
Kenya, the direction and magnitude of change will vary considerably across regions, and 
warming-induced increases in evaporation rates are likely to offset the benefits of precipitation 
increases in some regions. Meeting this challenge will require both investments in building 
resilience to near-term shocks and in adapting to long-term climate change. In this context, 
climate smart agriculture (CSA) offers an appropriate strategic framework for responding to and 
reducing the adverse effects of climate change.  
 
12. Agriculture is the largest source of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in Kenya, 
contributing about 58.6 percent to total GHG emissions. Contributions of other sectors to national 
GHG emissions are: energy (25.3 percent), industry (3.2 percent) and waste management (1.2 
percent).   The agricultural sector is also a key driver of deforestation and land degradation, which 
account for an additional 32 percent of national GHG emissions.  Agricultural emissions are 
likely to increase from 20 MtCO2e in 2010 to 27 MtCO2e in 2030, largely driven by livestock 
methane emissions, which account for 96.2 percent of agricultural emissions. Agriculture, 
therefore, needs to reduce its GHG emissions and become part of the solution to tackle climate 
change. The sector plays an important role in sequestering carbon in soil and trees on farms.  It 
has the biophysical potential to offset and sequester about 20 percent of total annual emissions 



through improved soil management techniques.   Currently, the world?s soils hold three times 
more carbon than the atmosphere. Soils also have significant potential to absorb a larger amount 
of carbon from the atmosphere than they currently do.  Restoring this carbon to the soil will not 
only sequester carbon from the atmosphere, but also boost productivity, increase water retention 
(leading to greater resilience when droughts occur), bring land back into production (thereby 
reducing pressure on biodiversity and forests), and boost incomes (thereby benefiting the rural 
poor). Similarly, Kenya?s livestock GHG emission intensities (i.e. amount of GHGs emitted per 
unit of product) amongst the highest in the world; this is mainly due to low livestock productivity. 
With the continuing rising demand for livestock products this threatens to become a growing 
problem.  Increasing livestock productivity (e.g., through improved forages and providing 
adequate year-round feed resources) would increase incomes, protect people?s asset base, as well 
as reduce GHG e/unit of product.  
 
13. The proposed CSA project can help Kenya meet the rising demand for food; and attain 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of ending poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), and 
combating climate change and its impacts (SDG13). But this would require investing in 
agricultural technologies, innovations and management practices (TIMPs) that would lead into 
CSA?s triple-win: increased agricultural productivity, enhanced resilience to climate change, and 
reduced GHG emissions. 
 
14. Kenya has a wide spectrum of CSA policies, strategies and plans that would help secure 
the triple-win. The Vision 2030 recognizes the significance of agriculture to its goal of achieving 
an average GDP growth rate of 10 percent per year up to the year 2030. This level of growth will 
be crucial for attaining the SDGs 1 and 2 of ending poverty and hunger, respectively.  Kenya?s 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS, 2010?2020) operationalizes the Vision 2030 
by focusing on transforming smallholder agriculture from low-productivity subsistence activities 
to more innovative, agri-business oriented agriculture. Regarding adaptation to climate change, 
ASDS prioritizes investments in weather information systems, research on drought tolerant crop 
varieties, soil and water conservation, water harvesting, and strengthening integrated pest 
management systems. For livestock, it prioritizes improved management of grazing systems, 
biogas, livestock diversification, and improved breeding of animals.  
 
15. Kenya also has a National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2010) that 
provides a framework for integrating climate change into development priorities. The National 
Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP, 2012)  operationalizes the NCCRS, and emphasizes low-
carbon, climate-resilient development pathway for the economy that is critical for achieving SDG 
13 of combating climate change and its impacts.  In the NCCAP, Kenya planned for a low-carbon 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) pathway for six sectors, namely energy, 
transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management.  The first activity undertaken 
under the NAMAs process was the analysis of emissions from the forestry and agriculture sectors. 
Selected practices for mitigation in the NCCAP included restoration of forest on degraded lands; 
REDD+; agroforestry; increase tree cover to 10 percent of total land area; conservation tillage; 
limiting use of fire in cropland; rangeland management; improved cook stoves; biogas; and 
management of agricultural wastes. The proposed Project will support these interventions, which 
are aimed at achieving the CSA triple-win of increasing productivity, building resilience to 
climate change, and reducing GHG emissions. 
 
16. The Kenya Climate Change Bill (2014) is about to be approved by the President, after 


undergoing a public hearing and passing through the Senate. More recently, Kenya has developed 
a Climate-Smart Agriculture Program (CSAP, 2015?2030), that will be jointly implemented by 
MoALF, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and the Ministry of Water 
and Irrigation (MoWI). The Vision for the CSAP is a ?climate resilient and low carbon growth 
sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and contributes to national development goals in 
line with Kenya Vision 2030.?  In addition, Kenya has a National Policy on Climate Finance 
(2015) that seeks to position Kenya to better access climate finance through a variety of 
mechanisms. With support from the World Bank, the International Center for Tropical 
Agricultural (CIAT) recently developed a Kenya CSA Country Profile. The Profile systematically 
assesses the state of CSA nationally, including agricultural practices that deliver higher 
productivity, improved resilience, and lower emissions. It also assesses the institutional, policy, 
and finance entry points for taking CSA options to scale. The Profile will be an important 
mechanism for building awareness of country options, facilitating dialogue, and helping identify 
high-interest CSA options and opportunities for investments to deliver on the triple win. The 
Profiles coupled with prioritization tools  can provide in depth analyses of agricultural practices, 
detailed assessments of their ?climate-smartness?, and costs and benefits of various investments. 
The ongoing development of County-level CSA risk profiles and prioritization of interventions 
would bring this information to the relevant level of devolved governance in Kenya. 
 
17. At the international level, Kenya has been actively engaged in dialogue on mainstreaming 
climate change into agricultural policies, plans, and actions. The country is a signatory to the 
United Nations Conventions on Combating Desertification (UNCCD), Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Conservation of Biological Diversity (UNCBD). Regionally, 
Kenya is implementing the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(CAADP) Framework (2010) and the East African Community Climate Change Policy 
(EACCCP). Both of these frameworks emphasize sustainable land and water management for 
improved agricultural productivity through research, technology adoption and dissemination; and 
agricultural GHG emissions reduction. In July 2015, Kenya declared its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC) to UNFCCC that by 2030, the country seeks to abate its total 
GHG emissions by 30 percent relative to the ?business as usual? scenario of 143 MtCO2-e. It is 
suggested that US$40 billion would be required to finance the mitigation and adaptation efforts 
across six key sectors until 2030.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
18. The Kenya CPS (2014-2018) highlights achieving rapid and uninterrupted growth over a 
decade or more as the foundational challenge for Kenya. The CPS indicate that for Kenya to make 
a huge dent on poverty, support for the growth and realization of people?s potential must focus on 
sectors and locations where the majority of the poor can benefit. In rural areas, the single most 
sustainable impact would be to improve agricultural performance, both in terms of increased 
productivity and resilience to shocks, including climate change risks. The proposed KCSAP aims 
at fulfilling two priority domains of the CPS: (i) Domain 2 ? ?Protection and potential for shared 
prosperity?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 4 (Greater agricultural productivity), and 
Outcome 6 (Improved capacity to manage risks from Climate Change); and (ii) Domain 3 ? ?
Consistency and equity in delivering a devolution dividend?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 
8 (Better provision of agricultural extension services by counties) and Outcome 9 (Adequate 
systems to monitor performance of services delivery by counties). The proposed project is also 
well aligned with current GoK policies and priorities as articulated above.  
 
19. The proposed Project is also in line with the Africa Climate Business Plan: Accelerating 

Climate Resilience and Low-Carbon Development. The Plan aims at boosting the region?s ability 
to adapt to the changing climate while reducing GHG emissions through a number of concrete 
actions in various sectors. For agricultural sector, the Plan is focusing on promoting climate-smart 
agriculture, creating climate-resilient landscapes, and promoting integrated watershed 
management. It underscores that there is a range of agricultural management solutions, which can 
improve crop productivity, enhance resilience to climate shocks and reduce carbon emissions.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
20. The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and build 
resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in 
Kenya. 
 
21. The PDO is informed by the CSA concept; one that ambitiously aims to integrate climate 
change risks responsiveness into agricultural development activities. The CSA outcomes are 
increased productivity, enhanced resilience, and reduced GHG emissions. While the concept is 
new and still evolving, many of the practices that make up CSA already exist worldwide and are 
used by farmers to cope with various production risks – particularly droughts and floods. The 
utility of CSA then comes in as a way of explicitly integrating productivity, adaptation, and 
mitigation planning, often done in isolation; and understanding of expected outcomes of CSA 
investments on different users and locations over time.

Key Results (From PCN)
22. Achievement of the proposed PDO will be measured using the following outcome 
indicators: (i) Increased yields of selected crop and livestock value chains (percent); (ii) Direct 
project beneficiaries adopting TIMPs leading to CSA triple-win (percent);  (iii) Increased land 
covered due to adoption of agro-forestry and sustainable land management (SLM)  practices 
(percent); (iv) Improved access to agro-weather, technical and market information by direct 
beneficiaries(percent);  and (v) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percent).  
A detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation, and enhanced by quantitative modeling of uncertainties along the impact pathway .

D.  Concept Description

A. Concept  
 
23. Climate resilient agriculture that increases productivity requires a major shift in the way 
land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that they are used more 
efficiently, effectively and equitably. Making such a shift requires considerable investments in 
ongoing and new technologies, rural/production infrastructure, financing/credit mechanisms, as 
well as improving farmers? access to climatic information and markets. Actions to build climate 
resilience can, in many cases, also mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions or 
increasing carbon sinks.  
 
24. Kenya has three main agricultural production systems. The smallholder mixed crop-
livestock system found in areas that receive more than 1,000 mm of rainfall annually (high 
potential zones), spreading from central Kenya, through the central Rift Valley to western Kenya 
and the coastal strip. This system takes the form of a maize-based, dairy production system with 
or without cash crops, such as coffee, tea and horticulture. The crop-livestock-tree production 



(Agro-silvo-pastoral) system found in areas that receive between 750 and 1,000 mm of rainfall 
annually (medium potential zones). This system focuses on integration of livestock and crops, soil 
and water conservation, and growing drought tolerant and early maturing crops. In some areas, 
irrigation schemes have also been set up to enhance crop production. The pastoral/extensive 
livestock production system  found in areas receiving 200?750 mm of rainfall annually (low 
potential zones), stretching from north and north-eastern Kenya to the southern parts bordering 
Tanzania. Livestock production, mainly beef animals and small ruminants, are the major 
enterprises under small-scale, but also some large scale ranches 
 
25. KCSAP will primarily focus on supporting interventions aimed at increasing productivity 
and building resilience to climate change, with reduction of GHG emissions as a potential co-
benefit , where possible and appropriate, through: (a) Promoting sustainable, community?driven 
rangeland management and improved access to quality livestock services in ASALs (i.e. in 
pastoral/extensive livestock production systems); (b) Improving water/soil management, 
especially within smallholder maize systems in the marginal rainfall zones (i.e. in smallholder 
mixed crop-livestock, crop-livestock-tree production (Agro-silvo-pastoral systems), and crop-
forest production (agro-forestry)); (c) Supporting the generation and dissemination of improved 
agricultural technologies,  innovations, and management practices, and building a sustainable 
seed system; and (d) Enhancing access to quality climate/agro-weather, advisory services, and 
market information among farmers/herders for improved decision making. 
 
26. KCSAP interventions will be concentrated in selected counties within the crop-livestock-
tree production system and pastoral/extensive livestock production system (mainly in ASALs), 
with high potential for increasing production, but ones that are also prone to droughts. To 
maximize the impact of project interventions, about 15 - 20 counties will be selected using these 
criteria: (a) vulnerability to climate change, extreme weather events, and variable rainfall; (b) 
potential for increasing agricultural and livestock production; (c) current share in national 
agricultural production; (d) climate change projections; and (e) poverty distribution and rates. The 
project design would be informed by the following seven main principles:   
 
(i) Prioritization of promising TIMPs: CSA is very context specific?what is CSA in one 
place is not necessarily CSA in another place?so there is a need to prioritize technologies that are 
most promising for specific places and provide the best value for money. The CCAFS-CIAT CSA 
Prioritization Framework is one such approach that entails a series of activities to filter a long list 
of possible CSA options into a set of best-bet practices and services for an area ;   
 
(ii) Scaling-up promising TIMPs: The Bank and other donor-funded projects in Kenya, such 
as the Kenya Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (KACCAL) and Kenya 
Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land Management Project (KAPSLMP) have used 
participatory and community-driven development (CDD) approaches to pilot a number of 
adaptation and mitigation TIMPs including financing options, such as the Payment for Ecosystem 
Services (PES). While existing TIMPs are a good starting point and their broader application 
needs to be scaled up, new technologies must be developed to achieve the CSA triple-win;  
 
(iii) Value chain (VC) approach:  An approach that focuses on developing priority, promising 
agricultural and livestock commodities in the respective counties, through interventions covering 
production, value addition and links to markets will be taken. This approach will look at supply 
chains, delivery channels, and enabling environment issues, to identify and address bottlenecks 


and leverage points in the chains. Innovation platforms and methodologies, such as LINK  
developed by CIAT provides approaches for developing innovative business models that take a 
value chain approach and link smallholder farmers to markets; and IFC can finance private sector 
investments, such as in animal health services, commercial-scale bio digesters, solar-pumps, 
micro-and-drip irrigation, seed production and distribution, on-farm storage, weather info/
advisory/climate services, rural credit, and processing facilities; 
 
(iv) Gender sensitivity: Looking at various interventions through a gender lens to ensure that 
the project benefits women as much as possible. Alternative livelihood interventions would be 
primarily geared for women participants. Special care would be paid to ensure that intervention 
do not contribute to increased drudgery and burden for women; 
 
(v) Nutrition informed: Favoring those interventions and leveraging activities that have a 
direct and indirect links with improving the nutritional outcome (dietary/nutrients diversification 
using fruit tree and vegetables ) of the project beneficiaries, particularly women and children 
under the age of five;  
 
(vi) Collaboration with other World Bank Group Agencies: The VC development approach 
will require a close collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the 
Multilateral International Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which have greater roles to play in 
agricultural value addition, linking smallholder farmers to markets (i.e. inputs, outputs and 
financial markets); and abating political risk for local and international private investors, 
respectively; and 
 
(vii) Complementarity with other interventions: Ensuring that synergies and alignment with 
other Bank-funded projects, such as the National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project 
(NARIGP), and the Rural Roads Project (RRP), given that could be operating in the same 
counties, will allow for greater complementarity and impact. 
 
27. Although reduced GHG emissions might be co-benefits, these will nonetheless be 
measured. At appraisal stage, the project will undertake GHG accounting to estimate the impact 
of project interventions against a baseline. It is expected that by improving per unit efficiency, the 
project will have a positive impact on GHG net emissions.  
 
Project Components  
 
28. The proposed project will comprise four components briefly presented below: 
 
Component 1: Upscaling Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (US$100 million) 
 
29. This component aims at supporting and incentivizing smallholder farmers to implement 
TIMPs that provide triple-wins: increased productivity, stronger resilience and reductions in GHG 
emissions, as co-benefits. It will comprise two subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting Pastoral/Extensive Livestock Production Systems (US$40 
million) 
 
30. Livestock production is a key contributor to CSA?s three strategic outcomes: (i) 



agricultural productivity and food security - animals contribute directly (through meat and milk 
output) and indirectly (through fertilization, draft power) to food production and also to income 
diversification; (ii) adaptation to climate change - livestock represents a diversification asset, a 
coping mechanism for households (risk management tool, that contributes to household 
resilience), and a contributor to the management of organic matter in soils (through manure), 
which improves water retention and drought resistance; and (iii) mitigation - there is typically a 
great potential for reducing GHG emission intensity among low productivity ruminant systems, 
and carbon sequestration in pastures.  
 
31. This subcomponent will therefore support interventions aimed at: (a) increasing 
productivity of livestock (e.g. feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-take 
rates); (b) promoting integrated soil fertility and SLM practices based on crop-livestock 
integration (e.g., manure management, biogas production, use of crop residues and food products) 
and modern inputs; and (c) supporting market access (e.g., stock routes/migratory corridors, 
watering points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets). 
 
32.  In the arid lands, ensuring that pastoralists can access feed and water resources at critical 
times is essential to resilience. Demography and increased pressure on land and water are greatly 
challenging the traditional arrangements through which sedentary and mobile populations have 
managed resources. The project will thus support the development of new management practices 
and institutional arrangements that can secure pastoralists? access to resources, especially during 
drought and the dry season. In the semi-arid lands, interventions may aim at increasing the 
efficiency of animal production (e.g., feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-
take rates), increasing crop-livestock integration (e.g., manure management, use of crop residues 
and food by-products), and increasing institutional mechanisms and markets for resilience.  
 
33. Interventions inter alia could promote: (i) innovative rangeland co-management (state and 
local community) approaches that leverage customary forms of collective action and economic 
instruments to reward sound pasture management; (ii) development of fodder production, storage 
and marketing; (iii) small-scale fattening operations managed by pastoral communities, to which 
young animals from mobile herds could be sent for fattening before commercialization; and (iv) 
sustainable resource use practices, including  contour ridges and barriers, cisterns for storing 
rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources 
during drought. ILRI has relevant research outputs to contribute to these interventions.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Smallholder Mixed Crop-Livestock-Tree Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
34. The smallholder mixed crop-livestock-tree systems account for more than 70 percent of 
total maize output in Kenya. Characterized by low productivity, these systems are increasingly 
vulnerable to extreme and variable weather. Thus, achieving national food security will require 
concerted efforts and targeted investments to improve yields and strengthen their resilience. 
 
35. This subcomponent will therefore focus on: (a) improving water and soil management; 
(b) promo ting livelihoods and crop diversification, including drought-tolerant crops (e.g., 
legumes - beans, cowpeas, pigeon pea etc.,), intensive dairy production and agro-forestry systems; 
(c) investing in small-scale irrigation development; and climate risk mitigation initiatives, 



including exploring the smallholder adapted crop insurance options.  
 
36. KCSAP support under this component will aim at promoting sustainable intensification 
and increasing climate resilience of Kenya?s small-scale, rain fed production systems. This will 
be achieved through myriad, yet mutually-supportive interventions designed to improve crop 
yields and reduce losses (pre-and post-harvest) in the near-term, and to mitigate climate change 
impacts via adaptation over the long-term. Project interventions will focus on, inter alia, curbing 
rainfall run-off, improving soil nutrition and moisture holding capacity, and strengthening 
fertilizer- and water-use efficiency. This will be achieved via incentivizing broad farmer adoption 
of improved water, soil and land resource TIMPs. To promote income diversification, the project 
will promote take-up of animal husbandry, micro-gardening, agro-forestry and other income 
generating activities less dependent on rainfall. 
 
37. KCSAP investments will be guided by County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs)  
and community priorities. Integrating project activities within the CIDPs will ensure alignment, 
sustainability and optimization of outcomes. In the case of high agricultural (medium-to high 
rainfall) potential areas in the central and western highlands, interventions will broadly focus on 
improving maize yields and farm-gate prices via quality, drying and storage upgrades. In more 
marginal, more variable rainfall zones, greater emphasis will be placed on stimulating farmers? 
uptake of more robust, drought-tolerant crops (e.g., cowpeas, cassava, millet and sorghum). 
Project interventions will also aim to enhance risk-sharing and strengthen smallholder access to 
markets across target food commodity chains via catalyzing upgrades (i.e. product, process) and 
downstream linkages (horizontal and vertical).   
 
38. Matching grants will be provided to common interest groups (CIGs) organized along the 
VCs to finance community micro-projects. The grants will enable smallholder farmers adopt 
TIMPs developed under Component 2. Making direct payments to farmers conditional on 
adoption of climate adaptation and mitigation practices will lead to better CSA triple-win 
outcomes.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Seed Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
39. Building strong research capacity and seed systems at the national level is critical for 
achieving the CSA triple-win: increasing productivity, building resilience and reducing GHG 
emissions. Strong and sustained support to agricultural research and development (R&D) can 
have large payoffs as evidenced by R&D?s significant contribution to the impressive agricultural 
growth achieved in Brazil, China and India. More broadly, returns to investment in agricultural 
research have been high and the benefits will only rise as the losses from climate-induced crop 
and livestock systems failure increase. Investments in seed and animal breeds research and their 
market-driven distribution systems will better equip farmers and livestock keepers with timely 
access to quality, affordable seeds (also for forage crops - grasses, legumes, herbage, fodder trees 
and regeneration practices) and planting materials; and animal breeds that respond to their 
specific needs (e.g., higher-yielding, fast maturing, drought resistant, and heat tolerant breeds) 
and that would help them better manage growing climate change risks. This component will have 
two subcomponents ? supporting CSA research and innovations, and building competitive and 
sustainable seed system. 
 


Subcomponent 2.1: Supporting Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Innovations (US$40 
million) 
 
40. A renewed urgency, and international and national commitment, is needed to sustain CSA 
research to deliver needed science-based solutions. Kenya should act now given that developing 
improved TIMPs can take many years. Developing improved seeds, planting materials and 
livestock breeds that are more adapted to changing climates to meet rising food demand, while at 
the same time reducing GHG emissions will need significantly more investment in agricultural 
research and development.  It also requires commitment to strengthen the Kenya Agricultural and 
Livestock Research Organization (KALRO); build partnerships with international research 
institutes (e.g., CGIAR institutes, such as the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), International Center for Tropical Agriculture 
(CIAT), ICRISAT, which operate in Kenya) and local universities (e.g., University of Nairobi, 
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT), Moi and Egerton); and 
engage the private sector (contracted extension services delivery model) to facilitate the uptake of 
TIMPs at local levels.  But agricultural research and innovation processes require long-term 
political commitment, financial stability, human resources, and institutional strength. Thus this 
subcomponent would finance activities aimed at strengthening national agricultural research 
system (NARS) and competitive collaborative research grants focusing on CSA research and 
innovations. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Building a Competitive and Sustainable Seed Systems (US$20 million) 
 
41. Kenya has one of the more developed cereal (maize and wheat) seed systems in Africa 
with over 70 registered seed merchants. But legume seed systems are poorly developed. Highly 
regulated, the formal cereal seed system produces over 30,000 tons of seed per annum. But only 
supplies about one-quarter of the country?s total seed needs. The remaining supply mostly comes 
from recycled seeds. While robust seed research by KALRO and CIMMYT, among others, have 
resulted in the release of dozens of improved maize and other varietals (e.g., drought-tolerant, 
high-yielding, disease-resistant, and short-season) that can help farmers better respond to climate 
and market signals and manage uncertainty, adoption among smallholders remains low. Even in 
ASAL regions that receive less than 500 mm of rainfall per annum, farmers continue to grow 
maize rather than drought-tolerant crops, such as sorghum and millet.  Such areas could benefit 
more from short duration legumes, such as beans, cowpea and pigeon pea. As a result, the 
productivity of many staple crops (e.g., wheat and maize) remains below regional averages.  
 
42. The project will promote pluralistic seed systems model depending on level of crop 
development. Working with KEPHIS , Kenya Seed Company (KSC), KALRO, CIMMYT , 
ICRAF  and other stakeholders, KCSAP will finance activities geared towards strengthening seed 
research (e.g., seed production and processing equipment, TA and training, grants for community-
level seed multiplication, etc.,), as well as promoting commercially viable multiplication and 
distribution systems to ensure that farmers and pastoralists have access to the right seeds at the 
right time. Specifically, KCSAP will finance interventions related t o: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of KALRO?s research centers/institutes in the production of foundation seed; (ii) 
supporting private sector companies involved in the commercial seed production and community-
based seed multiplication systems; (iii) promoting the use of selected drought-resistant seeds; (iv) 
strengthening seed associations and inter-professional organizations; (v) supporting innovative 
mechanisms of seed marketing; and (vi) strengthening seed policy, production and distribution 

strategies and institution al support to the national seed control and certification agency.  
 
Component 3: Supporting Agro-weather, Market, Climate and Advisory Services (US$30 million)
 
43. Improving productivity and resilience of smallholder farmers requires access to timely, 
cost-effective, and personally relevant information on improved agricultural practices, markets, 
prices, inputs, weather?and news of impending disasters. Integrating information on weather and 
markets into planning for CSA interventions and sustainable agriculture development entails: (a) 
use of modern tools for climate data sourcing and analysis, including automatic meteorological 
measurements and satellite data products on a near real-time basis; (b) analysis of weather risks 
and assessment of impacts using advanced crop?weather interactions modeling; (c) formulation of 
highly practical advice that farmers can apply directly to their operations; and (d) dissemination 
of weather and market advisories to farmers using modern information and communication 
technologies (ICT). 
 
44. The quality of these climate and market information services are critically low or non-
existent in many parts of Kenya. Under this component, KCSAP will address this obstacle by 
developing modern agro-weather forecasting and dissemination tools, as well as marketing 
information system to help farmers address the challenges of climate variability and change and 
enhance their resilience. 
 
45. Building on infrastructure already provided to KALRO under the Kenya Agricultural 
Productivity and Agribusiness Project (KAPAP), as well as experiences of BNPP-funded Agro-
weather Tools for Climate Smart Agriculture pilots in Embu, Kenya,  this component will finance 
interventions related to the following: (i) improving agro-meteorological forecasting and 
monitoring; (ii) developing climate-smart, location-specific agro-weather and market information 
system and advisories using ?big data?; and (iii) building institutional and technical capacity for 
agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and market advisory dissemination.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Agro-meteorological Forecasting and Monitoring (US$15 million) 
 
46. One of the main obstacles to effective meteorological forecasting is Kenya?s limited 
agro-meteorological observation network. To improve data collection and geographic coverage, 
existing agro-meteorological and hydro logical stations will be upgraded, whilst modern, near real 
time automated weather stations (AWS) will be installed in areas lacking the facilities. KCSAP 
will work with other initiatives that are already in-place to expand the country?s agro-
meteorological and hydrological network to meet international standards. This subcomponent will 
therefore finance the following investments: (a) installation of new AWS, hydrometric stations 
and rain gauges to complement existing weather infrastructure; (b) upgrade and modernization of 
the existing agro-meteorological network and priority hydrological stations country-wide; (c) 
establishment of agro-meteorological centers in targeted counties to improve drought and flood 
forecasts; and (d) development of the Kenya Meteorological Services (KMS) early warning 
system (EWS), and building institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and mitigation.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Developing Integrated Weather and Market Information System (US$5 
million) 
 
47. Systems that integrate agro-weather and market information are either non-existent or 
rudimentary in Kenya. KCSAP will address this problem under this subcomponent by financing 
activities related to: (a) developing ?big data? for CSA; (b) developing Market Information 
Systems (MIS) and services; and (c) delivering integrated weather and market advisory services 
using ICT.  Big data  crop-weather analytics help farmers in making decisions on what, when, and 
where to plant. Using advanced statistical and data mining/machine learning algorithms,  time 
series data of crop yields will be combined with weather observations at daily resolution  from 
agro-meteorological stations and satellite data,  soil and management factors to reveal climate and 
weather patterns, and detect the limiting factors for crop production. This would subsequently be 
used to generate timely and site-specific recommendations on crop cultivars, soil preparation, 
sowing rate and time, fertilization, irrigation, pest and diseases control, harvest time, and storage 
options. Access to reliable market information from the MIS using ICT empowers farmers to 
obtain and negotiate fair market prices for their crops subsequently improving their income and 
livelihoods. It also reduces their overall risk and results in greater price stability in supply and 
demand, in addition to improving overall market transparency. Using multiple ICT channel to 
reach target users will allow bi-directional information exchange - allowing the collection of data 
from farmers, as well as information delivery to farmers. Rapid and geographically targeted agro-
weather information will be disseminated using SMS and smart phone applications, and through 
more conventional radio, television, bulletins and print messages. Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) systems that render weather conditions into human speech will also be incorporated. 
 
Subcomponent 3.3: Building Institutional and Technical Capacity (US$10 million) 
 
48. The capacity for agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and advisory dissemination 
needs to be strengthened at the MoALF, KMS, KALRO, and at county governments. KCSAP will 
finance activities related to human and institutional capacity building at these agencies. This will 
include: (a) defining proper configuration of the main elements of the system; including 
automated monitoring, new forecast techniques, big data analytics and modernization of 
management; (b) analyzing and utilizing big data for various purposes; and (c) providing the 
hardware and software needed for interaction of data from a variety of sources in a way that is 
efficient and scalable. Capacity of scientists at national and county levels will be strengthened in 
the area of crop modeling, using both deterministic and statistical models of different complexity 
levels. KCSAP will partner with national and international research and academic institutions to 
provide state-of-art training in agro-meteorology, climate science, including downscaling and 
weather predictions, artificial neural network and machine learning applications, seasonal 
forecasting, ICT, GIS and remote sensing. KALRO?s capacity to implement a national soil 
information service based on soil spectroscopy and remote sensing technology to help target 
interventions and monitor impacts on soil health will be further enhanced . 
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$20 million) 
 
49. The Project will be implemented by MoALF with close collaboration with MENR and 
MoWI at the national level and county governments at subnational level. Activities financed 
under this component will comprise coordination, fiduciary aspects, M&E, safeguards monitoring 
and compliance, and day-to-day implementation of the project; and consists of three 
subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Project Coordination (US$15 million) 
 


50. The purpose of this subcomponent is to ensure that the project is implemented in 
accordance with the Financing Agreement. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and a small team 
of experts located at the national and participating county levels will be established. Costs related 
to national and county level project coordination (i.e., salaries of the contract staff, operations and 
maintenance (O&M), office space rental, fuel and spare parts of vehicles, office equipment, 
furniture and tools, among others) will be financed. Safeguards monitoring and compliance will 
be carried out under this subcomponent.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
51. An M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate information, to 
verify the output, effects and eventually the impacts of project activities over time. Baseline 
information for M&E will be collected as part of the preparation process. In addition to the 
routine M&E functions (e.g., data collection, analysis and reporting), it will also finance the 
baseline, mid-point and end of project impact evaluation of the project; and the development and 
operation of the ICT-based Climate Smart Agriculture Information System. Where possible, 
M&E approaches will be harmonized with continental and global efforts (e.g., Global Alliance for 
CSA and the Alliance for CSA in Africa) to build robust and harmonized evidence of the impacts 
of TIMPs supported by the project to achieve CSA triple-win.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 
 
52. This subcomponent will finance natural disasters risk management (DRM) activities in 
the agriculture sector. The contingency emergence response financing will be triggered through 
formal declaration of a national emergency and upon a formal request from the GoK.  In such 
cases, funds from unallocated category and other project components could be reallocated to 
finance emergency response expenditures and meet crises and emergency needs.  
 
53. The subcomponent will finance the training and capacity building for disaster risk 
management (DRM); community-managed disaster risk reduction (CMDRR) interventions; 
development of an EWS; and response, mitigation, recovery and reconstruction following 
climate-induced natural disasters. Implementation of this subcomponent will follow the 
provisions of the DRM Manual. 
 
54. Annex 3 outlines in more detail some key interventions envisioned under each project 
component.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
29. The project will be implemented at selected locations on a national scale. The activities will 
be implemented in the rural areas and will include projects in rural infrastructure, such as watering 
points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets of fodder production, storage and 
marketing sustainable resource use practices, including  contour erosion and barriers, cisterns for 
storing rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources during 
drought, agro-forestry projects and hydromet systems/stations.


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
30. The MoALF will the implementing agency of KCSAP. MoALF will work closely with 
MoENR and MoWI. These ministries have adequate capacity and experience of implementing Bank-
funded projects, including knowledge for implementing World Bank safeguards in the devolved 
context. However, the implementation of previous projects identified a number of significant 
capacity issues in monitoring and enforcement of environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
KCSAP will allocate resources to build the counties’ capacity in for safeguards implementation, 
based on institutional capacity assessment that would be carried out at the project preparation stage.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The initial scoping of the proposed project 
interventions suggests that due to the nature of 
proposed activities, the potential environmental and 
social impacts will be moderate, largely reversible 
and site-specific. The identification mission noted 
that the potential project investments in rural 
infrastructure and agriculture VCs will trigger the 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). 
 
Given that specific micro-project designs and 
locations would not be known at the time of project 
preparation, the project will take framework 
approach to managing safeguards. There are three 
framework reports that will need to be developed by 
GoK: (a) Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF); (b) Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and (c) Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Group Framework (VMGF). These 
frameworks will need to cover the types of activities 
envisioned; identify potential impacts of these 
activities; propose screening mechanisms and 
processes of assessing their impacts; and designing 
mitigation measures. The scope of these frameworks, 
the exact implementation arrangements and costs 
will be identified during project preparation. The 
preparation of ESMF, RPF and the VMGF will 
include wide public consultations and will be 
disclosed prior to project appraisal. During project 
implementation, based on the screening, an 
Environmental Assessment (EA)/ Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Action 


Plans (RAPs) and Vulnerable and Marginalized 
Group Plans (VMGPs) will be developed for 
individual subprojects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project is envisioned use of agrochemicals to 
implement activities such as fodder production and 
agro-forestry projects. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) will be prepared to promote the adoption of 
an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach, 
which stresses non-chemical pest management 
methods as much as possible, with use of 
agrochemicals only as a “last resort” when  
other methods are not sufficiently effective. The 
PMP would describe specific actions needed to be 
implemented, timeframes, estimated costs, 
monitoring indicators, institutional and beneficiary 
roles and responsibilities etc.).

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions. Should it be confirmed during 
the project preparation that the implementation will 
cover the areas where vulnerable and marginalized 
groups are present, the project will prepare the 
VMGF, which will then guide the preparation of 
VMGPs, where required.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project activities may require land acquisition 
and may result in the loss of community resources. 
To guide the process of compensation, the project 
will prepare the RPF and publicly disclose it in 
Kenya and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to 
project appraisal.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

TBD


E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
26-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The ESMF, RPF and VMGF will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed before project 
appraisal in November 14, 2016.

























































World Bank Document


 

INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 

ADDITIONAL FINANCING 

Report No.: PIDISDSA20872 

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-April-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 1. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Ethiopia Project ID: P161373 

   Parent Project ID: P151432 

 Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P161373) 

 Parent Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P151432) 

 Task Team Leader(s): Qaiser M. Khan, Louise Victoria Monchuk, Yoseph Abdissa Deressa 

 Estimated Board Date: 28-Sep-2017 

 Managing Unit: GSP01 

 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 

(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)? 

No 

 Project Financing Data (in USD Million) 

 Total Project Cost: 21023.70 Total Bank Financing: 700.00 

 Financing Gap: 835.00  

     Financing Source Amount 

     Borrower 19,541.30 

     Cofinancing 560.00 

     IDA recommitted as a Credit 1,300.00 

     Total 21,401.30 

 Environmental Category: C - Not Required 

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? 

No 

 2. Project Development Objective(s) 

 

A. Original Project Development Objectives (PDO) - The PDO of the Enhancing Shared Prosperity 

through Equitable Services (ESPES) program is to improve equitable access to basic services and 

strengthen accountability systems at the decentralized level. The program is anchored around four sets 

of key results: (a) ensuring equitable access to basic services; (b) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (c) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (d) ensuring quality data access and results. 

 B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF) 

 The PDO of the ESPES AF remains the same as the parent program. 

 3. Project Description 

 

ESPES supports Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program (woreda block grant system) 

which provides funding to close to one thousand woredas all over the country which are responsible for 

delivering basic services in health, education, agriculture, water and rural roads. The block grant 

program is a decentralized system of governance that supports flows of information, resources and 

accountability between different levels of government and between service providers and citizens. This 

system has been found to be effective in improving equitable access to services as indicated in the 

Systematic Country Diagnostic, the Poverty Assessment and the technical assessment undertaken as 

part of the preparation of the ESPES. Government ownership and commitment to the program also 

continues to be very strong. 

 

This proposed additional financing is sought to help finance the expenditures associated with the 

Government of Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program which provides block grants to 

region and woreda levels for delivering Basic Social Services such as health care, education, agriculture 

services, rural roads, and water and sanitation. The additional financing would (a) scale up existing 

Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) DLR targets; and (b) introduce new DLIs especially in the areas 

of citizen engagement and fiduciary management. Alongside the AF, the operation is also being 

restructured into a hybrid PforR to include an investment component to provide capacity building 

support for citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards 

management systems (ESMS), improved data production and dissemination, and program management. 

Performance of the operation has been satisfactory over the last 12 months. The closing date will also 

need to be extended from May 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022 to cover the implementation of the new 

DLIs and the capacity building component. 

 

The objective of the system strengthening and capacity building Investment Project Financing (IPF) 

Component is to improve the Government’s federal, regional and woreda level administrative systems 

for implementing and monitoring the block grant program, thereby improving the efficiency and 

effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas. For instance, the safeguards 

capacity building element is relevant to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for 

implementing resettlement, compensation and grievance redress for all infrastructure projects 

implemented in their respective woredas. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level 

capacity citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social management, and data 

production and dissemination. 

 

The proposed AF includes an allocation of US$100 million for the IPF component which aims at 

complementing the PforR by providing technical assistance and capacity building for service delivery 

system performance. The IPF component is made up of 3 sub-components which are described below. 

 

 Sub-component 1: Strengthening Systems and Sectors (US$30 million): This component 
provides support to the service delivery systems at the federal, regional and Woreda levels. 

Support to sectors is closely tied to the availability of quality data to monitor sectoral outputs 

and outcomes (including monitoring ESPES DLIs). The component will finance key activities 



such as (a) strengthening sectoral MIS for Education, Health, Agriculture and WASH, (b) 

providing finance and TA to the SARA health survey
1
, and (c) costs related to undertaking 

behavioral change campaigns for improving human development outcomes in the bottom 20 

percent of Woredas. The component will also finance activities that strengthen the procurement, 

financial management, governance, and social and environmental systems at decentralized 

levels.  

 Sub-component 2: Citizens Engagement (US$30 million): This component will finance three 
key areas of CE, namely (a) Financial Transparency and Accountability (US$5 million), (b) 

Grievance Redress Mechanisms (US$5 million), and (c) Social Accountability (US$20 

million). In FTA, the activities include support to budget literacy, media campaigns, support for 

audit and procurement information disclosure, related training assessing the effectiveness of 

FTA, strengthening FTA/GRM/SA linkages; capacity building support to the EIO and support 

to grievance management GRM offices. With regard to Social Accountability, to inform the 

implementation of the social accountability activities, the government is undertaking a study to 

determine the best institutional arrangement. It would involve that the government hires a 

national consultancy firm to manage the individual social accountability implementers. The 

choice will depend on technical expertise and capacity as well as independence to undertake 

social accountability activities. Overall, the technical design of the on-the-ground 

implementation of social accountability in the ESPES program will be informed by the ongoing 

design on the ESAP II successor program provided that those design details are agreed within 

the timeline of the preparation schedule of the ESPES AF. 

 Sub-component 3: Capacity building and M&E (US$40 million): The objective of the 
support is to strengthen the capacity of the Central Statistics Agency to produce and disseminate 

timely and reliable statistics to monitor progress under the second Growth and Transformation 

Plan. Some support will also be provided to VERA to improve vital statistics and especially the 

interface with CSA. The capacity building support for CSA and VERA will focus on 1) data 

production and dissemination, and 2) organizational and soft statistical infrastructure and 

capacity building; and 3) improving the quality of vital statistics. This component will also 

support M&E, management and operational costs including (a) incremental staffing costs, (b) 

operational costs including audits and program monitoring and evaluation, and (c) costs 

incurred by the DLI verification agencies.  

 

 
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 

(if known) 

 

 

The physical setting is not relevant for safeguard analysis as the IPF component does not involve any 

capital investment or civil works and will strengthen the system by (a) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (b) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (c) ensuring quality data access and results. There will be no land acquisition or restriction 

of access in this IPF component. 

The ESPES AF will be implemented throughout the country. The objective of the system strengthening 

and capacity building IPF component is to improve the government’s federal, regional and woreda level 

administrative systems for implementing and monitoring the block grant program and for improving the 

efficiency and effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas in environmentally 

and socially sustainable manner. For instance, the safeguards local capacity building element is relevant 

to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for implementing community consultation, land 

                                            
1
 The SARA survey is not being financed by the Health PforR SDG project. 



acquisition and resettlement, including compensation enforcement and oversight of grievance redress 

mechanism, etc. for infrastructure development such as rural roads project regardless of funding 

sources. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level capacity in safeguards, especially 

in relation to social impacts and aspects, which are typically weaker than biophysical aspects, at woreda 

level.  

. 


 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 No This is a capacity building project 

focusing on system strengthening, 

including safeguards. It will not have any 

negative impacts on people and 

environment 

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

 Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

 Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

 
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 

7.50 

No  

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

. 

 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 
There will not be any large scale and significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with this project. 

It will actually enhance local capacity in safeguards, which will be beneficial not only to basic sectors 

but also to all sectors implementing projects in woredas.  

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 
The long term impacts of the project activities are positive in terms of environmental and social 

management. The safeguards capacity building at local level will contribute towards improved 



environmental and social management in project design, implementation and monitoring in both the 

public and private sectors. 

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 Not applicable 

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental and social assessment and 

management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the Establishment of Environmental 

Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 

299/2002); and the Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  

 

As part of the Management Action Plan, in response to the PBS 3 Inspection Panel investigation, (a) the 

Government has developed Environmental and Social Management Operational Manual, and (b) a 

screening tool to manage the interface between Bank-financed projects and Commune Centers, was 

developed, and it is being rolled out. An Incremental ESSA was carried out as part of the preparation of 

the ESPES AF. It identified changes or improvement to the systems in place for environmental and 

social management at all levels, including taking stock of implementation capacity and performance at 

woreda level and the identification of any areas for improvement, based on the review of the original 

ESSA and any developments since then. This has informed the preparation of the safeguards IPF 

component with regard to local capacity building. 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 
The key stakeholders are the MoFEC, MoEFCC, basic sector ministries, BoFEDs and regional 

environmental agencies and basic sector bureaus. Consultation on the Incremental ESSA will be held, 

and it will be disclosed on the infoshop and in-country before appraisal.  

 





















AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 

 

ANGOLA 
 

 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS  

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
 

 

PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

Client information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

BORROWER : Government of Angola 

EXECUTING AGENCY :  Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI)  

 

Source 

Amount (million)  

Instrument UA USD 

African Development Bank  73.77 101.07 Loan 

Government 14.54 19.91 Counterpart contribution 

Beneficiaries 1.58 2.17 In-kind contribution 

Total Project Cost 89.89 123.15  

 

 

AfDB’s key financing information 

 

 
Loan Currency  USD 

Loan Type   Fully Flexible Loan  

Tenor  25 years 

Grace period  8 years 

Average Loan Maturity  16.75 years 

Repayments  (34 consecutive semi-annual payments after grace period) 

Interest Rate  Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium if applicable 

Base Rate  Floating Base Rate (6-month USD LIBOR reset each 1st 

February and 1st August). A free option to fix the Base Rate 

is available. 

Funding Cost Margin  The Bank funding cost margin  as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 1st 

February and 1st August 

Lending Margin  80 basis points (0.8%) per annum 

Maturity Premium  20 basis points (0.2%) per annum 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount payable at latest at signature of the 

loan agreement 

Commitment fees  0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees start 

accruing 60 days after signature of the loan agreement and 

are payable on Payment dates 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate* 

 In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base Rate, 

the borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating or refix it 

on part or full disbursed amount. Transaction fees are 

payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate* 

 The borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the Base 

Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to convert loan 

currency 

 The borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to another 

approved lending currency of the Bank. Transaction fees are 

payable. 
* Conversion options and transaction fees are subject to the Bank Conversion Guidelines available: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

 

 

 

 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


iv 

 

 

Main milestones 

 

Submission of Cabinda Province Study Report November 2016 

Government Request for Bank Support December 2016 

Concept Note Approval May 2017 

Appraisal Mission June 2017 

Board Approval December, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion December 2021 

Last Disbursement March, 2022 

 



v 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP) will provide improved production, produce conservation, storage, processing and 

marketing infrastructure necessary for selected commodity value chains: food crops (cassava, 

banana, sweet potato, peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland 

fisheries; small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). The Project will rehabilitate 

water conveyance structures necessary for irrigation; train value chain actors in technical and 

managerial skills; introduce mechanization for land preparation; support adaptive research; and 

improve agricultural extension services. The Project will also rehabilitate or construct rural 

infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-processing centers, 

market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water facilities in the 

communities and improve rural energy access. The Project will enhance access to improved 

productive resources (improved seed varieties, fish fingerlings, fertilizers, crop protection 

chemicals) through the establishment of a credit facility to be externally administered by World 

Vision International (WVI). The project will be implemented over a four-year period at a total cost 

of USD123.15 million. 

 

Needs Assessment: Angola has made remarkable progress in socio-economic and infrastructure 

development since the end of the 27-year-long civil war in 2002, but more still needs to be done to 

lift majority of its population out of poverty. The sharp and long-lasting decline in oil prices has 

derailed Angola’s economic performance. GDP growth slowed to 0.1% in 2016 down from 4.8% in 

2014. This led to a significant reduction of the nominal GDP to about USD96.2 billion in 2016 from 

USD126.8 billion in 2014. The Government of Angola (GoA) seems increasingly aware of these 

realities and has taken steps to mitigate the impact of the oil price shock on the economy. The 

Government therefore requested assistance from the Bank to strengthen investments in agricultural 

transformation through commodity value chains in order to diversify exports, reduce imports 

through value chains development, increase national revenue sources and reduce dependence on oil.  
 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed CPAVCD Project fits in with the 

two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola in the Country Strategy Paper (CSP, 

2017-2021) as follows: (i) inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to 

sustainable infrastructure development, in particular, in energy and transport. The Bank Group is 
ideally suited to support Angola through this Project because: (i) the Bank Group has gained useful 

experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in its RMCs and in particular, Angola through 

implementation of similar projects; and (ii) the project is in concordance with the Bank’s High-5 

Priorities with its numerous flagship initiatives that will be brought to bear in this project. The Bank’s 
partnership with other technical and development agencies such as the Consultative Group of 

International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system, International Fund for Agricultural Development 

(IFAD), World Bank (WB) and others is an asset that the Bank can draw upon. 
 

Knowledge Management: The Project shall develop a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System based 

on Geographic Information System and computer assisted technology for data collection, compilation 

and presentation. The M&E Specialist will coordinate all results and measurement activities, ensure the 

quality control and provide the necessary capacity building. In using the performance indicators and 

targets specified in the results-based framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing monitoring 

and planning indicators, they will be sex and age disaggregated. They will be captured using analysis of 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and field 

exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution by 

showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). 



 

vi 

 

 

ANGOLA 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CPAVCDP)  

LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and project name: ANGOLA : Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

Purpose of the project:  Contribute to food and nutritional security, employment generation, and shared wealth creation along the commodity value chains 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2021) 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 1. Jobs and wealth are generated 

along the value chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is 

enhanced  

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.  Increased domestic food  supply for key commodities 

(cassava, sweet potato, beans, coffee, cocoa, oil palm meat 

and fish) 

3. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting 

1. na  

2. 670,000 mt  

 

 

3. 37% 

1. 27,000 

2. 1.3 million mt. 

 

 

3. 80% reduction 

Min of Finance reports 

National Bureau of 

Statistics (NBS) reports 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 

 

2. Increased Crop, fisheries  and 

livestock Production 

1. Number and percentage of women and men with increased 

incomes, (young men and women) 

2.1 Crops production (tons)  

2.2 Livestock production (tons) 

2.3  Fisheries production (tons) 

 

1. USD500 

2.1 cassava 

(491,359 mt  p.a); 

banana (121,000 

mt p.a); potato 

(163,614 mt  p.a); 

beans (6,121 mt  

p.a); coffee (405 

mt  p.a); cocoa 

(na); oil palm 

(na);  

2.2 Meat (na) 

2.3 Fish (na) 

1. USD3,500/hh pa 

2.1 Cassava (900,000 mt p.a); 

banana (210,000 mt p.a);  potato 

(300,000 mt ton p.a); beans (12,000 

mt  p.a); coffee (2,200 mt p.a); 

cocoa (1,900 mt  p.a); palm oil 

(8,400 mt  p.a);  

 

 

 

 

2.2 Meat (25,000 ton)  

2.3 Fish (15,000 ton) 

Min of Finance reports 

NBS reports 

Household surveys 

Risk 1: Counterpart funding not 

readily made in time 

 

Mitigation 1: Government 

contribution will be limited to local 

costs related to maintenance of 

office buildings and remuneration 

of counterpart staff  

 

OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Commodity Value Chain 

Development 

1.1 Capacity of producers on 

improved technical and 

managerial skills built 

1.2  Improved access to  financial 

services (credit) 

 

1.3  Farm extension services provided 

 

 

1.4  Increased production of crops 

 

 

1.5  Increased production of 

livestock/fish 

1.6  Increased employment in crop 

value chains 

 

 

1.1  No. farmer associations trained in technical and 

managerial skills, of which men and women, young men and 

women 

1.2.1  % Farmer Organizations and SMEs obtaining loans  

1.2.2 Number of women, men, young men and women getting 

access to credit 

1.3.1 No.  private sector agencies providing extension services  

1.3.2 % farmers provided with farm extension services, of 

which are women and youth 

1.4.1   Area under crop production 

1.4.2  Crop Yields 

1.4.3  No. of Seedlings multiplied/selected 

1.5.1   Quantity of meat/fish production 

1.5.2 Number of  fish fingerlings 

 

1.6  Number of farmers and processors 

 

 

 

1.1  4 

 

 

1.2.1  5 

1.2.2 23 

 

1.3.1  2 

1.3.2  10 

 

1.4.1 18,800 

1.4.2 2t//ha 

1.4.3  0 

1.5.1  n.a 

1.5.2 NA 

 

1.6   51,000 

 

 

 

1.1  60 

 

 

1.2.1 120 

1.2.2 8,000 

 

1.3.1  25 

1.3.2   80 

 

1.4.1 39,177 

1.4.2  4 mt/ ha 

1.4.3 1.2 million 

1.5.1 25,000mt/15,000 mt 

1.5.2   15 million 

 

1.6  95,000 

 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports 

 



vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

2.  Infrastructure Development 
2.1  Roads linking farms to markets 

rehabilitated 

2.2  Extension of electricity 

 

2.3  Processing facilities functional, 

well-equipped demonstration and 

technology centers  

2.4  Storage facilities rehabilitated 

2.6  Rehabilitated irrigation canals 

2.7  Construction of landing sites 

2.8  Construction of abattoir 

2.9  Construction of quarantine parks 

2.10 Community development 

facilities improved  

 

2.1  Kilometers of all-weather feeder roads rehabilitated 

 

2.2.1 Km of power extension 

2.2.2 % of households with an electricity connection 

2.3  No. of demonstration & technology centers  

 

 

2.4  No. of warehouses constructed  

2.6  Area of land under irrigation (Ha)  

2.7  No. of landing sites constructed 

2.8  No. of abattoir constructed 

2.9  No. of parks constructed 

2.10.1 No. of boreholes constructed 

2.10.2  No. of clinics rehabilitated & equipped 

2.10.3  No. of schools/crèches rehabilitated & equipped  

2.10.4 % increase in numbers of boys’ and girls’ school 

enrolment rates,  

 

2.1   0 

 

2.2.1  0 

2.2.2 na 

2.3   2 

 

 

2.4  4 

2.6   108.1 

2.7   0 

2.8   0 

2.9   0 

2.10.1  0 

2.10.2  0 

2.10.3  25 

2.10.4  46 

 

2.1   191 

 

2.2.1   54 

2.2.2   80 

2.3     10 

 

 

2.4   14 

2.6  750 

2.7  2 

2.8. 1 

2.9  2 

2.10.1 16 

2.10.2  4 

2.10.3  29 

2.10.4  65 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports  

Risk 2: Facilities are not well 

maintained, under utilized  

 

Mitigation 2: Proper  asset usage 

mechanism developed 

3.  Program Management/ 

Monitoring & Evaluation 

3.1  Program work plan and 

operations are implemented 

3.2  Program activities monitored and 

information produced regularly 

3.3 Public sector support 

 

 

3.1  Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 

 

3.2 .1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 

3.2.2  No. of audit reports produced annually 

3.3     No. of staff trained 

 

 

3.1    0 

 

3.2.1 0 

3.2.2 0 

3.3 0 

 

 

3.1   95% 

 

3.2.1 4 

3.2.2 1 

3.3 55 

Program agreements, 

funding documents 

Supervision mission 

Financial management 

reports M&E reports 

 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS                                                                                                                              SOURCES OF FINANCE  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Commodity Value Chain Development 

improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); training in good agricultural practices; mechanization along the value chains; 

support to training in post-harvest technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and business management 

training; development of market information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; environmental protection management for 

productivity enhancement, processing, marketing and community infrastructure. 

 

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 

Extension of electrical power grid; rehabilitation of feeder roads; rehabilitation of community markets and storage facilities; installation of water boreholes for potable and sanitation 

systems; construction of irrigation water distribution schemes; development of irrigated land; construction of residences to support extension advisory services; construction of structure to 

mitigate coastal erosion; construction of health centers and primary schools; construction of a fisheries training facility; construction of piers and produce preservation warehouses; 

construction of an abattoir; construction of a tissue culture laboratory at Ste Vicente Research Centre; and livestock quarantine facilities.. 

 

Component 3: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions. 

 

 
Project Cost (USD million):   123.15 

  AfDB Loan                     :     101.07 
     

  Other sources 

   Government of Angola  :  19.91 
   Beneficiaries                  :    2.17 

 

Component 1                     :  21.46 
Component 2                     :  90.57 

Component 3                     :  11.12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.7  Establishment of database for 

value chain actors 

1.7. % of value chain actors registered 

 

1.7  0 

 

1.7   95 

 



viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIMEFRAME 
 

 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                   

Board approval                   

Signing of Loan Agreement                   

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement for loan                   

Project launch                   

Technical coordination meetings                   

Project work plans and budgets                     

Technical Design Review/Baseline data update                   

Prepare bid documents and contract awards for works, goods and services                   

Contracts execution for works, goods and services                   

Quarterly reports submission                   

Annual reports submission                   

Bank’s supervision missions                   

Financial audit                   

Mid-term review                   

Impact assessment and technical audit                    

Project completion reporting                    

 

 

 

 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF MANAGEMENT FOR A 

PROPOSED AfDB LOAN OF USD101.07 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC 

OF ANGOLA FOR THE FINANCING OF THE CABINDA PROVINCE 

AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 

(CPAVCDP) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendation for an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to finance the Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1 Project Linkages with the Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1 Angola’s Long Term Plan, dubbed “Vision 2025” articulates the country’s conceptual 

view to achieve sustainable development and seeks to “extricate the country from poverty by 

promoting economic growth, macroeconomic stability and employment”. Vision 2025 was 

designed to be implemented in a period of 25 years, in three stages, with concrete objectives and 

targets and which may be adapted: 2000-2005 (peace, national reconstruction and economic 

growth startup); 2005-2015 (consolidation of national reconstruction, modernization and 

development); and 2015-2025 (sustainability and growth). The National Development Plan 

(NDP) 2013-2017 underscored aspects of the “Vision 2025” by stressing the need to: (i) diversify 

the economy; (ii) invest in infrastructure (in particular, transport, energy and water and 

sanitation); (iii) enhance better management of natural resources; and (iv) expand employment 

opportunities to reduce poverty. The new NDP 2018-2022 that is under preparation is only due 

for approval after the general elections in August 2017. 

 

1.1.2 The recent approved CSP 2017-2021 adopts a broader context of policy continuity by 

anchoring on the longer Vision 2025 of the country. It focuses on two complementary pillars: (i) 

inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable 

infrastructure development, in particular energy and transport. The project is aligned to the 

Bank’s Feed Africa – Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025; the Bank 

Group Industrialization Strategy for Africa 2016-2025; the Bank’s Private Sector Development 

Strategy 2013-2017; the Bank Group Strategy for the New Deal on Energy for Africa 2016-

2025; the Bank Group Strategy for Jobs for Youth in Africa 2016-2025; and the Bank Group 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018. Lastly, the CSP is fully aligned to the achievement of Angola’s 

SDGs, in particular, the  SDG 1 (“No poverty”), SDG 2 (“No Hunger”), SDG 5 (“Gender 

equality”), SDG 6 (“Clean water and sanitation”), SDG 7 (“Clean energy”), SDG 8 (“Good jobs 

and economic growth”), SDG 9 (“Innovation and infrastructure”), SDG 10 (“Reduced 

inequalities”), and SDG 13 (“Protect the planet”).  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

 

1.2.1 In March 2015, a Middle Income Country (MIC) Technical Assistance grant of 

UA420,045 was approved for the Government of Angola to undertake a Study as part of a project 

cycle pre-investment activity. It is noteworthy that the Bank Group had not carried out an 

agriculture sector review in Angola since the Bank Group commenced operations there in 1980. 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is based 

upon the technical documents produced by the Study.  

 



2 

 

1.2.2 The project fits in with the two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola 

in the just approved CSP 2017-2021. The Bank’s strategy focuses on: (i) inclusive growth 

through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable infrastructure development, 

in particular, in energy and transport. The agricultural transformation interventions under the 

pillar I are aligned with the Bank’s High 5s priorities of Feed Africa and Industrialize Africa, 

while the infrastructure development interventions under pillar II will help achieve the following 

High 5s: Light-up and power Africa, Integrate Africa and Improve quality of life of Africans. It 

also fulfils the requirement of the Ten-Year Strategy (TYS, 2013-2022) as it pertains to inclusive 

growth objective through the involvement of youth, women and skills development. It is also in 

alignment with Pillar 2 (improving rural infrastructure and trade-related capacities for market 

access) and Pillar 3 (increasing food supply and reducing hunger and malnutrition) of the 

Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP). 

 

1.3 Aid Coordination 

 

Apart from the Bank Group, development partners in the agriculture sector include the World 

Bank and the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD). The World Bank is 

supporting the Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSSAP) with the 

amount of USD30 million and jointly financed by IFAD with USD8.2 million and a grant of 

USD4 million from the Government of Japan. The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) has a 

number of agricultural development initiatives with the aim of promoting the sector by providing 

an enabling environment for farmers and processors. One of the strategies is Private-Public-

Partnerships (PPP) in agricultural production. In pursuit of this, US-owned Chiquita Brands 

International recently announced plans to begin growing banana in the southern province of 

Benguela; while Brazilian-owned Odebrecht Africa Fund is investing in sugar and ethanol 

production in Malanje Province. The American company "Ellada Investiments Pty Ltd" is trying 

to invest in the production of coffee in northern Uige province; and China Development Bank is 

financing rice production in Kuando-Kubango province. Other foreign owned companies are 

expected to invest in coffee, sugar, cassava and palm oil production. Tables 1.1a and 1.1b provide 

the details of development partners’ activities in the various sectors.  

 

Table 1.1a: Official Development Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 

0,66

1,28

3,70

5,15

12,28

40,35

251,61

268,61

876,05
1 252,89

0 200 400 600 800 1 000 1 200

France

United Kingdom

Norway

Netherlands

UNDP

USAID

European Union

Japan

World Bank

AfDB

Total ODA volume (2015) - approved and ongoing projects  (Million USD)



3 

 

Table 1.1b: Sectors of Donor Intervention 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1 Project Objectives 

 
Development objective  

 

2.1.1 To contribute to increased food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

 Specific project objectives 

 

2.1.2 To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and incomes through increased 

agricultural output and value addition. The Project will also contribute to enhance income of 

small and medium enterprises engaged in input supply, production, processing, storage and 

marketing of selected commodities on a sustainable basis.  

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The proposed CPAVCD Project is composed of three components: (i) Commodity Value 

Chains Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Management and 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project focuses on the provision of the enabling environment 

for agricultural development and value addition of staple crops (cassava, banana, sweet potato, 

peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland fisheries; poultry 

and small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). It will rehabilitate or construct rural 

and resilient infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-

processing centers, market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water 

facilities in the communities and improve rural energy access. A summary of the activities is in 

Table 2.1.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Capacity Building & 
Institutional 

Development; 8; 10,38

Agriculture , 7, 

Higher Education and 
Vocational Training, 5, 

83,36

Power; 5; 1 244,93

Environment ; 11; 
28,50

Fisheries; 3; 
29,97

Multi-sector and 
Governance, 5, 554,35

Health ; 8; 148,79Other Infrastructure; 
6; 29,15

Justice; 4; 
Multinational projects; 3; 

9,71

Social, 2, 
68,53

Trade & Regional 
Integration; 2; 13,77

Water & Sanitation ; 
5; 326,11

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900

1 000
1 100
1 200
1 300
1 400
1 500

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14

O
D

A
 v

o
lu

m
e

s 
(M

ill
io

n
 U

S
D

)

X- axis: Number of projects 
Note: Bubble size - represents ODA volumes (Million USD)

ODA Sectoral Distribution, Approved and Ongoing projects (2015)



4 

 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 

Components 

Total Cost 

(USD 

million) 

Description 

Component 1  

Commodity Value 

Chains Development 

 

21.46 

 (17.4 %) 

Provision of improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and 

livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); 

training in good agricultural practices; promotion of 

mechanization along the value chains by equipment and 

machinery leasing with two tractors/associated implements each 

in the four Municipalities; support to training in post-harvest 

technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value 

chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and 

business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of 14 processing equipment for 

commodity value addition and marketing; environmental 

protection management for productivity enhancement, 

processing, marketing and community infrastructure; provision 

of two refrigerating units for vegetables in Cabinda 

Municipality; and establishment of the credit fund.   

Component 2 

Infrastructure 

Development 

90.57 

(73.5 %) 

Extension of electrical power grid (54 kms); rehabilitation of 

feeder roads (191 kms); rehabilitation of four community 

markets and storage facilities; installation of 16 water boreholes 

for potable and sanitation systems; rehabilitation of 1,500 km of 

irrigation water distribution schemes; development of 750 ha of 

irrigated land; construction of nine residences to support 

extension advisory services; construction of structure to mitigate 

coastal erosion at Landana; construction of one health center and 

one primary school in each of the four Municipalities; 

construction of a fisheries training facility at Tanda-Zinze 

(Cabinda Municipality); construction of two piers and produce 

preservation warehouses at Tungu and Chicaca in Cacongo 

Municipality; reconstruction of the landing pier at Landana in 

Cabinda  Municipality;  construction of an abattoir in Cabinda 

Municipality; construction of two animal quarantine parks in 

Cabinda Municipality; construction of a tissue culture laboratory 

at Ste Vicente Agriculture Research Centre 

Component 3:  

Project Management 

/Monitoring and 

Evaluation  

11.12 

(9%) 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, 

management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; 

development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered 

 

The technical solutions retained are based on criteria that help ensure Project success and 

sustainability. Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their weaknesses in 

generating the expected impact on a sustainable basis (Table 2.2). 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



5 

 

 

Table 2.2: Technical Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

Alternative Solution Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

1. Instrument: Project vs. sector 

budget support  

Under sector budget support, 

resources are disbursed in tranches 

based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector fiduciary 

environment was not conclusive and 

had high level of uncertainty 

2. Build in credit administration 

into the project  

Create a unit within the Provincial 

Department of Agriculture to 

administer credit to beneficiaries 

No experience exists within the 

Government institutions to administer 

credit on a sustainable basis 

3. Matching grant for acquisition 

of production inputs and 

machinery 

Beneficiaries are supported with 

matching grants to partially defray 

the cost of acquiring the requisite 

inputs and machinery for 

production / processing activities. 

The mechanism has often not worked 

effectively if beneficiaries are 

expected to provide surety to access 

the credit from participating financial 

institutions. Stringent collateral 

requirements make it challenging to 

take off. 

 
2.3 Project Type 
 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is an 

investment project financed by an AfDB loan.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 

Project costs 
 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at USD123.15 million, net of taxes, and based 

on 2017 prices, comprising of USD66.08 million (54%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

USD57.07 million (46%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively. The summary of 

estimated costs by component, expenditure category, sources of financing as well as an 

expenditure schedule are presented in the tables below. Detailed project cost tables are presented 

in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD ‘000) 

 

Components 
Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total  

Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 9,265.58 10,605.13 19,870.71 53 

2. Infrastructure Development 35,365.08 45,533.41 80,898.49 56 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 7,230.91 3,501.44 10,732.35 33 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.98 111,501.55 53 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.75 57 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 

 

2.4.2 The project cost of USD123.15 million will be financed by: (i) an AfDB loan of 

USD101.07 million (82.1% of project costs) covering all major activities including review of 

infrastructure designs and a credit facility; (ii) the Government of Angola: USD19.91 million 

(16.2% of project costs) mainly through the extension of electricity lines to project areas, 

provision of office space, salaries for government staff, road maintenance and services such as 

electricity, water and telecommunication for the Project office. Government will also, in addition 



6 

 

to the contributions, bear the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and duty exemptions of all 

procurements; and (iii) beneficiaries: USD2.17 (1.7% of project costs) in-kind contribution 

during land preparation activities and payments for services in maintenance of agro-processing 

facilities. The summary of project costs are presented in the tables below. 

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Category of Expenditure (USD ‘000) 
 

Categories of Expenditure 

 

 

Local 

Cost 

 

Foreign 

Cost 
Total Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

%  

Total  

Costs 

 I. Investment Costs       
   A. Works 34,426.07 44,078.16 78,504.23 56 70 

   B. Goods 1,320.34 3,932.21 5,252.55 75 5 

   C. Services 7,270.44 8,812.12 16,082.56 55 14 

   D. Miscellaneous 2,750.00 2,250.00 5,000.00 45 4 

Total Investment Costs 45,766.85 59,072.49 104,839.34 56 94 

II. Recurrent Costs      
   A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 624.00 336.00 960.00 35 1 

   B. Operation & Maintenance 4,045.40 75.60 4,121.00 2 4 

   C. General Operating Costs 1,425.32 155.88 1,581.20 10 1 

Total Recurrent Costs 6,094.72 567.48 6,662.20 9 6 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.97 111,501.54 53 100 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.76 57 8 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 3 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 110 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (USD ’000) 
 

 

Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 3,650.36 11,321.45 4,086.91 2,398.89 21,457.61 

2. Infrastructure Development 2,352.79 39,757.04 34,991.95 13,472.07 90,573.85 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 2,904.47 3,212.38 3,060.48 1,941.79 11,119.11 

Total Project Costs 8,907.62 54,290.87 42,139.34 17,812.75 123,150.58 

 

Table 2.6: Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (USD ’000) 
 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

I. Investment Costs      

 A. Works      

  Construction & Rehabilitation 20,040.68 - 2,092.58 22,133.25 18.0 

  Roads 54,232.33 8,265.03 - 62,497.36 50.7 

  Electricity extension - 4,947.63 - 4,947.63 4.0 

 Subtotal Works 74,273.01 13,212.66 2,092.58 89,578.24 72.7 

 B. Goods      

  1. Vehicles      

   Vehicles 479.61 - - 479.61 0.4 

  2. Equipment & Materials      

   Equipment 4,595.76 - - 4,595.76 3.7 

   Furniture 271.14 - - 271.14 0.2 

 Subtotal Goods 5,346.51 - - 5,346.51 4.3 

 C. Services      



7 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

  

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars,  2,003.50 - - 2,003.50 1.6 

  Technical Assistance & Consultancies 7,498.98 - - 7,498.98 6.1 

  Contractual Services 5,207.65 1,328.40 - 6,536.05 5.3 

  Audit 300.00 - - 300.00 0.2 

 Subtotal Services 15,010.14 1,328.40 - 16,338.54 13.3 

 D. Miscellaneous      

  Credit facility 5,000.00 - - 5,000.00 4.1 

Total Investment Costs 99,629.65 14,541.06 2,092.58 116,263.29 94.4 

      

II. Recurrent Costs      

 A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 979.20 - - 979.20 0.8 

 B. Operation & Maintenance      

  Vehicles 108.00 - - 108.00 0.1 

  Infrastructure - 4,144.57 48.00 4,192.57 3.4 

 Subtotal 108.00 4,144.57 48.00 4,300.57 3.5 

 C. General Operating Costs 348.81 1,228.71 30.00 1,607.52 1.3 

Total Recurrent Costs 1,436.01 5,373.28 78.00 6,887.29 5.6 

Total Project Costs 101,065.66 19,914.34 2,170.58 123,150.58 100.0 

 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (USD ‘000) 

 

Sources 
Foreign 

Cost 
Local Cost Total Costs 

% 

Total 

Cost 

 AfDB Loan 66,081.89 34,983.77 101,065.66 82.1 

 Government of Angola - 19,914.34 19,914.34 16.2 

 Beneficiaries - 2,170.58 2,170.58 1.7 

Total Project Costs 66,081.89 57,068.69 123,150.58 100.0 

 

2.4.3 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The AfDB loan of USD101.07 million will 

finance 100% of Goods; 82.91% of Works; 91.35% of Services; 100% of the credit fund; and 

29.01% of recurrent costs. The loan will finance 100% of foreign costs and 60.85% of local 

costs. Despite contributing 16.2% of total costs, the Government of Angola does not have the 

capacity to finance the requisite 50% of total project costs as a result of the current economic 

hardship and fiscal deficit arising from the prolonged decline in oil prices. Consequently, local 

costs have been factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.  

A waiver request for financing 82.1% of the project cost through an AfDB loan is presented in 

Annex VII. 

 
2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries 

 

The CPAVCD Project will be implemented in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province 

namely: Belize, Buco Zau, Cacongo and Cabinda with a combined human population of 688,285. 

The direct beneficiaries are the 51,000 economically active smallholders living in the rural areas 

in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province who are already or being encouraged to participate 

in agriculture. The indirect beneficiaries include existing 15 small, medium and large-scale 

entrepreneurs and business associations who provide services to the producers and processors. 

This number is expected to increase significantly when other economically active value chain 

entrepreneurs get involved in the Project. Commodity processors, marketers, agro-dealers in the 



8 

 

province will be engaged. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop 

and animal production, processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. At least 50% of 

beneficiaries (women) will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits.  

 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Formulation, Design and Implementation 
 

During the study stages, cross-sectional consultations were held by the consultants in the four 

municipalities. A general workshop was held on 25 August 2016 in Cabinda city where all 

stakeholders were present. The general outline of the proposed project was presented and 

deliberated upon. The general workshop incorporated both plenary and working group sessions 

that were designed along thematic areas critical for the successful and logical implementation of 

the project. Comments and suggestions were later incorporated in the final documents by the 

consultants. The workshops established the desirability for interventions using the value chain 

approach. The key outcome of the consultation process was a consensus on the Project objective 

and strategy as well as the implementation arrangement. These were further validated during the 

appraisal mission of June 2017 with representatives from key Government agencies such as: IDA 

(Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services Institute); IIV (Veterinary 

Research Institute); IDF (Forestry Development Institute); the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

and farmer cooperative heads in each of the four Municipalities. The consultation process was 

complemented at final briefing sessions with the Director-Generals of the departments, Secretary 

of State for Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture, as well as with development partners 

such as the World Bank and FAO. The participatory approach adopted during the formulation 

will be continued during its implementation. The implementation arrangement will therefore 

include representatives of key stakeholders such as the existing farmer groups and value chain 

actors in the Project Steering Committee to ensure that their interests are taken into consideration 

at all times.  

 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learnt Reflected in the Project Design 

 

2.7.1 The Bank Group currently has two on-going projects in the agriculture sector as follows: 

(i) Angola Fisheries Sector Support Project (UA20.00 million); and (ii) Environment Sector 

Support Program (UA0.42 million). Though these initiatives offer great potential for agricultural 

and rural development by improving productivity and ensuring sustainable use of natural 

resources, actual implementation has been bogged by institutional and project staffing 

challenges. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance in Angola is deemed unsatisfactory with 

an average score of 2.3 out of 4. The average age of the portfolio is 3.8 years with two projects 

of more than five years foreseen to be completed by the end of 2017. Details are in Annex B1 of 

the Technical Annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The sole agriculture project financed by Bank Group to date was the Bom Jesus-Calenga 

Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (UA17.2 million ADF grant), which ended in 

November 2016. The Project Completion Report indicated that the project met most of its targets 

for rural infrastructural development and economic diversification, but it took nearly twice as 

much time to complete the construction and rehabilitation works. The Bank Group has gained 

useful experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in the country. Key lessons that 

have been learned include: (i) institutional environment under which the project operates needs 

to be optimum so as to avoid unnecessary delays to project implementation; (ii) retention of 

qualified staff is key to core management functions, to ensure timely delivery of outputs, and 

effectively achieve the development goals. It is thus envisaged that the Cabinda Province 

Agriculture Value Chains Development (CPAVCD) Project will have a specific activities on 

institutional development to bring a major transformation of the agriculture sector in Cabinda 

Province. There is no Project Completion backlog in the country. 



9 

 

 

2.7.3 The Table below summarizes key lessons learnt from closed and on-going agriculture 

sector interventions in the country, and indicates how they have informed the design of 

CPAVCD Project. 

 

Table 2.8: Consideration of Lessons Learnt in Project Design 
 

Lessons learnt  Actions incorporated into the design of CPAVCD 

Project 

The need to ensure a 

geographical focus and that 

resources are not thinly spread 

 

The Bank has adopted a cluster model where production 

and processing are in a closely-knit geographical area as 

opposed to sites in various communes. This would allow 

for optimal use of installed infrastructure and ease of 

technical assistance and supervision activities 

The need for participatory and 

socially inclusive formulation 

and implementation of 

development interventions  

The organization of three workshops that attracted all 

stakeholders and their potential involvement in 

implementing the Project would ensure ownership and 

sustainability after project investment period 

The need for decentralization 

of implementation to the 

Province where the project is 

located using existing organs  

The implementation arrangement of CPAVCD Project is 

located in Cabinda where the actual day-to-day actions are 

taking place. The recruitment of a dedicated PIU will 

ensure efficiency in delivery 

The need to ensure high state 

of readiness for project start up 

and implementation.  

 

The various technical assessments carried out during the 

Study provided the technical, engineering, environmental 

as well as procurement documents that will ensure that 

project will be implemented in a shorter period (four years 

instead the default five).   

 
2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

 

2.8.1  The key performance indicators for monitoring progress in achieving the Project 

objectives are in the results based logical framework (RBLF). These indicators include impacts, 

outcomes and outputs that will be further refined at Project start-up when more information/data 

would be available through revised assessments. Key impact indicators include level of wealth 

created along the value chains (farmers, processors, women, market operators, etc); level of food 

and nutrition security achieved; and number of jobs created. The key outcome indicator is the 

additional income earned by value chain actors.  

 

2.8.2  Outputs indicators on infrastructure development include number of climate resilient 

water control structures rehabilitated; number of wash bore/tube wells constructed, hectares of 

land with supplementary irrigation facilities; increased crop yield and hectares of land put to 

production of the commodities; number of small holders and percentage of them using good 

agronomic practices; percentage of producers trained in technical and managerial skills; and 

percentage of farmers provided with farm advisory services. Other output key indicators for 

processing, market and community development include kilometers of feeder roads 

rehabilitated; number of community markets, storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated; and 

number of social facilities rehabilitated and equipped (schools, clinics, potable water for drinking 

and processing).   

 

2.8.3 Key output indicators for the commodity value chain development include number of 

operational storage facilities and collection centers; percentage of actors trained in post-harvest 



10 

 

technologies, modern food processing, group dynamics and leadership; percentage of farmers’ 

organizations and SMEs undertaking collective marketing and purchasing. Other output 

indicators include market share of local food products vis à vis imported ones; and percentage 

of beneficiaries obtaining credit and paying back on time. Key output indicators for Project 

management include the rate of implementation of the annual work plan, number of supervision 

missions per year and number of technical and financial reports per year, rate of disbursement, 

and timeliness of reports. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  

 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of 2016 market prices. The objective of the financial analysis of the project activities is to: 

(i) assess the commercial viability of the proposed agricultural, livestock and value addition 

enterprises to be funded under the project; and (ii) to provide a basis for the economic analysis 

of the project. The analysis focuses on crops, livestock and aquaculture production modules and 

various agro-processing enterprises. These analyses were carried-out with financial and 

economic costs generated using Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in 

Annex B7 and further elaborated in Annex B7 in Volume II of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.2 The CPAVCD Project will contribute to the improvement of socio economic indicators 

especially on reduction of poverty and malnutrition, maternal and child health, reduced child 

literacy, improved schooling rate of children especially girls due to improved communication 

through rehabilitated roads, provision of schools and community health centers. 

 

       Table 3.1: Key economic and financial figures* 

 

FIRR : 19%  NPV (base case) is USD 204,698,612  

 

EIRR : 23%  NPV (base case)  is USD 317,656,845 
    

*NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

  

 Financial analysis  
 

3.1.3 Based on the above assumptions, the aggregate financial benefits from agricultural 

production and processing activities when computed against the investment costs for the project 

activities generated Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 19% and Net Present Value 

(NPV) of USD 204.70 million. Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially 

feasible. The FIRR of 19% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

 Economic analysis 
 

3.1.4 The Economic Analysis is carried out to determine the impact of the proposed project to 

the economy as a whole, to justify Government intervention with public funds. The economic 

analysis includes most quantifiable incremental costs and benefits that are associated with the 

project's investments.  

 

3.1.5 The economic analysis was conducted using the similar approach as the financial 

analysis, on the basis of shadow prices (prices in conditions of the efficient market operation) of 



11 

 

tradable goods and total cost of project. In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, 

such as, easy access to markets through market linkages; easy transportation of goods and 

services, better health delivery systems, improvement in literacy and employment generation. 

However, these additional benefits were difficult to value in monetary terms due to the limited 

scope of this report and data limitations, hence they could not be adequately captured in the 

analysis. In these conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD317.66 million and 

Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 23% as captured in the technical annexes. 

 

3.2 Environment and Social Impact 

 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The proposed Cabinda Province Agricultural Value Chains Development project was 

classified Category 2 (validated 9th June 2017) because the project activities are expected to have 

minimal and site-specific environmental and social impacts. The project will finance 

construction and rehabilitation of small irrigation scheme, processing and storage facilities, and 

community infrastructure (heath care centers, schools and water supply and sanitation) as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. These impacts can be 

managed with the application of mitigation measures elaborated in site-specific environmental 

and social management plans (ESMPs). The ESMP that was prepared in September 2016 by the 

Cabinda Province Agriculture Development Study consultants for the general project 

intervention areas will be fine-tuned for specific sites during project implementation; hence, an 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF, which was posted on the Bank’s 

website on 11th August 2017) will provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social issues and guide the preparation of environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) 

and/or ESMP as required during project implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and the agricultural production and value-chain development activities 

including  (i) loss of vegetation cover due to site clearing, soil erosion, landscape degradation 

and possible habitat fragmentation, (ii) noise, vibration and emissions from operation of 

machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (iii) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, and (iii) wastes generated from processing 

and marketing facilities. These impacts are site specific and readily managed with the application 

of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) refilling the 

exposed or excavated soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing 

compaction of soils, (ii) ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing 

sustainable water management systems, and (iv) capacity building of value chain actors to 

promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy.  

 

3.2.1.3 Overall, the CPAVCDP will have significant positive impacts such as improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agricultural commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local economy of the 

Cabinda province. 

  

3.2.2 Climate change 

 

The Cabinda province experiences seasonal variability of rainfall. Studies indicate that the 

province is susceptible to sea level rise, with a projection of 0.13 – 0.56m by the 2090s. Sea level 

rise can aggravate flooding events causing riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure 

damages, crop failure, fisheries destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant 



12 

 

implications on livelihoods of agricultural, pastoral and fisheries communities. The Project has 

been assessed Category 2 per the Climate Safeguard Screening Systems requiring the 

implementation of adaptation measures to increase the resilience of communities and the 

infrastructure to be rehabilitated to withstand the impacts of climate change. The project will 

address the potential climate risk through the implementation of practical risk mitigation and 

adaptation measures. Specifically, water harvesting technologies, and rehabilitation and 

improvement of water infrastructure to reduce the dependency on rainfall for agricultural 

activities. Furthermore appropriate measures including physical structures will be implemented 

to reduce coastal degradation as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other hazards that 

accompany floods, and land use changes. This includes construction of gabions and rip rap 

concrete pillars at Landana beach to mitigate coastal erosion; reconstruction of the existing pier 

at Landana; construction of a small floating pier for fishing boats; as well improvement of the 

irrigation and drainage schemes. The Project will prioritize the implementation of adaptations 

measures as identified in Angola’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA for 

agriculture, pastoral and fisheries systems). Implementation will be monitored through the 

inclusion of appropriate indicators in the project monitoring and evaluation framework. 

Furthermore engineering designs will integrate the need to raise drainage datum and camber 

access roads to the required levels to mitigate effect of floods in order to enhance resilience of 

the infrastructure. Overall, the project promote climate smart agriculture through the use of 

improved agricultural technologies and conservation agricultural practices as a means to enhance 

the resilience of the farming systems. It is estimated that USD7.40 million (or 7.2%) of the loan 

would be used on the above mentioned activities and is considered as climate finance portion of 

the loan.  

 

3.2.3 Green Growth 
 

CPAVCD Project has been designed in congruence with the Green Growth principle of “quality 

and inclusiveness of growth”. The Project design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (rapid population growth, urbanization, shifting consumption 

patterns, uneven economic growth, lack of energy access, and limited access to value addition 

by processing. The Project has been designed to be more holistic in that it has integrated 

economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of human well-being in 

the Province. The Project has further considered solutions to the impact of environmental 

changes, such as land degradation, disaster risk and climate change. 

 

3.2.4 Gender  

 

Structural transformation of Africa’s agriculture is a prerequisite for enhancing agricultural 

productivity, food security and poverty reduction on the continent. However, a critical ingredient 

of such a transformation is gender equality, given its potential impact on social inclusion and 

employment generation. Unfortunately, available evidence reveals that Angola’s agricultural 

landscape is characterized by gender inequalities disproportionately against women. These 

gender-based differences ranged from access to productive resources, low rates of technology 

adoption to economic capacities and incentives. This project will address some of the gender 

inequalities in agricultural productivity, by reducing or closing women’s deficits in agriculture 

performance and will unlock women and youth’s productivity potential. The indirect effects 

include increases in female managers’ bargaining power and improvements in their social status 

as their earnings increase, better child nutrition, health, and education attainment in households 

with female-managed plots.  There is a large gap between men and women in terms of income, 

access to basic services (energy, water and sanitation), access to housing, land, credit and 

continuing education in the Cabinda Province. The project will also contribute to the 

improvement of socio economic indicators especially the Sustainable Development Goals on 



13 

 

reduction of poverty, maternal and child health, reduced adult illiteracy, improved schooling rate 

of children especially girls due to improved access roads. With gender integrated value chains, 

the project will achieve competitive domestic food supply and increase the income levels of 

farmers, processors and marketers. Through improved agricultural production, productivity and 

market linkages, expected impact include food and nutrition security, creation of jobs, of which 

women and youths account for about 50%, along the commodity value chains. For inclusivity, 

the project shall ensure professional training, access to credit and other resources to women and 

youth; facilitate acquisition of machinery and equipment among women and youth; and provide 

capacity building (agribusiness and entrepreneurial, etc.) for women and youth amongst other 

activities.   

 

3.2.5 Social Impact 

 

3.2.5.1 As the project intends paying particular attention to women as well as mechanizing and 

enhancing the agricultural processes and products, drudgery will be removed, more women will 

be empowered, more jobs created and nutrition status significantly improved in the intervention 

areas. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation in Angola is quite poor particularly in rural 

areas. This negatively affects the health status of the population, school enrolment and retention 

especially for the girl-child, agricultural productivity and poverty status of the people in general. 

The Project will drill boreholes and construct sanitary facilities in public places such as markets, 

schools and health facilities in an effort to contribute to improvement of the hygiene situation. 

 

3.2.5.2 The expected increased commercial activities particularly around the warehousing, and 

processing facilities and markets with increased influx of people of diverse cultures, beliefs and 

behaviors is likely to expose people to sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS. The 

Project shall therefore design sensitization and capacity building activities to address these health 

issues. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good nutrition and hygiene 

practices as well as prevention and management of malaria and HIV/AIDS; (ii) improving access 

to health facilities by way of extending the feeder roads to them; (iii) rehabilitation and equipping 

community health facilities; and (iv) skills training for health care providers. 

 

3.2.5.3 In order to accommodate all these activities a total of USD34.09 million has been 

earmarked for the provision of social infrastructure such as schools, clinics, potable water and 

sanitation systems for the beneficiaries. Community mobilization and training on nutrition, 

conflict resolution and health issues have been estimated at USD5.63 million. It is also estimated 

that USD17.65 million (or 45%) of these sums will target women. 

 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the Project 

activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agriculture and pastoral 

systems.  

 

IV- PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Agriculture will be the executing agency of the project. Based on the 

weaknesses identified in the agriculture project that just ended and lessons distilled by the Bank 

from its experience in implementing programs in the country, the management of the CPAVCD 



14 

 

Project emphasizes a highly decentralized but inclusive structure. At the National Level, a lightly 

staffed National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established at MINAGRI in Luanda 

to coordinate project activities in Cabinda Province and also to carry out key policy and 

institution back stopping at the Ministry of Agriculture as well as disbursement and reporting 

liaison with the Bank. The NPCU will be headed by a national Project coordinator (NPC) and 

staffed by a liaison officer, a secretary and a driver. The staff of the NPCU will be paid from the 

proceeds of the loan. Furthermore, a Project Implementation Unity (PIU) will be competitively 

recruited as a consulting firm to manage the project and be based in Cabinda town itself. The 

PIU will comprise eight key officers as follows: (i) Project Manager; (ii) Financial Manager; (iii) 

Civil Engineer; (iv) Agro-processing Specialist; (v) Financial Accountant; (vi) Procurement 

Expert; (vii) M&E Officer; and (viii) Credit Management Specialist. The setting up of the PIU 

will be retained as a condition precedent to disbursement.  

 

4.1.2 The Government will provide full time counterpart staff to understudy the consultants 

and IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) will take over the management of the project after 

two and a half years. The Gender Expert at the Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

will assume the leadership and responsibility for all gender related aspects of the Project and will 

engage with national NGOs for support. This arrangement will provide in-house training and 

sustainability upon the exit of the consultants. The Government counterpart specialists will 

receive a predetermined monthly allowance as incentive. The existing Provincial Director of 

Agriculture shall provide oversight function on the implementation of the Project in Cabinda 

Province represented by Agricultural Development Stations in each Municipality. 

 

4.1.3 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy guidance to 

the project. The PSC will be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture. The PSC will be chaired 

by the Minister of Agriculture and will comprise a representative (of not lower than the grade of 

Director) each from IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services 

Institute); Ministry of Women and Youth; Ministry of Environment; Ministry of Finance; 

Ministry of Fisheries; Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda; and Departments of 

Agriculture; Forestry; and Water from Cabinda Province. A representative of the farmer apex 

cooperative association will also be in the PSC. The PSC will approve work plans and budget 

estimates for activities and monitor reports of project implementation. The organogram for 

Project implementation is presented in Annex II.  

 
 Procurement Arrangement  

 

4.1.4 Procurement of goods and works and the acquisition of consulting services, financed by 

the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for 

Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement will be carried out following: 

 

 BPS – Borrower Procurement System: Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures 
(PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as set forth in the Public Contracts 

Law No. 9/16 of 16 June 2016 and related implementing regulations, using the national 

Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other SDs agreed during project negotiations. 

Procurement of (i) construction of abattoirs for an estimated total amount of UA 343,360, 

(ii) construction of processing centers for an estimated amount of UA 455,500, (iii) vehicles 

for an estimated total amount of UA 350,080 and (iv) furniture for an estimated total amount 

of UA 197,910 (iii) will be procured using BPS. 

 



15 

 

Bank PMPs: Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation 

Documents, will be used for the procurement of works and goods and for the selection of 

consultants under the project. Works procured using Open Competitive Bidding (OCB) through 

International Competitive Bidding include : (i) construction of four clinics for an estimated total 

amount of UA780,000; (ii) construction of four schools for an estimated total amount of 

UA1,200,000; (iii) construction of one irrigation scheme for an estimated total amount of 

UA2,627,440, (iv) drainage works for an estimated total amount of UA1,833,000; (v) 

construction of a greenhouse for an estimated total amount of UA821,000; (vi) construction of 

pier (landing sites) for an estimated total amount of UA4,077,390; (vii) construction of 

warehouses for an estimated total amount of UA518,900; (viii) construction of residences for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,097,890; (ix) other infrastructures for an estimated total amount 

of UA873,750; (x) construction of Belize roads for an estimated total amount of UA10,126,900 

(with prequalification); (xi) construction of Buco Zau roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA5,183,140; (xii) construction of Cacongo roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA6,267,890; and (xiii) construction of Cabinda municipality roads for an estimated total 

amount of UA18,007,710 (with prequalification) . Goods procured using Open Competitive 

Bidding (OCB) through International Competitive Bidding include equipment related to the 

constructions for an estimated total amount of UA3,110,530. The selection of: (i) a Project 

Implementation Unity (PIU) in charge of the implementation of the project, for an estimated 

total amount of UA2,020,070; (ii) service for support to product marketing by NGOs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA291,970; (iii) two consulting firms for review of designs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,391,350; and (iv) three contracts for supervision of the works, 

for an estimated total amount of UA3,708,690 will be carried out using the Quality and Cost 

Based Selection (QCBS) method. The selection of audit services, for an estimated total amount 

of UA218,980, will be carried out using the Least Cost Selection (LCS) method. A policy 

advisor, for an estimated total amount of UA289,050, will be recruited using the Individual 

Consultant (IC) selection method. The personnel for the National Coordination Unit will be 

selected through selection of individual consultant method, for an estimated amount of 

UA466,860. The Bank Group has approved that a Memorandum of Understanding should be 

signed with World Vision International for the administration of the credit facility, and with a 

consideration of administration fee estimated at UA182,000. WVI has a well-established 

expertise in a wide range of technical sectors including agriculture, health and nutrition, water 

and sanitation, education, etc. in Angola since 1989 also has experience utilising credit funds 

from the Bank and other development partners.  

 

4.1.5 Advance procurement: Advance procurement mechanism will be used to select the 

project management team (project implementation unit – PIU), in order to be in place at project’s 

start. The establishment of the PIU will be a loan condition. 

 

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: Country, Sector, Executing Agency 

(EA), and Project procurement risk assessments were undertaken for the project and the output 

have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS, Bank or Third party) and the 

PMPs being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement capacity 

development action plan (CDAP) under the project. The resources, capacity, expertise and 

experience of the Executing Agency, the Institute of Agrarian Development (IDA), are 

inadequate to carry out the procurement, as it has little experience in implementing Bank-funds 

operations and do not have procurement professionals conversant with Banks and national 

procedures. Most of the issues/risks associated with the procurement components for 

implementation of the project have been identified and include: (i) lack of capacity at the EA 

side, and (ii) weaknesses at sector level (agriculture sector, cooperatives), although some 

capacity exist for execution of smaller works and supply of vehicles and basic equipment and 



16 

 

furniture. The corrective measures which have been agreed are: (i) recruit a private project 

implementation unity (PIU), which will include procurement responsibilities; (ii) this project 

management team will prepare a project procedures manual and train appointed IDA 

staff/counterpart; and (iii) all the executing agency staff will receive adequate procurement 

orientation to enhance their procurement and project management capacity, as part of the project 

launching and during its implementation. It is expected that appointed IDA staff will take over 

the private service provider at mid-term project implementation. Detailed assessment and 

mitigations measures can be found in the Technical Annexes B.5. 

 

 Financial Management 
 

4.1.7 An assessment of the IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) in the Ministry of 

Agriculture at the Cabinda Provincial level as Project Executing Agency (that included a review 

of the budgeting, accounting, treasury systems, internal controls, and reporting and external audit 

arrangements) was done to ascertain effective financial management of the project.  The current 

financial management of resources managed by IDA at provincial level is primarily for small 

value operating expenditures from periodic transfers made from the National office in Luanda. 

Basic manual records are maintained by an administration staff with no formal reporting and 

specific bank account maintained. At national level, the department of finance (within the 

Finance and Administrative Department at the Ministry of Agriculture) is responsible for the 

function of planning and budgeting including recording expenditures and maintaining assets 

through the use of the Government wide IFMIS (Sistema Integrado de Gestiiodas Finanqas do 

Estado) (SIGFE). The staff receive training in finance and accounting from the Ministry of 

Finance and can manage the accounting for the smaller and recurring nature of some operating 

expenses given their experience with other donor financed projects. However, given the 

complexity and size of the project to be implemented at provincial level, the existing FM capacity 

do not fully meet the Bank’s minimum requirements to ensure financial resources to be made 

available under the project would be used for the intended purposes. In this regard there is need 

for technical assistance in ensuring not only the effective financial management of the project 

but also in capacity building of the finance department at IDA. A Project Implementation Unit 

(PIU) will be competitively recruited as a consulting firm to implement the project, including 

financial management responsibilities and also training government staff with the Ministry of 

Agriculture, through IDA having the overall responsibility of overseeing its implementation.   

 

4.1.8 The project financial management activities will therefore be done by the PIU under the 

oversight of the NPCU that will include a competent accountant whose specific duties shall be 

to ensure a sustained existence of a satisfactory system of accounting, reporting and proper 

record keeping of all documentation to permit a timely production of complete and accurate 

financial reports. The finance staff in the firm will work together with the government 

counterpart finance staff that will be designated to the project at the province to enable transfer 

of skills and offering substantial operational benefits to Angola in terms of contribution to 

capacity development in order to enable them eventually take over project FM. Training in Bank 

requirements regarding financial management will be given as part of project launching and 

during its implementation. Given, the proposed arrangements, the overall FM risk for the project 

is assessed as Substantial with the risk mitigated through the putting in place of the PIU that will 

be responsible for project implementation. The detailed FM assessment including the financial 

management responsibilities of the PIU are attached in Annex B4. 

 

4.1.9 The NPCU will have overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with the Bank’s 

reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic progress reports with financial 

information for the Bank loan and Government contributions to the Bank within 45 days after 

the end of the respective quarter. The NPCU in liaison with the PIU will submit quarterly interim 



17 

 

unaudited financial reports covering their activities, as well as the related annual financial 

statements. The PIU will produce a project implementation manual, which will include 

comprehensive financial management procedures, describing the detailed financial procedures 

in processing, budgeting, recording, reporting and auditing of the financial transactions of the 

Project. Furthermore, external audits for the project will be done annually in accordance with a 

Bank approved audit Terms of Reference. The project external audits will be done by private 

auditors and the audit reports (including management letter) submitted to the Bank within six 

months after the end of the respective period covered by the audit with the costs of the audit 

borne by the Loan.  

 

Disbursements 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the Direct Payment method 

for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification of invoices 

submitted by other service providers or contractors and preparation of disbursement application 

which will be reviewed at the NPCU and signed off by the Government designated staff and 

submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account method to be managed by the NPCU 

will however be used for financing the smaller and recurring nature of some operating expenses. 

The opening of a Special Account denominated in United States Dollars together with the 

associated local currency account in Angola Kwanzas at National level will be required before 

disbursement of loan proceeds. The Reimbursement method of disbursement will also be 

available.  All disbursements under the Loan will be made in accordance with the Bank’s rules 

and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. In addition, a 

Disbursement letter will be agreed upon as part of the Loan negotiations. 

 

4.2 Monitoring  

 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual (POM) 

which will be prepared by the PIU shortly after project loan approval. IDA will monitor overall 

operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of the project, 

implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national standards. The 

PIU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project and compile the project’s quarterly 

and annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, IDA, other line ministries, and the 

Cabinda Provincial Directorate of Agriculture. A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken 

two years after project start to review the project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon 

completion of project investments at the end of project year four, the PIU will prepare a 

Borrower’s project completion report.  

 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Office of 

Planning and Statistics (GEPE) of the Ministry of Agriculture will be used to assess the 

contribution of the project towards the country and province’s development goals and objectives 

as defined in the relevant development plans. The baseline values were drawn from the NDP 

2013-2017, and the results framework of Bank’s new projects. In using the performance 

indicators and targets specified in the results-based framework, project implementers tracking 

progress towards project results are expected to take special note of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing 

monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated by sex and age. The key functions 

of the M&E Officer in the PIU will be to ensure quality and accountability of monitoring; 

information management; facilitation of knowledge building; and knowledge sharing on 

monitoring and evaluation. 

 



18 

 

4.2.3 The RBLF will form the basis for measuring outputs, outcomes and impact. Supported 

by the M&E Specialist, the PIU will prepare: (i) Annual Work Program and Budgets; (ii) 

Quarterly Progress Reports; (iii) Mid-year Progress Reports; (iv) Annual Progress Reports; (v) 

Status Reports for Supervision Missions; (vi) Mid-term Review Report; and (vii) Project 

Completion Report.  

 
4.3 Governance 

 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Angola, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of CPAVCD Project 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to provincial to commune levels. This 

is in relation to better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of 

resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, 

and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4 Sustainability  

 

The ownership of CPAVCD Project is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders 

played during formulation and preparation of the Project. As the coordinator of the Study that 

gave rise to this project the Ministry of Agriculture put up a technical team of experts both in 

Luanda and Cabinda to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The intense 

interest of the Governor of Cabinda Province in this project was made manifest during the 

workshop during which she appointed her economic advisor as the focal point for the Province. 

The maintenance of the access roads and municipal infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the Province as is done nationwide. The present Project will build capacities 

of the Provincial agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure profitability for the 

value chain actors.  

 

4.5 Risk Management 

 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Angola have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group will 

engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. It is expected that the proposed project will contribute to reducing unemployment 

and poverty, particularly among the youth, and thereby directly mitigate some of the main 

underlying factors of social conflict. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-

sensitive approaches and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. 

CPAVCDP is a category II intervention and will require an environmental, social and health 

impact assessment. The ESIA and ESMPs have been prepared as part of the Study and will be 

fine-tuned for specific project sites during implementation and to be examined as well by the 

Bank. The following is the main risk identified and with its mitigation measures.  

 

Risk Rating1 Mitigation Measures 

Macroeconomic risks: slow 

economic growth and deterioration 

of the country’s creditworthiness 

due to persistent oil crisis     

 

H 
The Bank will intensify the dialogue with the 

Government to adopt supportive macroeconomic 

policies to rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce 

exchange rate flexibility, strengthen the banking system 

to prevent systemic crisis, and implement structural 

reforms for economic diversification. 
H= High 
 

 



19 

 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach in 

agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be monitored 

closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized implementation unit 

located in the Province; the role of value chain actors including farmers and farmers’ 

organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge will be 

captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and periodic 

impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside the 

production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the Project 

results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank website, 

etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information 

sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, 

share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension 

agents. This will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access to the 

disseminated knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports will introduce and 

consolidate knowledge and skills, and facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the 

community and national levels. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments 

 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an AfDB loan agreement for USD101.07 

million between the Republic of Angola and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions for the Bank’s Intervention  

 

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfillment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan 

 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the competitive recruitment of the members of the Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), which will comprise the following key officers: (a) Project 

Manager; (b) Financial Manager; (c) Civil Engineer; (d) Agro-processing Specialist; (e) 

Financial Accountant; (f) Procurement Expert; (g) Monitoring and Evaluation Officer; 

and (e) Credit Management Specialist, whose experience and qualifications shall be 

acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

 

 

 

 



20 

 

 

 Other Conditions  

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than three months from the date of loan effectiveness, appoint 
Government counterpart staff to the PIU, with qualification and experience 

acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(ii) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(iii) Prior to the use of Special Account disbursement method, submit to the Bank a 
disbursement application with a Special Account in the name of the Project, 

denominated in USD together with the associated local currency account in 

Angola Kwanzas, in a bank acceptable to the Bank, for deposit of the proceeds of 

the Loan. 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(iv) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(v) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable to 
the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including any 

implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATIONS 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to the Republic of Angola for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report.  

 

 























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

BURUNDI 

 

 

 

SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

November 2017 

 
       

 

PROJECT DOCUMENT 

CLIENT RECORD 

 

BENEFICIARY   Republic of Burundi 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) 

 

Financing Plan 

Source  Amount Instrument 

 

TSF (Pillar I) 

 

 UA 12 million 

 

Grant 

Government  UA 0.00 M.  - 

TOTAL COST  UA 12 M.   

 

Key information on TSF financing 

 

TSF Grant Currency 

 

$US 

Commitment fee: % per annum on undisbursed amounts 

Service Commission 0%  of outstanding amount per  year 

  

TRE (baseline scenario) 

TRI (baseline scenario) 

NPV 

23.01% 

20.17% 

BIF 89,72 billion 

 

Time Frame - Main milestones (Expected) 

Preparation August-September 2017 

Concept Note Approval October 2017 

Project appraisal October 2017 

Project approval December 2017 

Entry into Force January 2018 

Closure of loan December 2022 

Last Disbursement June 2023  
 

 



 

iii 

 

Project Summary  
 

General overview of the project: The Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera 

Natural Region Project (PATAREB) covers Bugesera natural region comprising seven (07) 

municipalities in Kirundo Province and Gitreranyi municipality in Muyinga Province. These 

municipalities cover an area of 2 100 km ², that is 7,5 % of the national territory, and has a 

population of 1 004 907 inhabitants (2017 estimates), 519 665 of them women, or more then 

51,71% of the population within the project intervention zone (PIZ). The project targets 

economically, socially and environmentally fragile and disadvantaged communities, who 

possess significant agricultural and fish farming potential  and whose sustainable development 

will contribute to improving food and nutritional security, increase the income of vulnerable 

small-scale producers, alleviate the impact of poverty on rural households and strengthen the 

resilience of populations, including women and youth.  With a total cost of UA 12.00 million, 

fully funded from Pillar I (additional support) resources of the Transition Support Facility 

(TSF), the project will be implemented over a five-year period in  three (03) components: (i) 

Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of the Living Conditions of inhabitants; and (iii) 

Management and Coordination. PATAREB will directly benefit more than 650,000 people, 

51% of them women, and approximately 355 000 residents within the area of intervention. In 

order to ensure sustainability of investments, the participative and inclusive approach adopted 

during preparation and evaluation will continue during execution in order to associate all the 

recipients and to allow the durability of the investments. Similarly, an innovative approach to 

participative development of agricultural values chains and streams will be adopted to address 

the key constraints to durable financing of agricultural entrepreneurship within the framework 

of public-private partnerships (PPP) and improve the access to markets, guaranteeing a better 

price for producers. 

 

Needs Assessment: Burundi's agricultural sector engages more than 94% of the active 

population and accounts for more than 39% of the GDP, more than 80% of foreign exchange 

earnings and provides 95% of the dietary intake. It also accounts for 25% of government 

spending. The financing needs of the sector were estimated at approximately BIF 145 billion 

during the evaluation mission, to achieve the objectives of the National Plan for agricultural 

investment (NAIP-2012-2017) in terms of increased production and productive capital, 

organization of producers, developing profitable sectors and strengthening institutions 

providing technical support to rural areas. In 2017, the resources are estimated to be BIF 59.28 

billion, a significant deficit of over BIF 85.70 billion. The TSF resources, approximately BIF 

29.28 billion, will help to significantly reduce the financing gap, especially in the eight (08) 

municipalities in Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces. Moreover, the control of water for irrigation 

in the project area requires significant resources, as well as the dissemination of new 

technologies, creation of added value in the main agricultural sectors, sustainable promotion of 

young agricultural entrepreneurs, and strengthening resilience of socio-ecological systems. 

 

Added value for the African Development Bank: PATAREB supports the Bank's Ten Year 

Strategy 2013-2022 and the priority intervention areas funded by TSF in Burundi will support 

food and nutritional security, value chains and strengthen resilience. In particular, the project 

will contribute to reducing the Agricultural Financing Gap, serving as a catalyst for agricultural 

development of the area, by promoting a better control of water, reinforcing economic 

infrastructures, promoting appropriate technologies for food production, processing and 

marketing. In addition, PATAREB reinforces the Bank’s role in financing the agricultural 

sector in Burundi while taking into account the Bank's previous experience in similar projects. 

Lastly, it implements the Bank strategy to “remedy fragility and reinforce resilience in Africa 



 

iv 

 

2014-2019” by consolidating the role of communities, the private sector, and local NGOs in 

reinforcing resilience, local governance and citizen monitoring. This intervention will help build 

resilience and reduce situations of fragility that characterize the targeted Provinces. The project is 

also aligned to the Bank's Gender Strategy 2014 - 2018, in strengthening their right to ownership 

of developed land, economic empowerment through income generation and strengthening their 

capacity in management and in entrepreneurship. 

 

Knowledge management PATAREB will establish a baseline for land surveys (including on 

value chains), which will serve to establish a reliable database, disaggregated by gender, to 

measure results indicators and the impact of the project. A geo-referenced map will be created 

to provide information on developed sites and completed infrastructure. Specific impact 

assessment studies (quick and in-depth) will be carried out by competent firms and the results 

will feed into the project database. This information will be made available on a web site and 

will be shared with all stakeholders. The project will also support training and capacity building 

for diverse local actors, including, in the first instance, farmers within the reclaimed wetlands 

and women in charge of processing and marketing food products. The project will seek to 

disseminate good practices for conservation and storage of agricultural products. In the field of 

irrigation, the project will develop expertise in hillside irrigation using solar energy, and 

resilience to climate change, disseminating innovative actions promoting local know-how, 

including by women. Communication mechanisms and capitalization of project outcomes, 

value addition processes benefiting women and youth through development of value chains, as 

well as participatory assessment and evaluation by the civil society integrated within the project 

implementation mechanism, is part of knowledge management. 



 

v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
(*): Baseline indicator data will be updated at the end of the baseline survey. 

COUNTRY AND NAME OF 

PROJECT: 

Burundi : Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project (PATAREB) : 

PROJECT PURPOSE:  Stimulate  agricultural development of Bugesera natural region by setting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and suppo rt to social safety nets. 
 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Long term  2017 2022 and beyond 

Stat. INSAE, 

EMICOV/EDS 

 

Food and nutritional security 

improved and incidence of 
poverty reduced 

Average prevalence of food insecurity in the project intervention zone 

(PIZ) 

12%  5%  / 8% ( 2020) 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (children 5-59 months) in the PIZ 50.8% 25% / 35% (2020) 
SCRPIII Studies / 
Survey 

Proportion of population in poverty within the PIZ, disaggregated: M/F 39% 25% / 30% (2018) AGVSA Reports 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Medium Term  2015 2020  Risks 

 Unclear land and demesnial issues may bring 
difficulties in highlighting sites to be developed 

and compromise project objectives in terms of 

food security and the fight against poverty 

particularly for women and youth. 

 

Mitigation measures 

 Support to the project in terms of planning and 
land management which will result in the 
establishment of tripartite agreements  (rights 

holders of the common lands, professional 

organizations) and cooperatives in order to 
mitigate  conflicts  

1. An increase in agriculture, 

food , vegetables and fish 

production 

Average productivity for rice and sorghum respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 2 and 0.8 ≥ 10 and 2  Agricultural statistics 

 Project Monitoring 
Reports 

 Mid-term review report  
and project completion 

report 

Average productivity of maize and cassava respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 1 and 4.5 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Average productivity for vegetables (T/Ha) ≤ 2 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Commercial fish production volume / year (T) 700 2.200 

2. Improved  income for 
producers in rural areas, 

including women and young 

farmers 

Income/year for food crop production managed by men/women (BIF) 540000/300000 1000000/855000 

Income/year for horticulture production men/women (BIF) 90000/171000 1905000/2175000 

Income per year for fish farm run by men/women (BIF) ND 1260000/1065000 

3. Access to income and social 

services improved for very poor 

households 

Number of households benefiting from social transfers ND 1500 

% of social transfer beneficiaries  with a current integrated farm plan. ND 100% 

3. Establishment of a pro-youth 
agri-business promotion 

framework  

Number of operational companies with promoters H/F ND ≥ 12/11 

Number of bankable agri-business projects developed for H/F* ND 100/88 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Short Term  2017 Before 202  Risks  

 Climatic hazards may aggravate ecosystem 
degeneration (drought, flooding, etc.) leaving 
inhabitants more vulnerable and promoting 

conflict. 

 Restricted ownership and management of rural 
infrastructures 

Mitigation Measure: 

 Irrigation, protection of areas at risk, opening 
up production zones, integration of climate 

information in designing projects, and 
safeguarding incomes will alleviate this risk. 

I. SUPPORT TO DEV. OF 

AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

1.1 Reclaiming wetlands 

Reclaimed wetland areas (ha) for the benefit of men/women 618 1150 
 Project activity report 

 Monitoring unit reports 

 Contracts signed with 
the companies 

 Civil Society Activity 
Report 

 

1.2 Development of hillside 

irrigation 
Area covered by pilot highland irrigation (ha) for the benefit of M/F 0 30/20 

II. AGRICULTURAL 
TRANSFOMATION AND 

Area (ha) developed using new technologies for M/F  ND 3.382 / 2.200 



 

vi 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IMPROVEMENT OF 

LIVING CONDITIONS 

 

2.1 Support to Development 

of Value Chains 

Member of contact groups  formed in the Farmer Field Schools (FFS)  and 

Demonstration Units (DU) on  technological innovations: M/F 

0 105 / 105  Capacity building in conflict management for 
municipalities 

Number of stores (post-harvest inputs) built managed by M/F 0 4 / 6  CARDER Reports 
Agreements and 

protocols signed 

Project activity report 

Risks 

 Lack of follow-up of  technological 
innovations by communities 

 Weakness of follow-up by municipalities (MOD), 
delays in procurement, low capacity in technical services 

and of companies. 
Mitigation Measures: 

 Take committed and participatory steps in 
involving, organizing and training local actors 

 Financing a capacity building program for all 
actors. 

Person-days of training in technological review workshops : M/F 0/0 1450/1450 

Number of peasants trained in fine with resilient 

technologies 
ND 1750 / 1750 

Number of producers of improved seeds assisted: M/F 0 20/10 

Length of tracks built post-harvest (km) 0 13  

Number of beneficiaries from the Funds for CVA Promotion : M/F 0 12,600/8,400  

2.2 Promotion of Youth 

Entrepreneurship 

Number of business incubators supported 0 5≤ 

 DGPAE/MINAGRIE 
performance report 
 Civil Society 

Organizations report 

 MFI Report 
 Project Activity 

Report 

Number of Youth Employability support beneficiaries 0 / 0 365 / 135 

Number of PO and female EIG for transformation strengthened M/F 0 / 0 0 / 30 

Number of innovative youth initiative support fund beneficiaries: M/F 0/0 105/105 

Number of MFI that have signed agreements for rural financing 0/0 1 

Number of young producers benefiting from support in fish farming M/F: 0/0 85 / 25 

2.3 Support to Social Safety 

nets 

Area (ha) of catchment areas developed for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 2.500 / 910 

Area (ha) of catchment areas afforested for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 1.000 / 650 

Number of operators  (M/F) benefiting from livestock breeds:  0/0 350 / 200 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of agricultural inputs:  0/0 7.000 / 5.000 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of IGA: 0/0 950 / 1.500 

A number of social transfers beneficiaries taking part in awareness raising 
actions 

0/0 2100  
 

      

III. PROJECT 

MANAGEMENT 

Numbers of work plans and budget (AWB) produced and carried out 0/0 5  MPP 

 SAP System 

 Audit Reports 

 Activity Reports 

 Mission aide-
memoire 

 Impact assessment 
report 

Risks 

 Institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 
management and monitoring-evaluation. 
Mitigation Measures: 

A capacity building program for MINAGRIE 

and the PMU in project administration, 
procurement and financial management will 

mitigate this risk. 

Number of quarterly reports / approved annual audit reports 0/0 20/5 

Numbers of PPM plans produced and updated /rate of disbursement 0/0 5 / ≥ 95% 

Number of steering committee meetings held 0/0 10 

Number of supervision missions carried out by project supervisors /the 

Bank  
0/0 20 / 10 

Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced 0/0 1/1 

 Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced  0/0 1/1 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

Component 1: Support to Dev. of agricultural Infrastructure:  UA 3.38 million (28.20%) 

Component 2: Transf. Agricultural and improvement of living Cond.: UA 7.46 million (62.19%) 

Component 3: Project Management    UA 1.15 million (9.61%) 

TOTAL UA 12.00 million (100%) 

Total cost of  project: UA 12.00 million 

TSF Grant UA 12.00 million  (100%) 

Burundi Government UA 0.00 million (0.00%) 

(**)  M/F: Male / Female 
  



 

vii 

 

 

Indicative calendar of Project Execution 

 
 

No. ACTIVITIES 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 

1 TSF Grant Negotiations                         

2 Signature of grant agreement                          

3 Satisfaction of conditions precedent to 1st disbursement                          

4 Publication of general procurement notice                          

5 Recruitment of PMU staff                          

6 PATAREB launching workshop                          

7 
Procurement of PMU goods and offices (vehicles, IT equipment 

etc.) 
                  

      

8 Update of project baseline                           

9 Signature of agreements with partners organisations                         

10 Development of the Annual Work Plan(PTA)                          

11 Installation of management unit                          

12 Recruitment of service providers                           

13 Hillside irrigation: DAO                          

14 
Installation of post-harvest infrastructure (tracks, storage 

warehouses, processing units): DAO 
                   

      

15 Agreement with Micro-finance Institutions                          

16 Agreement with Partner Organisations                          

17 Development of Rice Value Chains                         

18 Development of Sorghum Value Chains                         

19 Development of Maize Value Chains                         

20 Introduction of Blue Economy Value Chain                         

21 Training of  actors                          

22 Watershed Management (ABV)                         

23 Support to Social Safety Nets                         

24 Development of Markets and Marketing                         

25 Monitoring and Supervision of Work                         

26 Development & Implementation of Monitoring-Evaluation System                          

27 Annual external audit                         

28 Completion report                         



 

1 

 

PROPOSAL AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS OF 

DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP CONCERNING  

A TRANSITION SUPPORT FACILITY GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI 

TO FINANCE THE SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 
 

Management submits this proposal for a UA 12 million TSF grant to the Republic of Burundi, 

to finance the Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project 

(PATAREB). 

 

I. Strategic Orientation and justification 
 

1.1. Linkages with the Country's Strategy and Goals 
 

1.1.1.  PATAREB is in line the implementation framework strategy of Government overall 

development policy, as captured in the "Burundi Vision 2025" document and in the 2 phase of 

strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction (PRSP II). At the sector level, it  at the 

same time supports implementation of the national Plan for agricultural investment (NAIP) 

linked to Burundi's National Agricultural Strategy (NAS)  of the implementation of the national 

policy on social protection, as well as the national employment policy These strategies aim at 

a high and inclusive growth likely to promote  improvement in the quality of life of vulnerable 

populations, by addressing food and nutritional security constraints, increasing incomes and 

creating employment particularly for the youth, by making agriculture more attractive. In 

addition to structural investments in water control, development of wetlands and afforestation 

of ridges, the project will contribute to the development of agricultural value chains targeted 

through new growth areas in Bugesera region and taking into account agro-industrial needs 

(rice, maize, sorghum, horticultural products, fish), as well as strengthening household 

resilience towards climate change. The project will also contribute directly to the objectives of 

the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) of Agenda 2063 of 

the African Union and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), related notably to food security 

et improvement of nutrition, promotion of sustainable agriculture discernible by production, 

productivity and greater value addition, youth employment, infrastructure, promotion of gender 

equality and empowerment of women as well as climate change. 

 

1.2. Justification of the Bank's involvement 
 

1.2.1  Agriculture financing remains insufficient as a result of reduction of external financing 

but also because the Government has not increased the proportion of national resources reserved 

for the agricultural sector. The share of the national budget reserved for agriculture was, on 

average, 5.2% between 2012 and 2014, compared to 10% of the national budget agreed upon 

during the Maputo declaration and the PNIA review conducted in 2015 showing a gap of 450 

billion BIF, which did not meet the target objective of inclusive growth, poverty reduction and 

strengthening of nutritional and food security. Considered in the past as the breadbasket of 

Burundi, Kirundo province, the project intervention zone is seriously affected by irregular 

rainfall patterns. As a result, it is one of the main emigration areas in the country. Climate 

analysis shows that the rainy season regularly experiences altered rainfall patterns and when 

this happens during the main farming seasons, the fall in agricultural production is considerable, 

increasing the rate of food insecurity which may be as high as 60%. On average, water deficit 

is estimated at more than 40%, which makes the choice offered by the development of swamps 

and hillside irrigation the best strategies to ensure a good harvest. In addition, due to a 

combination  of several factors such as (i) the sharp drop in agricultural production resulting 



 

2 

 

from climate change, (ii) the precariousness of populations, exacerbated by the widespread 

practice of selling of standing crops s causing a sharp drop in prices paid to producers, (iii) the 

high level of unemployment and underemployment, especially of the youth,  Kirundo province 

is among the poorest in the country with a  poverty index of 69.2% (ECVMB 2014) and a rate 

of malnutrition of children under 5 years, at more than 60%. In a context where 85 percent of 

the possesses land of less than or equal to 50 Ares and an average more than 6 children per 

household, efforts must be made to improve agricultural productivity, support the resilience the 

most vulnerable populations by allowing them to have access to employment and methods of 

financing income-generating activities. 

 

1.2.2  As a result of drought experienced in Kirundo Province in recent years which have had 

a negative impact on living conditions, the Government has implemented an ad hoc working 

group to propose a lasting solution to this situation. Within this context, the Bank was requested 

to support this program by financing PATAREB, for an amount of UA 12 million, to strengthen 

the resilience of the people of this region. This TSF support will help reduce the deficit in 

agricultural investment within the region, in particular by implementing the NIPA of the SAN. 

Consistent and high rates of agricultural growth resulting from high productivity are therefore 

necessary for increase in incomes and to accelerate poverty reduction. By targeting this 

disadvantaged area with significant agricultural potential, and by supporting  development of 

infrastructure and agricultural entrepreneurship, the TSF intervention will help reduce poverty, 

social disparities, promote employment of the youth, mitigate  fragility, and build resilience to 

climate change. In the project design, the prism of fragility has been applied so that the main 

sectoral fragility factors identified in the project implementation zone are taken into account by 

project activities, as indicated in annex IV. Finally, the project fits within the strategy of some 

agribusiness companies who have opted for the substitution of imported raw materials with 

local products, which will contribute to the improvement of the country’s trade balance.    

The Bank's intervention through this project is justified by the vision and objectives of the 

transformation strategy for agriculture "Feed Africa" which is part of the High 5s of the Bank. 
The project will indeed contribute to the objectives of the strategy "Feed Africa" by: (i) poverty 

reduction through the financing of investment in facilities, infrastructure and equipment likely to be 

valued for the generation of income by the beneficiaries; (ii) promoting the transformation of agricultural 

products by agricultural value (CVA) chains; and (iii) the promotion of export of agricultural products 

by market development and the implementation of systems of market information. It also integrates the 

priority of the Bank "Improving the lives of people in Africa" insofar as it will contribute to: (i) eradicate 

famine by high quality and high volume food production; (ii) safeguard basic income through 

employment created within the framework of development work and income generating activities 

initiated in particular by households living in extreme poverty. Finally, through activities in support 

of Youth entrepreneurship, the project will contribute to the implementation of the Bank’s 

strategy for Youth employment in Africa 2016-2025. At the national level, the project is aligned 

to the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Burundi (2012-2016) which has been extended to the 

end of 2017, mainly on the Pillar II: Improvement of the infrastructure that integrates related 
activities oriented toward the fight against vulnerability and exclusion of vulnerable groups with the aim 

to contribute to mitigate the factors of fragility. Specifically, the project will contribute to results 4 to 7 

of Pillar 2 namely: (i) contribution to the promotion of food security (ii) protection of the environment 

and sustainable management of soil and water, (iii) creation of jobs and (iv) adaptation to climate 

change. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 
 

1.3.1  The framework for aid coordination is based on the institutional mechanism of follow-

up and evaluation of the LRCS2, articulated around the sectoral groups, which are frameworks 

for synergies and cooperation. Despite suspension of aid by some donors, the  "agricultural and 



 

3 

 

rural development" and "social protection” sectoral groups have remained operational. The 

Bank actively participates in arrangement of consultations and dialogue which brings together 

non-governmental organizations involved in these sectors. The meetings are organised on a 

quarterly basis to facilitate discussions on subjects relating to policies, and to conduct, in a 

concerted manner, discussions relating to planning and programming of various projects and to 

ensuring regular monitoring of  activities in the different sectors. This coordination mechanism 

allows improvement of complementarity of interventions by different PTFs, thus creating a 

natural synergy to multiply the impact of projects on the economic and social development of 

Burundi. 

 

1.3.2  In the agricultural sector, the Bank financed the Bugesera natural region rural 

infrastructure support project which wrapped up its activities in 2016. The other donors 

involved in this sector are the World Bank, IFAD, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and 

Belgium. In the field of social protection, the Bank has financed capacity-building projects in 

the past few years which have allowed the setting up of institutional structures in charge of 

employment and social protection while at the same time supporting a project for strengthening 

entrepreneurial capabilities of the youth and women. The main stakeholders in the social 

protection sector are the World Bank, WFP and UNICEF. With respect to youth employment, 

the only active project is the one financed by IFAD. The table below presents the main amounts 

by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector in Burundi. The table below 

presents the principal amounts by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector 

in Burundi. 

 

 Table 1.1  Principal amounts active in the sector since 2012 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Proportion 

GDP Exports Labour Force 

Agricultural sector 39% (2016)  80% 90% 

Stakeholders - Public Expenditure (programs or projects in progress) 

Government Donors Amounts (USD million ) Duration 

BIF 28.5  billion per year World Bank 155 2016-2022 

(Average 20012-2014) BANK                        - - 

That is 5.2% of the 

National Budget 
BTC 27.8 2011-2017 

 

Kingdom of the 

Netherlands 
                          27.1 2016-2021 

 IFAD                       144 2014-2019 

 FAO 9.7 2013-2018 

Aid Coordination level 

Presence of thematic working groups Yes 

Presence of a global sectoral program No 

 

1.3.3  Burundi and its partners have made progress in terms of aid efficiency, particularly in 
predictability of aid and its inclusion in the budget. Efforts are still to be made with regard to 
incorporation of gender equality into the development plans and in the use of national public 
finance management systems and procurement. In Burundi, the use of national public 
procurement systems by the Bank in its operations remains rather limited. However, since 2013, 
it has begun to use the national procedures for the award of contracts in the framework of the 
national tenders (AON) on a pilot basis. The on-going revision of the Code of Public 
Procurement (CPP) and Standard Bidding Documents for National Tenders (DTAON), which 
benefits from the Bank’s assistance, the World Bank and the Belgian Technical Cooperation, 
will allow the systematic recourse to the national procurement system. In terms of alignment to 
national systems and procedures, all projects are managed directly by permanent structures, 
within the supervising ministries. With regard to capacity building, the Bank works closely with 



 

4 

 

the Government, in organizing training in key areas such as financial management, 
disbursements and procurement with a view to the efficient and effective implementation of the 
portfolio by the CEP.  

 

II. Project Description 
 

2.1 Components of the project 
 

The overall objective PATAREB is to contribute to the improvement of populations 

livelihood through agriculture development and transformation. The specific objective of the 

project is to stimulate inclusive agricultural development in the Bugesera natural region by 

putting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and support to social 

safety nets. Scheduled for 5 years, the project comprises the following three (03) components: 

(i) Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of Populations Livelihood; and (iii) Management and 

Coordination. The activities are summarized in table 2.1 below: 

 

Table 2.1: Components of the project 
 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

A. 

 

SUPPORT  TO AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 

3,384.40 

(28.20%) 

A1. Completion of wetland development 

(i) Development of Nyavyamo swamp (300ha) 
(ii) Development of Kabuyenge swamp (232 ha) 
A.2. Development of the hillside irrigation 

(i) Bugabira municipality (20 ha on Cohoha Lake) 
(ii) Busoni municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha and 10 ha on 

Lake Rweeru) 

(iii) Kirundo municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha) 
. 

B. 

PROMOTION OF THE 

AGRICULTURALTRANSFORMATION 

AND IMPROVEMENT OF 

POPULTATIONS LIVELIHOOD 

 

7 462.95 

(62.19%) 

B1. Support to Development of Value Chains 

(i) Rice, maize and sorghum value chains 
(ii) Horticultural products value chain 
(iii) Subsistence agriculture value chain 
(iv) Blue economy value chain 
(v) Study on promotion of Banana, Maize and Horticulture 

value chains 

B2. Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 

(i) Business incubators; 
(ii) Support for Youth Employability 
(iii) Support to financing of young entrepreneurs; 

B3. Support to Social Safety Nets 

(i) Watershed Management - Labour intensive work  

 Gradual grading and agroforestry 1800 ha at 
Nyavyamo and 1550 ha at Kabuyenge 

(ii) Food security support  for  very poor and vulnerable 
households (few livestock and agricultural inputs) 

(iii) Support for income-generating activities 
(iv) Support to the strengthening of human capital;  



 

5 

 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

C 
MANAGEMENT AND 

COORDINATION OF PROJECT 

1 152.65 

(9.61%) 

 

(i) Organization of  strategic and operational planning of 
project 

(ii) Coordination of the project activities  
(iii) Administrative , accounting and financial management  
(iv) Acquisition of goods, works and services,  
(v) Institutional support, 
(vi) Establishment of a training and communication plan 
(vii) Monitoring and evaluation of project execution 

 TOTAL 12,000.00  

 
 

2.2 Adopted technical solutions and substitution solutions studied  
 

2.2.1  The technical solutions adopted are based on the lessons learned from similar 

achievements, including the PAIRB and the PABVARC, adapted to the specific context of the 

area of intervention of the project.  Thus the choice of gravity irrigation which involves watering 

the crops by dripping water through open conduits connected to a reservoir upstream which 

could be either a dam with a water pipe from the river or a water container has been preferred 

for Nyavyamo and Kabuyenge swamps..  This technical choice was motivated by the fact that 

the cost of construction of a gravity irrigation system is 3 to 4 times lower than that of a 

pressurised one and does not require a source of energy 

 

2.2.2  Regarding hillside irrigation, the chose option was photovoltaic energy on the basis of 

the following benefits: (i) solar energy is inexhaustible and non-polluting (clean and does not 

emit greenhouse gases); (ii) it supplies energy needs in a sustainable manner and with 

significant savings; (iii) the costs of maintenance and operation of a thermal installation are 

relatively low; (iv) the energy performance is positive once configuration has been carried out 

in relation with the irrigation needs. 

 

2.2.3  The choice of the "Cash for Work” approach  has been prioritized with regard to support 

to social safety nets, in order to meet both the needs of protection of watersheds and access to 

income for the most vulnerable households. In addition, the transfer of agricultural inputs and 

support for income-generating activities naturally helps these households to emerge from 

vulnerability in a sustainable way. 
 

Table 2.2: Alternative solutions considered and reasons for rejection 
Alternative solution Brief Description Reason for rejection 

Pressurised irrigation 

system, with an efficiency 

that can reach 80% to 90% 

of irrigation system 

In addition to irrigation system 

install a pumping system to 

distribute water in the reservoirs. 

This option is outside the project framework  which requires 

involvement of individuals and local cooperatives in the 

implementation of hydro-agricultural developments to be 

installed at a community level. In addition, this solution is too 

expensive for all communities 

Pressurised irrigation using 

thermal energy (diesel or 

petrol) 

Pressurised irrigation using a 

pumping station operated by a fossil 

fuel energy source (diesel or petrol) 

This option is considered too expensive, because of the cost 

of fuel. The source of energy is not aligned with the 

framework, in compliance with environmental standards  

Recruit a private provider 

to perform all of watershed 

development works. 

A service provider is recruited to 

complete the watershed 

development works for the benefit 

of inhabitants. 

This option does not allow the service provider company to 

use the local labour force which will then access income 

benefits intended for the most vulnerable households. 

 

2.3 Type of Project 
 

PATAREB is an investment operation financed by a Pillar I grant from the Transition 

Support Fund. Burundi does not implement project and programs using the sectoral approach 



 

6 

 

due to institutional constraints. Consequently, the project approach has been considered more 

axed towards the framework of this proposal, to guarantee achievement of results and ensure 

effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources allocated to the project.  

 

2.4 Cost of project and financing arrangements 
 

2.4.1  Cost of project. The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 12.00 million (BIF 

29.28 billion) excluding taxes and duties. This cost is distributed as follows:  UA 5.76 million 

(BIF 14.06 billion) in foreign currency and UA 6.24 million (BIF 15.23 billion) in local 

currency. This costs includes contingency reserves and for increase in costs which are estimated 

to be at 5% and 4% respectively on average. The provision for an increase in prices has been 

estimated on the basis of  current levels and projected from rates of inflation  in local currency 

and in foreign currencies at 3.2% and 1.8% respectively , per year on average. The provision 

for physical contingencies is estimated at between 0 and 7 %, a summary of the estimated cost 

of the project by component and by expenditure account is presented in Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 

below, while the details are provided in the technical annex of project appraisal report. 
Table 2.3: 

Summary of Estimated Costs by Component 

 COMPONENTS 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 2,710.50 4,734.00 7,444.50 1,110.79 1,940.04 3,050.82 64 28 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 2,410.50 4,034.00 6,444.50 987.85 1,653.17 2,641.02 63 24 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

B AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & IMPROV. 

POP. LIVE 9,841.00 7,022.99 16,863.98 4,032.93 2,878.08 6,911.01 42 63 

 Support to Value Chain Development 4,656.76 2,437.67 7,094.43 1,908.38 998.98 2,907.36 34 26 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 2,486.75 325.00 2,811.75 1,019.09 133.19 1,152.28 12 10 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 2,697.49 4,260.31 6,957.80 1,105.46 1,745.91 2,851.37 61 26 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 

OF PROJECT 1,652.09 1,006.85 2,658.94 677.04 412.62 1,089.66 38 10 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

Table 2.4: 
Summary of Project Cost by Category of Expenses 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 I. INVESTMENT 11,839.33 12,393.36 24,232.68 4,851.87 5,078.91 9,930.78 51 90 

 A. WORKS 3,770.04 8,796.76 12,566.80 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 70 47 

  Developments 2,898.99 6,764.31 9,663.30 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 70 36 

  Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

  Construction & Rehabilitation 32.55 75.95 108.50 13.34 31.13 44.46 70 - 

  Post-Harvest Infrastructure 538.50 1,256.50 1,795.00 220.68 514.93 735.61 70 7 

 B. GOODS 650.91 1,291.69 1,942.60 266.75 529.35 796.10 66 7 

  1. VEHICLES 72.50 217.50 290.00 29.71 89.13 118.84 75 1 

  2. FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT & INPUTS 578.41 1,074.19 1,652.60 237.04 440.21 677.25 65 6 

 C. SERVICES 4,268.38 2,304.90 6,573.28 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 35 24 

  Training 726.00 484.00 1,210.00 297.52 198.35 495.87 40 4 

  Technical Assistant 85.50 484.50 570.00 35.04 198.55 233.59 85 2 

  Studies 150.88 184.40 335.28 61.83 75.57 137.40 55 1 

  Contractual Services 3,249.75 1,083.25 4,333.00 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 25 16 

  Audit 56.25 68.75 125.00 23.05 28.17 51.23 55 - 

 D.MISCELLANEOUS 3,150.00 - 3,150.00 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 - 12 

II. OPERATIONS 2,364.26 370.48 2,734.74 968.90 151.83 1,120.72 14 10 

 A. STAFF 1,849.65 - 1,849.65 758.00 - 758.00 - 7 

 B. TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCE 97.00 - 97.00 39.75 - 39.75 - - 



 

7 

 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 

C. MAINTENANCE, OPERATION AND 

REPAIR 157.73 283.85 441.59 64.64 116.33 180.97 64 2 

 D. GENERAL COSTS 259.88 86.63 346.50 106.50 35.50 142.00 25 1 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

 

 

Table 2.5:  

Expense Calendar by component (in thousands of UA) 

COMPONENTS 
PROJECT YEARS 

Total 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 91.01 1,523.28 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 3,384.40 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 91.01 1,069.46 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 2,930.58 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation - 453.82 - - - 453.82 

B. AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & POP. LIVELIHOOD 

IMPROV. 1,019.76 2,519.72 2,802.57 871.94 248.95 7,462.95 

 Support to Development of Value Chains 376.72 1,550.49 588.78 369.22 211.76 3,096.99 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 628.82 216.42 308.02 18.51 18.54 1,190.30 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 14.22 752.81 1,905.77 484.21 18.66 3,175.66 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF 

PROJECT 449.43 188.83 180.61 165.97 167.81 1,152.65 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 1,560.20 4,231.84 4,566.53 1,130.71 510.73 12,000.00 

 

 

2.4.2 Financing facility: The costs shall be entirely financed by a TSF grant amounting to 

UA 12 million.  Counterpart contributions by the government were not feasible for this project, 

given that Burundi is recovering progressively but with major challenges from the 2015 socio-

political crisis, hardly mobilising contributions for recent and on-going operations.  This 

situation gave the Country-Team no other choice but to recommend a financial arrangement 

without counterpart state funds, if at all feasible. Within this context, the project was designed 

to allow financing of all activities from TSF resources. Distribution of financing of expenses 

by source of funds and list of goods and services is recorded in tables 2.6 and 2.7, here below. 

 
Table 2.6:  

Project Financing Plan 

FINANCING SOURCES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 
Local Cur. For. Exch Total Local Cur. For. Exch Total 

 TSF Grant 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 Government of Burundi 0.00 -0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 

Total 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 
Table 2.7:  

Allocation of Project resources by Source of Financing (in thousands of UA)  

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

A. WORKS 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 

 Developments 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 

 Irrigation 122.94 286.87 409.81 

 Construction and Refurbishment 13.34 31.13 44.46 

 Post-harvest infrastructure 220.68 514.93 735.61 

B. GOODS 266.75 529.35 796.10 

 Vehicles 29.71 89.13 118.84 

 Facilities 237.04 440.21 677.25 

C. SERVICES 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 

 Training 297.52 198.35 495.87 



 

8 

 

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

 Technical Assistance 35.04 198.55 233.59 

 Studies 61.83 75.57 137.40 

 Contractual Services 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 

 Audit 23.05 28.17 51.23 

D. MISCELLANEOUS 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 

E. STAFF 758.00 - 758.00 

F. OPERATION 210.89 151.83 362.72 

Non-allocated 419.04 529.46 948.51 

Total 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 

 

2.5 Area and beneficiaries targeted by the project 
 

2.5.1  The project intervention zone (PIZ) covers the natural region of Bugesera extending 

over all the seven communes of Kirundo Province and the Gitreranyi Commune of Muyinga 

Province.  It is bordered to the North and the West by the Republic of Rwanda and Ngozi 

Province. To the South and East, it shares a common border with Muyinga Province. Its surface 

area of 2,100 km2 represents 75% of the national territory. The population of the Province in 

2017 is estimated at 1,004,907 inhabitants, of whom 519,665 are women. Despite having a high 

agricultural potential, the region’s agricultural yields are low not only because of the limited 

use of chemical fertilisers, but also the rudimentary farming techniques, lack of inputs, 

degeneration of seeds, etc. the dominant cultivation system is the combination of crops with the 

exception of rice cultivation, which is carried out in monoculture in swamps.  

 

2.5.2   The project will directly benefit a population of 900,000 people (51% women) 

composed mainly of agri-pastoralists. The latter will be supported through activities aimed at 

developing rice, maize and sorghum value chains and supporting the development of the blue 

economy. The development of these value chains will also benefit private sector companies 

engaged in the processing of agricultural products. In addition, special attention will be paid to 

vulnerable populations as well as the youth. Vulnerable populations will benefit particularly 

from the “Cash-for-work” approach developed through watershed management, transfer of 

agricultural inputs and support for the development of income-generating activities. This 

population group will benefit from 20% of parcels that will be developed in the Nyavyamo 

swamp. The project will also prioritise youth through related activities related to 

entrepreneurship promotion to enable self-employment. The choice of beneficiaries will be 

made in close consultation with the populations and the local Administration.  

 

2.6 Participatory approach for the identification, design and implementation of the 
project 
 

The Bank has adopted the participatory approach in its assistance to Burundi to 

formulate the request for TSF financing and throughout the project preparation process. This 

has resulted in the organisation of workshops and discussion meetings with public institutions, 

non-state actors, producer organizations, civil society including organizations working in the 

field of gender, private sector, TFPs and beneficiaries. This approach made it possible to better 

understand the major issues, to identify the appropriate solutions, and to reach a broad 

consensus on its design and the implementation modalities of the project. Thus, the producers 

reaffirmed the need to take into account the current rights holders in the allocation of developed 

swamp parcels. Rural women in the PIZ emphasised their access to developed perimeters, and 

new processing and marketing technologies. The Kirundo Governor and Local Authorities 

expressed their specific needs to address the vulnerability of inhabitants, by supporting social 

safety nets, improving agricultural production conditions and mitigating conflicts related to 

land competition. As for the youth, they insisted on vocational training and their successful 



 

9 

 

establishment as modern agricultural entrepreneurs targeting the markets. The project will 

continue this participatory approach so that local actors take ownership of activities and 

implementation during implementation. Good communication will be developed to ensure 

visibility of achievements and impacts and wide dissemination of project achievements. 
 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group experience and lessons learned in project design 
 

2.7.1  In October 2017, the Bank's portfolio in Burundi consisted of 17 operations, of which 8 

were national, at a total amount of UA 121.4 million (USD 171.2 million). The agricultural 

sector does not have an active project, the only project in the sector having closed on 

31/12/2016. The overall performance of the portfolio is assessed as satisfactory with a rating of 

3.5 in scale from 1 to 4.  The portfolio review conducted in 2016 highlighted shortcomings that 

were taken into account to ensure the project's performance. These include:  (i) Lack of 

familiarity with the Bank's procurement and internal control rules and procedures within the 

PIUs delays in setting up key project staff; (ii) delay in setting up key personnel, (iii) delay in 

the development of technical studies and poor synchronization of input procurement and  

weather patterns, (iv) low ownership of project achievements by beneficiary organizations; (v) 

delay in the provision and / or insufficiency of counterpart funds which severely hampers the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. In addition, the project took into account lessons learned 

from the Bank's Strategy and Program Appraisal Report for Burundi 2004-2015, which focused 

on (i) insufficient targeting to ensure that vulnerable populations are taken into account in the 

various projects as well as (ii) a weak integration of job creation support activities, especially 

for the youth and environmental conservation. 

 

2.7.2  The design of PATAREB took into account the lessons learned from the Bank’s projects 

in Burundi and those of the Bank's TSF portfolio, as shown below: 

 

Table 2.8:  
Consideration of the Bank Group experience and lessons learned 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

Lack of familiarity with the Bank's 

procurement and internal control rules 

and procedures within the PIUs. 

Provide proper training in Bank procurement and financial management 

procedures at project launch to PIU members and executives from partner 

administrative structures involved in project management. 

Delay in setting up key project staff. Adoption of the pre-procurement process in order to quickly set up the 

PIU and launch the various procurement processes.  

 
Delays in the development of technical 

studies.  

 

Low synchronisation of agricultural 

input acquisition and the rhythm of the 

seasons. 

The project will adopt community procurement for agricultural input 

acquisitions to ensure compliance with growing seasons. 

 

Low ownership of project achievements 

by beneficiary organisations. 

Right from the start of the project; recruit a local operator (NGO) with 

the necessary expertise to: (i) structure and strengthen the organisational 

capacities of producer organisations, (ii) provide support for improving 

good governance of POs, and (iii) support development of agricultural 

production. 

  

Late and/or insufficient provisions of 

counterpart funds severely handicap the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. 

Limited use of counterpart funds to finance key activities to address 

current fiscal challenges. 

 

Insufficient targeting of vulnerable 

populations. 

The NGO providing support from the beginning of the project will 

support the process of targeting vulnerable households.  



 

10 

 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

 Some fragility factors such as 

environmental protection, employment, 

especially of youth are not sufficiently 

taken into account in Bank operations in 

Burundi. 

A sub-component has been set aside to support the creation of youth 

employment and the protection of the environment will be taken into 

account in watershed management and reforestation.  

 

2.8 Key performance indicators  
 

The main performance indicators to be monitored from the baseline are:  (i) number of 

rehabilitated dams; (ii) developed areas with partial and total control; (iii) level of additional 

production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (iv) number of VA infrastructure completed (market 

sheds, km of farm tracks, warehouses for products and inputs, etc.); (v) number of operators by 

type of development supported disaggregated by gender; (vi) number of technology reviews 

and multi-stakeholder platforms completed and the percentage attributed to women; (vii) level 

of income growth including that of women and youth; (viii) number of youth jobs and women 

created in entrepreneurial initiatives; (ix) number of producers, processors and traders trained 

and organized into cooperatives in accordance; (x) degree of involvement of women in 

decision-making bodies and their rate of access to land after development; (xi) number of 

installed transformation units; and (xii) malnutrition rate in the beneficiary population. All the 

indicators selected for the project have been aligned with the main CSP indicators and those 

retained within the framework of the NAIP.  

 

III. Project feasibility 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  
 

3.1.1  The financial and economic analysis of the project was carried on the basis of 

cost/benefit analysis of the expected outcomes of the project, comparing the with and without 

project situations, over the life cycle of investments in promotion of agricultural transformation 

or project's lifespan  (Project life), estimated at 25 years. The expected benefits of the project 

come from the transformation of agriculture into the project intervention zone (PIZ), based on 

the preservation of natural resources and other livelihoods, including: (i) the sustainable 

promotion of agricultural value chains by intelligent agriculture, for productions in the project 

area such as rice, sorghum, maize, cassava, beans and farm produce. (ii) promotion of the blue 

economy (pond culture, cage and above-ground bins); (i) sustainable promotion of value chains 

of non-timber forest products (NTFPs), such as honey (beekeeping), pods, almonds, seeds and 

natural fruit, leaves and bark used in the traditional pharmacopoeia; (iv) improving the 

ecological balance and maintaining a habitat conducive to wildlife development that also offers 

environmental opportunities; (v) improving the well-being of the population by preventing 

drought and famine, improving food security, reducing the medical bill with the regulation of 

climatic conditions, reducing the hardship of the population; the work of families, especially 

women and vulnerable groups, improving people's life expectancy, better incomes for access 

to health care and education, etc. (vi) improvement of animal and livestock production, because 

of the quality and abundance of pasture and water; (vii) spin-offs from carbon dioxide 

sequestration (carbon credit, including bio-carbon); and (viii) the creation of temporary and 

permanent jobs, resulting from project achievements. The detailed assumptions of the economic 

and financial analysis, the tables of production and exploitation models (situation without and 

with the project) and the financial and economic flows are detailed in the technical annexes 

(Annex B8). 

 

 



 

11 

 

 

Table 3.1: Key economic and financial factors 
 

NPV (baseline scenario) 89.72 billion BIF 

TRI (baseline scenario) 20.17% 

Economic NPV (baseline scenario) 92.01 billion BIF 

TRE (baseline scenario) 23.02% 

 

3.1.2  Financial performance: The additional revenues resulting from the various models of 

development and exploitation retained are the following: (i) development of marshes 

(floodplains with water control) allows double rice cultivation (10 T/ha in total per year), 

corresponding to about BIF 1 509 000/ha, or BIF377 000  per farmer with 51 % of women 

beneficiaries; (ii) facilities also used for market gardening in rotation, for a production value 

BIF 7,474,000/ha or BIF 1,868,500 per male farmer, including women beneficiaries; (iii) 

cultivation of sorghum and maize in family farming on plateaux and watersheds BIF990 000 

/ha per farmer; (iv) the development of fish farming on and around Cohoha and Rweru lakes, 

for an estimated annual income per farmer of BIF845,000  (see Annex B7 for the typology of 

farm size and overall additional revenues released, thus contributing to increased value added 

through the project). The internal financial rate of return (IRR) is estimated at BIF 89.72 billion. 

The sensitivity tests established on the basis of simulations of successive decreases in prices or 

agricultural yields from 2.5% to 35%, show that the IRR falls more slowly than prices and 

yields, with a break-even value that is set at a drastic price reduction of more than 27.25%. As 

a result, the IRR is stable, with the effect of reducing the incidence of poverty in the IPA. 

 

3.1.3  Economic performance: The basic economic rate of return is 23.01% for a net present 

value (NPV) of BIF 92.01 billion. The other economic impacts of the project can be 

summarized as follows: (i) the upstream effects of additional revenues on providers (NGOs, 

companies, suppliers, consulting firms); (ii) the downstream effects of generating additional 

income on traders and processors who are predominantly women, thus contributing to women's 

empowerment and economic empowerment; (iii) lowering foreign exchange costs by 

significantly reducing the import bill for rice in the country's trade balance and currency 

balance; (iv) the impact on wealth creation in the country through the increase in GDP induced 

by the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will 

result, inter alia, in better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age 

and the elderly), a reduction in the medical bill, the arduous task of agricultural workers, 

particularly women, reducing the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty, enhancing 

livelihoods and household resilience to food insecurity and the effects of climate change, and 

in the long run, increase in life expectancy and improvement of the human development index. 
 

3.1.4  The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PATAREB is financially 

and economically viable.  
 

3.1.5  Sensitivity Analysis: The sensitivity analysis was carried out on the basis of scenario 

analysis to simulate the financial performance indicators (NPV, IRR and A/C Ratio) from the 

most sensitive endogenous variables of the analysis model used, namely the price and output 

of the productions. The simulations thus carried out show that, as the prices of products fall , 

the financial performance indicators also drop, but much more slowly. On the basis of this 

result, it can be concluded that the financial performance of PATAREB can be considered as 

stable, although the project's financial results are sensitive to lower prices. In addition, the 

switch-over threshold linked to the price decrease is over -27.5%. Therefore, prices need to fall 

drastically by more than 27.5% for the internal rate of return (IRR) to be equal to the opportunity 



 

12 

 

cost of Capital estimated at 12%. The successive decline in yields is also reflected in a drop in 

the values of the financial performance indicators (IRR, NPV, A/C ratio), as in the previous 

situation with the fall in prices. Similarly, the break-even point of return is -27.88% decline in 

yield. The scenario synthesis is presented in Annex B8, as indicated above. 
 

3.2 Environmental and social impact 
 

3.2.1  PATAREB is a follow-up to the Bugesera Natural Region Rural Infrastructure Support 

Project (PAIRB), which focused on major developments.  The activities planned during this 

second phase of the Project will complement those that were not completed during the first 

phase and will focus on improving value chains, social safety nets and youth entrepreneurship. 

The project is classified in Category 2. In line with Bank procedures, the summary of the ESMP 

was posted at least one month ahead of expected Board consideration. 

 

3.2.2  The planned activities will be mainly carried out in rural areas, outside the dwellings, 

on agrosilvopastal areas. They are not likely to generate negative impacts or major risks, or lead 

to significant asset losses or population displacements. These impacts and effects will be of 

minor magnitude and could be mitigated by application of different mitigation measures and 

good practices. The negative impacts will be small, and will be mainly related to the generation 

of waste, the risks of pollution, the risk of accidents and gas emissions during the realisation of 

certain developments. 

  

3.2.3  An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been developed in line 

with the Bank's environmental and social policies and guidelines, and in accordance with 

Burundi's regulatory framework in the field. The ESMP recommended different measures, 

mitigation and enhancement, but also provisions to be made during the implementation of the 

project, as well as the costs associated with these different measures. 

 

3.2.4  An Ordinance of the Minister in charge of the environment had set up a Technical 

Committee in charge of the implementation of the ESMP of Phase I of the project. This 

Committee could be renewed taking into account the new sub-components (social safety nets 

and youth entrepreneurship), and by integrating the provincial and municipal structures 

responsible for the environment, social development, gender, youth, etc. During the 

implementation of the project, the Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 

coordinating the activities of the Environmental Monitoring Committee and providing them 

with administrative, technical and financial support; etc. 
 

3.2.5  Climate change: CO2 emissions per capita (metric tons) in Burundi are estimated at 

0.03 tons (2013), compared with 1.1 in Africa and 3.0 in developing countries. Burundi is also 

experiencing a significant reduction in ODS (ozone depleting substances) consumption, from 

26.76 tonnes weighted in the 2000-2004 period to 7.0 tonnes in 2015. However, there is a sharp 

decline in forest area on the national territory. From 11.3% in 1990, it represented only 6.7% 

in 2010, and fell to a proportion of just 5.5% in 2015. The current rate is 64.54 square kilometres 

of annual loss of the area covered by forests, or more than 2% of annual average. 

 

3.2.6  In relation to climate change, the project area is mainly confronted with recurring 

droughts, sometimes alternated by periods of heavy rains that have led to swamps flooding, 

lake level rise, siltation some lowlands, soil erosion, etc. These natural phenomena negatively 

impact ecosystems, production systems and food security. In this context, the activities planned 

by the project will to a large extent enhance the resilience of ecosystems and communities to 

climate change, through the implementation of a series of actions that will contribute to the 



 

13 

 

improvement of the production systems , the reduction of the practice of the extensive system, 

the restoration of ecosystems through the application of good agricultural practices, 

reforestation actions, the establishment of green belts, bank protection activities, etc.  

 

3.2.7  The project activities align with the options and priority activities identified in Burundi's 

National Action Program for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAPA). The project should 

benefit from the "SAP-Burundi" project (early warning system) to integrate climate information 

into the agricultural calendar, the management of works, etc. As part of the National Program 

of Reforestation, Burundi is committed to increase carbon dioxide sinks by reforestation of 

4,000 hectares per year for 15 years from 2016. The PATAFI, which has planned a major 

reforestation program and the establishment of green belts, etc., will contribute to achieving the 

set objective.  
 

3.2.8 Gender: Women (about 52%) and youth (average age of the provincial population, 20.5 
years and median age, 16.0 years) represent a large majority of the population in the project 

area. Despite the existence of large hydro agricultural resources and potential, the population 

of the project area is among the poorest in the country (76% on a national average of 64%). 

Farming and farming systems are still traditional and weakly intensified.  

 

3.2.9 The consultations revealed that the agricultural sector, in which a large majority of 
women are involved, faces the following main constraints: very high pressure on land and 

fragmentation of agricultural parcels (average 0.5 ha); difficulties for producers and especially 

for women to access land and inputs; work overload due to household chores, strong 

responsibility for child rearing, household operation and management; weak management and 

programs on improving and diversifying production systems, leadership and entrepreneurship; 

difficulties related to the conservation, the processing and the sale of the products, etc.  

 

3.2.10 Despite the efforts made, there is still inequality and discrimination against women in 
terms of equitable access to land and other factors of production; and decision-making bodies. 

 

3.2.11 The PATAREB, whose main activities target women, in particular, will contribute to 
improving their access to factors of production such as credit and land, conservation, 

processing, production flow, etc. The project will thus make a significant contribution to 

improving women's living conditions by improving agricultural production systems and 

sectors, increasing production and income, and strengthening their capacity; etc.  

 

3.2.12 The consultations also revealed that they spend most of their income on the family, 
especially children. Increasing women's incomes will help improve household food security 

and well-being. The project will ensure that women and women benefit equally from other 

project benefits. 

 

3.2.13 The Ministry of National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender (MSNDPHG) is in 
charge of the promotion of women and gender equality. To carry out its mission, the 

MSNDPHG includes within it a Directorate General for the Promotion of Women and Gender 

Equality, structured in two departments: the Department for the Promotion of Women and the 

Department of Gender Equality. The Ministry also relies on deconcentrated structures called 

Family Development Centers (FDC), which are located at the level of each Province. The latter 

are relays of the ministry to communities on all aspects related to gender and other missions. 

 



 

14 

 

3.2.14  Provincial and municipal bodies and structures dealing with gender issues will have to 
be integrated into the bodies responsible for project management (technical committee, 

monitoring committee, etc.). Gender-related indicators will be taken into account in the project's 

monitoring and evaluation system based on disaggregated data by sex, etc. 

 

3.2.15 Social: With 84.7% for Muyinga and 76.2% for Kirundo respectively, the provinces in 
the area of influence of the project had poverty rates well above the national average (64%). In 

terms of nutrition, the province of Kirundo has a global acute malnutrition rate of 5%, that of 

chronic malnutrition at47.9% which is above the critical threshold of 40% set by WHO. 

 

3.2.16 In such a context of poverty and vulnerability, by improving agricultural production 
systems and the development of value chains, the positive impacts and effects of the project 

will be considerable on local and even national development in different sectors, activities and 

on all social categories (adults, youth, women, etc.). The project will contribute to improving 

agricultural production and incomes, enhance food security, foster the creation of local 

employment opportunities, contribute to poverty reduction and the vulnerability of targeted 

populations, reduce unemployment and youth migration, contribute to the empowerment of 

women, etc.  

 

3.2.17 However, the works could generate nuisances and inconveniences (noise, dust, exhaust 
gases, etc.) that could affect the health (respiratory diseases) of the workers and the populations 

who would be exposed to it. The mixing of populations in the work areas can also contribute to 

the proliferation of sexually transmitted diseases (STI/HIV AIDS). Rigorous safety, awareness 

and good practice measures are advocated to minimize and reduce these risks.  
 

3.2.18 Youth employment and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship: This 
component will help develop the entrepreneurial culture of young project leaders to increase 

incomes and create decent jobs for youth and women. The project will assist the emergence of 

small clusters of young promoters and will directly reach 1,200 young girls and boys trained in 

agricultural entrepreneurship, and installed in all links of the value chain: production activities 

in developed marshes, farms fish farming, processing, trade and services. This initiative aims 

ultimately, by its multiplier effect to reach nearly 3,600 young men and women.  

 

3.2.19 To this end, the project will work in partnership with the Kirundo Trade Centres (CEM 
Kirundo) and the Mutwenzi Centre in the identification, selection and training of beneficiaries.  

These institutions will receive project support, and will work with the Microfinance Institutions 

(MFIs) present in the project area for the financing needed for business development. Thus, the 

supervision of young promoters will be done in the incubation Centres, mentioned above, also 

responsible for mobilising aggregators and private operators. They will help youth to make their 

credit reports more reliable in order to better access the available financial resources. The 

project will also facilitate youth's access to developed perimeters and equipment in the form of 

basic kits, according to their business plans and areas of specialisation. Finally, the project will 

promote partnerships between all actors for better integration of value chains (production, 

processing, inputs, markets, etc.). The operational modalities of agricultural entrepreneurship 

and financial incentives will be defined following a specific study at the start of the project. 

 

3.2.20 Forced relocation: The activities of PATAREB do not induce any displacement of 
populations nor their resettlement. They contribute to the development of the affected territories 

and to maintain the populations in their zones 

 



 

15 

 

IV. Implementation  
 

4.1 Provisions for implementation: 
 

4.1.1 Implementing rules: In line with the Presidential Directives N°02/2015, the Country 
should take all necessary steps to fast-track the start-up of the project. The Ministry of 

Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) will be in charge of the project management and 

coordination.  A multi-sector project steering committee (PSC) will also be established to 

ensure guidance and orientation of the project implementation, as required. As part of the 

coordination of project activities, MINAGRIE will be supported by a full-time Project 

Management Unit (PMU), under the supervision of the Kirundo Provincial Directorate of 

Agriculture and Livestock, which has its headquarters in Kirundo. The PAIRB Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual will need to be adapted to affirm the enhanced 

role of DPAE in the management of PATAREB. 

 

4.1.2 The PMU will be mainly in charge of the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of 
project activities. It will be composed as follows: (i) a Project Coordinator; (ii) an Internal 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist; (iii) an Irrigation Engineer; (iv) a Procurement 

Specialist; (v) an Agronomist; (vi) a youth entrepreneurship specialist, (vii) a socio-economist, 

(vii) an administrative and financial manager; and (viii) an accountant. In addition, there needs 

to be an option for using MINAGRIE's internal expertise for positions whose capacities exist 

within. In accordance with the results of the consultations of the preparation and evaluation 

missions, these positions are those of the Coordinator and the Monitoring and Evaluation 

Specialist. For each of the two positions, three CVs will be submitted to the Bank, which will 

validate the evaluation report of the proposals made by the Ministry. The use of the expertise 

of the previous project was also retained. Thus, the Rural Engineering Expert should be 

reappointed if he is still available to fill this position. This proposal is justified by the fact that 

development and infrastructure development play a significant role in PATAREB. For all other 

positions, recruitment will be done through a call for applications. 

 

4.1.3 The project will also have support staff recruited as needed. In Bujumbura, the PMU 
will be supported by a Project Antenna responsible for liaising with the Home Ministry and the 

technical partners of the project and central services of the Administration to carry out activities 

requiring coordination with these Organisations. The PMU will also be supported by one-off 

technical assistance. 

 

 

4.1.4 Value chain development activities will be carried out under agreements to be signed 
with IRRI for the rice value chain and ISABU for the maize, sorghum and food value chains, 

respectively.  

 

4.1.5 In order to deal with the problems of agricultural financing in the project area, a 
Guarantee Fund will be established and an agreement signed with UCODE and an MFI with 

satisfactory capacities and of which more than 70% of the credits distributed go to the 

agricultural sector to enable beneficiaries to have easy access to credit.   

 

4.1.6 Procurement: All purchases of goods (including non-consulting services), of works 
and consultancy services, financed by the Bank under the project, will be made in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy for Funded Operations by the Bank Group” as of October 2015 

and in accordance with the provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. More specifically, 



 

16 

 

procurement will be carried out according to the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures 

(MPA) based on the relevant standard tender documents (DSAO) for all markets.    

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (ERCA): The risk assessment at the 
country, sector and project levels as well as the acquisition capability of the Executing Agency 

(EA) for the project was conducted and the results were used to guide the decision of the choice 

of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third Party) used for specific activities or a set 

of similar activities in the project. In addition, a market analysis was conducted with a view to 

obtaining information on market characteristics, the factors that may affect competition and the 

main players in the sectoral markets. The results of the evaluations and market analysis notably 

made it possible to carry out procurement planning, market structuring, the choice of the best 

procurement methods and procedures (MPA) adapted to the desired objective, and the 

establishment of the review and supervision framework by the Bank.  

 

4.1.8 Appropriate risk mitigation measures were included in the Procurement Risk and 
Capacity Assessment Action Plan (PERCA) as outlined in Section B.7.9. of Annex B7.    
 

4.1.9 Financial management: The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 
the overall coordination and financial management of the project. Its financial management 

staff will include the Project Coordinator, the Administrative and Financial Officer, the 

Accountant and the Cashier, all recruited in accordance with the procurement provisions of the 

project.  
 

4.1.10 The financial management systems of the PAIRB Management Unit whose structures 
will be used under the PATAREB framework are not generally satisfactory and the overall 

fiduciary risk is substantial due to the absence of: (i) a Coordinator and the financial staff 

indicated above; (ii) an administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual; (iii) an 

operational computerized accounting and financial management software; and (iv) financial 

management tools and terms of reference.  
 

4.1.11 Consequently, the PMU must make the following arrangements: (i) Establish, as soon 
as the Project is launched, a budget plan coupled with the provisional calendar of activities; (ii) 

recruit, from the start of the Project, a consultant responsible for drawing up the Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual (MPCF), and another consultant responsible for 

setting up the computerized accounting and financial management system (CCIS); (iii) allocate 

financial tasks as soon as financial staff are recruited; (iv) put in place the financial management 

framework and instruments (see Annex B 6 of Volume II). 
 

4.1.12 Disbursements: The disbursement methods to be used to mobilize the financing of the 
TSF Grant are: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special account / working capital method 

and (iii) the repayment method. Direct payments will be made in accordance with work 

contracts, goods and services signed between the recipient and the suppliers in accordance with 

the Bank's procurement rules and procedures and the national procurement legislation. The 

special account method will be used for the payment of operating expenses, training costs, field 

mission expenses, and so on. This will result in the opening of a Special Account at the Central 

Bank of Burundi, which in turn will, for all the funds received from the TSF, supply the bank 

account of the CGP opened in a bank acceptable to the AfDB. The repayment method will be 

used when eligible expenditures on the resources of the TSF Grants have been pre-financed 

with the prior approval of the Bank. These disbursements will be done in accordance with the 

list of goods and services and the Bank's rules and procedures as described in the disbursement 

manual. The disbursements modalities are detailed in the technical annexes. 



 

17 

 

 

4.1.13 Audits: An independent and competent external audit firm will audit the reliability of 
the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the CGP once a year and assess the 

functioning of the internal control system for the entire project. He will be recruited according 

to the terms of reference and the competitive bidding procedures recommended by the Bank. 

The audit costs will be financed by the TSFGrants. Audit reports must be sent to the Bank every 

year, no later than 6 months after the end of the audited financial year. Audits will be conducted 

in accordance with IFAC's International ISA Auditing Standards and the Bank's comprehensive 

terms of reference, which will be communicated to the project. 

 

4.2 Monitoring 
 

4.2.1  Monitoring mechanisms: A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up. It is 

chaired by the Minister of Agriculture and Livestock or his representative, and composed of a 

representative of the Ministry of Finance, the Permanent Executive Secretariat of the National 

Commission for Social Protection, the Governor of Kirundo, the DPAE, two (02) Beneficiary 

Representatives, a Private Sector Representative and a Civil Society Representative.  The PSC 

will meet at least twice a year in regular sessions to approve the budget and validate the results 

of the project performance. The PSC Secretariat shall be provided by the DGPAE. The 

responsibilities of the PSC shall be as follows: (i) major guidelines based on the coherence 

between the strategic framework and the execution of the project; (ii) ensuring that the results 

and recommendations of the external evaluation reports are taken into account in the execution 

of the project; (iii) directives to the PMU for the eventual reorientation of the Project; (iv) 

approval of the project's annual work program and budget (AWPB) prior to submission to the 

Bank's no-objection notice; and (v) guaranteeing project development objectives. 

 

4.2.2 Internal monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the Project Monitoring and 

Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring and evaluation will be provided by the DGPAE and 

the Ministry in charge of Finance. The external monitoring and evaluation is to measure the 

effectiveness and efficiency of outputs (products) of the project and their contributions to the 

achievement of development results that are the effects and impacts of the project. This be 

ensured with the involvement of other stakeholders, in addition to the two annual supervision 

missions organized by the Bank. The mid-term review will be conducted in the 3rd year. At the 

end of the project, the Bank and the Government will produce a completion report in due time. 

The main stages of implementation are summarized below. 

 
Table 9: Indicative Project schedule 

No. ACTIVITIES OFFICIALS DEADLINE 

1 Evaluation BANK October 2017 

2 Negotiations GVT / BANK November 2017 

3 Presentation of the  project to the Board  BANK December 2017 

4 
Signing the Memorandum of Understanding for  

TSF Grants  
GVT / BANK December 2017 

5 Fulfilment of conditions GVT January 2018 

6 Authorization of the 1st disbursement. BANK    January 2018 

7 Signing of agreements with  partners GVT    January 2018 

8 Project launch  GVT / BANK January 2018 

7 Submission of deliverables Deliverables 
February 2018-Dec. 

2022 

8 Midterm review GVT / BANK June 2020 

9 Completion of activities Governments / BANK October 2022 

10 Completion report   Governments / BANK December 2022 

11 Audits : GVT Annually 



 

18 

 

 

4.3 Governance 
 

4.3.1 In the area of economic and financial governance, Burundi has achieved encouraging 

results since the 2015 crisis, initiating a number of structural reforms in public financial 

management, and the mitigation of fiduciary risks. However, improvements are needed for 

domestic resource mobilization, programming and allocation of public resources. Although 

there has been progress in bringing the public procurement system up to standard, slowness in 

the procurement system is still one of the major shortcomings in project implementation. At the 

project level, risks related to fiduciary issues will be mitigated, including the use of a public 

financial management system and the strengthening of the PMU's procurement and financial 

management capacity. 

 

4.3.2 With regard to land, the dualism of modern and customary rights is a major handicap in 

promoting investments in agriculture in Burundi and to local peace. PATAREB will improve 

land governance by providing support for land planning and management, as well as 

strengthening municipalities' capacity to manage them. Tripartite agreements will be 

established between land claimants, municipalities and professional organizations, and 

collective agreements will mitigate conflicts.  
 

4.4 Durability 
 

4.4.1  The project is based on a participatory approach for better ownership of activities. Rural 

communities, local authorities and decentralized technical services have indeed been involved 

in the design of the project, and therefore will participate in all the developments they benefit 

from and will be reinforced to prevent and manage conflict linked to resource exploitation. 

They will bring their own knowledge and perceptions on the phenomena of climate change.  

 

4.4.2  The sustainability of the program is also based on the participation of the beneficiaries 

in the project. The PMU will work in collaboration with these organizations to ensure land 

tenure security, strengthen the capacities of farmers' organizations (OPs) for the technical and 

financial management of infrastructure, and initiate sustainable mechanisms for the recovery of 

infrastructure maintenance and renewal costs. Watershed protection activities will be carried 

out as part of the social safety nets. Support for para-agricultural trades (mechanization, 

maintenance, advisory support, etc.) will also help to ensure the long-term provision of services 

necessary for the viability of the activities undertaken. The simplicity of the planned 

infrastructure and the capacity building of the beneficiaries favour the sustainability of the 

investments. In particular, their realization will take into account the reliable climatic 

information collected. 
 

4.4.3  The use of the “value chain” approach with the consideration of aspects of processing, 

storage and marketing of products will make it possible to link production to markets more. 

Thus, the creation of small processing units of economically, financially and technically viable 

products will be a guarantee of the sustainability of the achievements of the project. The project 

will ensure the development of gender sensitive infrastructures and technologies to promote the 

sustainable economic empowerment of vulnerable people (women and youth) and the 

diversification of their sources of income. Sustainability of project interventions will also be 

ensured through the effective involvement of the local private sector, MFIs and aggregator 

enterprises in the approach to achieving sustainable settlement of young entrepreneurs and 

access to markets.  
 



 

19 

 

4.5 Risk management  
Table 10:  

Risks and mitigation measures 

RISKS LEVEL MITIGATION MEASURE 

Unclear land and state-owned land issues can 

lead to difficulties in exploiting the sites to be 

developed and compromise the objectives of the 

project in terms of food security and the fight 

against poverty, especially for women and young 

people. 

Means Project support for planning and land management 

that will result in the establishment of tripartite 

agreements ( having land rights, municipalities, 

professional organizations) and collective 

agreements to mitigate conflicts 

 Climatic hazards that can accentuate the 
degradation of ecosystems (drought, floods, etc.), 

make communities more vulnerable and promote 

conflict. 

 Limited ownership and management of rural 
infrastructure 

Means  Irrigation, the protection of vulnerable areas, the 
opening up of production areas, the integration of 

climate information into the design of works, the 

securing of income, will mitigate this risk; 

 Capacity building of municipalities, 

 Lack of monitoring of technological innovations 
by communities 

 Weakness in monitoring by municipalities 
(MOD), slow procurement, low capacity of 

technical services and low capacity of enterprises 

Means  Participative approach and involvement, 
organization and training of local actors 

 Funding of a stakeholder capacity building 
program 

The institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 

terms of management and monitoring and 

evaluation 

Means The capacity building program of MINAGRIE and 

the PMU on project administration, procurement 

and financial management will mitigate this risk 

 

4.6 Knowledge Development 
 

The project will be a disaggregated database, according to the type of reference that will 

be used to establish the baseline situation. Then a map will be produced with geo referencing 

of the activities carried out. This information will be networked and posted on a website to be 

shared with all stakeholders. The same will be true for the results of the independent (rapid and 

in-depth) impact assessments. The actions included in the project that will also lead to 

knowledge development are the popularization of innovative technologies, technology review 

workshops, innovation / multi-stakeholder platforms and exchange visits and support for 

innovative product processing experiments as part of a private partnership / OP; and promoting 

innovative youth and women's employability actions and resilience building activities for 

vulnerable groups. Finally, the project will put in place an integrated knowledge management 

system on project activities through the regular dissemination of acquired knowledge. 
 

V. Legal framework 
 

5.1 Legal instrument 
 

The legal framework of the project will be a TSF Grant Memorandum of Understanding 

signed between the Republic of Burundi and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the intervention of the Bank  
 

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to entry into force: The entry into force of the TSF Grant 
Memorandum of Understanding is subject to signature by the parties. 
 

5.2.2 Prerequisites for the first disbursement of the donation: The obligation for the Bank 
to make the first disbursement of the donation will be subject to the entry into force of the TSF 

Donation Memorandum of Understanding, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.1.7 



 

20 

 

above, and proof of fulfilment by the recipient, to the satisfaction of the Bank, both formally 

and substantively, of the following conditions: 
 

(i) Provide the Bank with proof of the opening of a Special Account with the Central Bank 
of Burundi for the Project intended to receive the Project funds in US dollars and the 

opening by the PMU with a bank acceptable to the Bank, a BIF Account for the Project 

intended to receive the Grant's resources (see 5.1.10); 

 

(ii) Provide the Bank with evidence of the recruitment of the Coordinator and the Project 
Administrative and Financial Manager, whose qualifications will be submitted for prior 

approval by the Bank (5.1.1); 
 

5.2.3 Other conditions: The Recipient must also provide the Bank with the following, no later 
than six (6) months after the first disbursement of the Grant's resources: 

 

(i) Proof of the recruitment of the Procurement Specialist, the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist and the Accountant, whose qualifications and experience will have been 

previously submitted to the Bank for approval (see 5.1.2); 
 

(ii) Agreements with Partner organisations (ISABU, IRRI, UCODE, CEM & 
MITUWENZI). 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 
 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The Board of Directors is requested to 

approve the TSF Grants. The project will be implemented as part of the Bank's intervention 

strategy in Burundi defined in the 2012-2016 CSP, which was extended at the end of 2017. 

 

VI. Recommendation 
 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the granting to the Republic of 

Burundi of Pillar I resources of the Transition Support Facility (TSF), a Grant of a maximum 

amount of not exceeding UA 12 million, for the purpose and under the conditions set out in this 

report. 



 






















































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

COTE D’IVOIRE 
 

 

BELIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT  

(2PAI-BELIER). 
 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Brief 

Client Information 

DONEE/BORROWER    : Côte d’Ivoire 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY  : Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 

Development (MINADER) 
 
Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UAM) Instrument 

ADF 26.04 Loan  

ADF 03.40 Grant 

ADB 50.56 

 

Loan 

Government and Beneficiaries 17 Own Resources 

TOTAL COST 97 
 

 
Key ADF Financing Information 
 
Loan Amount UA 26.04 million 

Commitment Fee (Loan) 0.50% per year of the 

undisbursed amount 

Service Commission (Loan) 0.75% per year of the 

outstanding amount 

Interest Rate 1% 

Maturity (Loan)  30 years  

Grace Period (Loan) 5 years    
 
Key ADB Financing Information 
 

Loan Amount                          EUR 64,360,000 (UA 50,560,000) 

Type of Loan  Loan with fully floating rate 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years, including the grace period) 

Grace Period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Average Loan Maturity To be determined (according to the amortization structure) 

Reimbursement To be determined (Half-yearly payments after the grace period) 

Interest Rates Base rate +funding cost margin+ loan margin+ premium at maturity, if 

applicable 

Base Rate Floating base rate (LIBOR USD 6-months, reviewed on 1 February and 1 

August). A free-fixing option for determining the base rate is available 

Funding Cost margin The Bank’s funding cost margin determined on 1 January and 1 July and 

applied at the base rate on 1 February and 1 August 

Loan Margin 80 basis points (0.8 %) 

Premium at Maturity To be determined as follows: 

- 0% if average loan maturity is 12.75 years or less 
- 0.10% if average loan maturity is over 12.75 years, but lower or equal 

to 15 years 

- 0.20% if average loan maturity is over 15 years 

Initial Commissions 0.25% of loan amount payable latest on signature of the loan agreement 

Commitment Fees 0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees are callable 60 days 

following the signature of the loan agreement and payable on the payment dates 

fixed. 

Option for Base Rate Change* In addition to the free-fixing option for the floating base rate, the Borrower may 

change the fixed rate to a floating rate or incorporate in whole or in part the 



 

iii 

disbursed amount. Fees are levied on such transactions. 

Option to set the Base Rate 

Ceiling or Tunnel* 

The Borrower may set the ceiling or floor to be applied on part or all of the 

amount disbursed. Fees are required for such transactions. 

Option for Loan Currency 

Conversion 

Borrower can convert the loan currency into another Bank loan currency, both 

for undisbursed amounts and those already disbursed either in whole or in part. 

Fees are levied on such transactions. 
* Currency conversion options and the related fees must comply with the Bank guidelines for the exchange, available at the following link: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

  

Project Performance  

NPV (12% rate) CFAF 123 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) 30% 

  

Time Frame – Key Milestones (expected) 
 
 

 
 

Concept Note approval 17 October 2016 

Project approval  25 January 2017 

Effectiveness date 30 April 2017 

Completion date 31 December 2021 

Closure of the grant and the loans 31 December 2022 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


 

iv 

Project Summary  

 

Overview. 2PAI BÉLIER was identified during the dialogue with the Government of Côte 

d’Ivoire to transform the agricultural sector, using an innovative approach. It aims to lay down 

the prerequisite conditions for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in the country’s 

heartland and as the first agropolis for the transformation and modernization of Ivorian 

agriculture. It concerns the Bélier administrative region and the Autonomous District of 

Yamoussoukro - a once prosperous zone that has experienced economic decline for three 

decades despite its significant potential. The project prioritizes the integrated approach to 

revive promising value chains and tackle a number of impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector. This innovative approach is a clean break from the 

sector-based approach, and is reflected in a critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

sustainably transforming economic activity at the grassroots. The project’s sector objective is 

to contribute to food and nutritional security. The specific objective is to contribute to the 

emergence of an agro-industrial pole in Bélier Region by revitalizing promising agricultural 

sub-sectors (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, pork and fish) and further involving the private 

sector, youth and women.  

 

The UA 97 million project cost will be financed by an EUR 64.36 million ADB loan, a UA 

26.04 million ADF loan, a UA 3.4 million ADF grant (a total of UA 80 million to be borne by 

the Bank) and by the Government and beneficiaries to the tune of UA 17 million. The project 

has three components: (i) Restoration of productive capital; (ii) Development of value chains; 

and (iii) Project management. The first component aims to endow the region with key 

infrastructure for the development of agricultural and agro-industrial activities (irrigation 

schemes, roads, storage and marketing facilities, livestock infrastructure, electric lines, ICT), 

while also ensuring the best living conditions for the population concerned (DWS 

infrastructure, classrooms, school canteens, health structures). The second component aims to 

support all actors for them to operate dynamically around value chains in a more integrative 

and inclusive environment. The concern will be to: strengthen land security; better structure 

farmers’ organizations and build their technical and managerial capacity; support 

mechanization; develop employment and the recruitment of young graduates, by supporting in 

particular INP-ESA; promote agri-business especially by strengthening the Yamoussoukro 

industrial zone and ICT development; ensure better access to agricultural financing and enable 

better contribution to nutrition. The last component will ensure that the project is managed 

according to schedule and through sound implementation and monitoring arrangements. 

  

The project will benefit 461,600 people (64% of project area residents), 112,000 of them 

directly, 800 young graduates and 200 SMEs (including 50 in produce processing). It will 

benefit about 230,000 women, including 4,300 farmers, 400 young girls and 25 processing-

operators and traders. With estimated additional production of 465,000 tonnes per year, 

additional income per beneficiary is estimated at about CFAF 1.2 million for Model 1 

(representing rice farmers), CFAF 7.2 million for Model 2 (representing market garden 

operators), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 3 (representing rain-fed activities), CFAF 4.8 million 

for Model 4 (representing young farmers), and CFAF 20 million for Model 5 (representing 

SMEs), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 6 (representing pig farmers) and CFAF 4.5 million for 

Model 7 (representing fish farmers). The project will benefit about 112,000 persons directly, 

107,000 of whom would be lifted out of poverty. Thanks to the setting up and organization of 

processing units (50% run by women), 120,000 tonnes of cassava tubers will be processed into 

several by-products. The project will help to raise the agricultural produce processing rate from 

119,000 tonnes currently (51% of total production) to about 581,000 tonnes (85%). It will 

create the equivalent of approximately 19,000 permanent jobs.   

 



 

v 

Needs Assessment: The project area has a population of about 702,000 and covers a land area 

of 11,695 km2. Average population density is 60/km2. It is about 200 km to the North of 

Abidjan. Two out of three people in Bélier Region live with less than one dollar a day (the 

poverty rate in the region is 61.8%, compared to 46.3% nationally). The rationale for the 

intervention is the high level of poverty and the need to revive the region around the once 

prosperous administrative capital that is now in the throes of economic decline, due mostly to 

insufficient investments linked to the socio-economic crisis of the 2000 decade (PADER-Lakes 

approved by ADF in 2000 was not implemented). Therefore, this intervention is urgent since 

it will contribute to establishing a development pole to tap the area’s high potential and meet 

the great expectations and pressing needs expressed by the youth and women.  

 

Bank’s Value Added: The establishment of a technical and financial framework to support 

agri-business is consistent with the Bank’s Medium-Term Intervention Strategy in Regional 

Member Countries, Pillars 1, 2, 3 and 5 of the High 5s (Light up Africa, Feed Africa, 

Industrialize Africa and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) and the Bank’s 

new “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025”. The Bank 

provided the Government technical assistance to identify and prepare the project, and expertise 

to develop financial inclusion and technical support in line with CSP 2013-2017. Besides, 

through this operation, the Bank will support Côte d’Ivoire’s efforts to rebuild the country and 

transform its economy - a priority objective of Government’s National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020). Unlike previous standard agricultural interventions, this Bank intervention 

will in particular fulfil all necessary conditions for setting up an agro-industrial pole to ensure 

the dynamism of promising agricultural sub-sectors in a given territory. Tangible and intangible 

infrastructure will be integrated to create local value added, improve the productivity of 

agricultural sub-sectors, and spur the produce processing dynamic to ultimately establish a true 

agro-industry as a prerequisite for agricultural sector development.  

 

Knowledge Management: The project will widely disseminate experience and good practice 

garnered during the management of units for agricultural produce production/processing. Thus, 

farmers of both sexes, artisans, processing operators, traders, youths and girls, as well as local 

authorities will acquire new techniques and skills enabling them to better manage their affairs 

and improve their living conditions. Thanks to the project, actors will gain experience on 

managing sub-sectors around inter-professions at the local level. INP-ESA’s involvement in 

helping young graduates to settle will help to endow it with new expertise and offer 

beneficiaries new opportunities in operational and managerial fields. The dissemination of 

knowledge via the monitoring/evaluation system will be done with the involvement of value 

chain actors. State officials involved will have the opportunity to be trained and broaden their 

experience in promising and innovative intervention sectors currently inexistent in the region 

(financial inclusion and framework of technical support to private initiatives).  



 

vi 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

(*): Indicator data on the baseline situation will be updated at the end of the baseline study 

PROJECT COUNTRY AND NAME: Côte d’Ivoire: Bélier Agro-Industrial Pole Project 

PROJECT GOAL:  The general objective of 2PAI Bélier is to contribute to increasing food and nutritional security of the population 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicators (including CSIs) 
Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

  2016 

 

2021 and Beyond  

 

 

1. Food and nutritional security is improved. 
1.1 Percentage of households living in food insecurity 1.1     12,6% 1.1      3%  Assessment of PND 

 

 

1.2 Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition 1.2     32% 1.2      20%     

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

      

The conditions for the emergence of an agro-
industrial pole in Bélier Region are fulfilled 

through the revitalization of promising 

agricultural sub-sectors and greater involvement 
of the private sector, youths and women. 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural sector volumes. 
 

2.2 Increased volumes of processed agricultural 

products. 
 

 

 
2.3 Increased crop yields. 

 

 
 

 

2.4 Increased income for sector actors. 
 

 

 

 

2.5 Revitalized SMEs.  

 
2.6 Accelerated industrialization. 

 

2.7 Improved employment level. 
 

2.1   Volume of agricultural production (tonnes)    Cereals assessment and 
MINADER statistics.  

 Mid-term assessment of 
PNIA 

Periodic project 

monitoring/evaluation 

report 

 Mid-term review report and 
project completion report 

Risks :   
(i) Climate change related risk 
(ii) Risk of land-related conflicts  
(iii) Risk of conflicts linked to 
transhumance 
Mitigation Measures:  

(i) A project conducted alongside 

2PAI BÉLIER fully addresses the 

underlying issue of climate change.  

(ii) Land security of target sites to be 

developed envisaged in Component 

B. 

(iii) Support to communes to 

accompany endogenous conflict 

management mechanisms  

2.1.1 Volume of paddy rice (tonnes) 2.1.1    60,000 2.1.1   91,500 

2.1.2  Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.1.2     2000  2.1.2   11,500  

2.1.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.1.3 120,000 2.1.3 460,000 

2.1.4   Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.1.4   50,000  2.1.4  123,000  

2.2    Volume of processed agricultural production (tonnes)   

2.2.1 Volume of polished rice (tonnes) 2.2.1  36,000 2.2.1   55,000 

2.2.2 Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.2.2     1,000  2.2.2     9,200  

2.2.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.2.3  48,000 2.2.3 384,000 

2.2.4  Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.2.4  10,000  2.2.4   97,600  

2.2.5   Production of pigs for slaughter and pork (carcass equivalent tonnes) 2.2.5       517 2.2.5      1,400 

2.2.6   Fish production (tonnes) 2.2.6         27 2.2.6        900 

2.3   Crop yields (tonnes/ha)   

2.3.1  Paddy rice 2.3.1        5 2.3.1         8 

2.3.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.3.2       10  2.3.2       18  

2.3.3  Cassava  2.3.3       13 2.3.3       20 

2.3.4  Maize (off-season) 2.3.4         2 2.3.4         5  

2.4     Farmers’ income (CFAF/ha)   
2.4.1  Polished rice  2.4.1  370,000 2.4.1    2.5 million 

2.4.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.4.2   1.1 

million 
2.4.2    4 million  

2.4.3  Rain-fed crops (maize, cassava) 2.4.3   90,000 2.4.3    250,000 

2.4.4   Income of pig producers (CFAF) 2.4.4  700,000 2.4.4    3 million 

2.4.5    Income  of fish producers (CFAF) 2.4.5  500,000 2.4.5   5 million  

2.4.6   Income of established youths, at least 50% of them women 

Filles (FCFA/an) 

2.4.6   1,200 2.4.6    6 million 

2.5      Number of SMEs/agro-industrial units (many in processing) 2.5          0  2.5       100 (20) 

2.6      Operational industrial zone  2.6          0 2.6           1 

2.7      Number of equivalent job positions created            2.7         0 2.7           19,000 

      

 
 

                       P
R

O
D

U
IT

S
 

I.  RESTORATION OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL 

1.1 Irrigation schemes 

 

1.2 Socio-economic infrastructure 

 

1.3. Storage and marketing infrastructure 

1.1.1  Number of dams rehabilitated 1.1.1        0 1.1.1             3  PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 
with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 

 

1.1.2  Rehabilitated land areas for irrigation  (ha) 1.1.2        0 1.1.2         2,170  

1.1.3  Number of beneficiaries (including women) 1.1.3        0 1.1.3      4,400 
(2200) 1.2.1  Linear distance of rehabilitated roads (km) 1.2.1        0 1.2.1        700  

1.2.2 HVA with built borehole equipped with a committee, of which 50% women 1.2.2        0 1.2.2        10 

1.2.3 Extension/rehabilitation of schools 1.2.3         1.2.3       +20 



 

vii 

 
1.4 Other infrastructure 

 

 

II. DEVELOPMENT OF  VALUE CHAINS 

2.1     Land security  

2.2    Organization and structuring of actors 

 
2.3 Support for employment of young graduates  

2.4 Technical and managerial support of actors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.5 Value chain development fund 
2.6 Promotion of agricultural mechanization 

2.7 Promotion of the agro-food industry 

 
2.8 Promotion of ICTs  

2.9   Support for nutrition  

 
2.10 Support for marketing 

 

 
2.11  Institutional support  

1.3.1 Number of storage facilities constructed (50% allocated to women) 1.3.1        0 1.3.1       10 (5) contractors 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contacting 
authority’s report 
 

 

 

 PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 

with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 
enterprises 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contracting 
authority’s report 

1.3.2  Number of rural markets rehabilitated/modernized (gender-sensitive design) 1.3.2        0 1.3.2        17 

1.3.3  Number of consolidation centres built (gender-sensitive) 1.3.3        0 1.3.3          4 

1.4.1  Development of pastoral areas 1.4.1        0 1.4.1          2 

1.4.2  Rehabilitation of slaughter houses and areas 1.4.2        0 1.4.2          8 

1.4.3  Construction of butcher’s shops 1.4.3        0 1.4.3          6 

1.4.5  Linear distance of electric lines (linear km) 1.4.5           1.4.5        +52 

2.1.1  Number of land certificates issued (including for women)    2.1.1      ND 2.1.1    100 (50) 

2.2.3  Number of village territories demarcated  2.2.3      ND 2.2.3        10 

2.2.1  Number of cooperatives organized (50% women) 2.2.1      ND 2.2.           42 

2.2.2  Number of groupings (50% women)  2.2.2      ND 2.2.2         40 

2.3.1  Number of incubators supported in Yamoussoukro     2.3.1       0 2.3.1          5 

2.3.3  Number of young graduates trained and established (50% girls)  2.3.3       0 2.3.3    800 (400) 

2.4.1  Quality seeds programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.2  Support counselling programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
  2.4.3  Research-development programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.5  Support programme for mainstreaming gender in ESA/INP curricular 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.6  Gender monitoring report in the project area drafted 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.7  Technical assistance for investment promotion 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.5.2  Guarantee fund 2.5.2       0 2.5.2         1 

2.6     Mechanization programme prepared and implemented 2.6         1 2.6            1 

2.7.1  Industrial zone revitalization programme implemented 2.7.1      0 2.7.1         1 

2.7.2  SME support programme (at least 30% managed by women) 2.7.2      0 2.7.2         1 

2.8. 1 Telephony, internet and mobility structure in place  2.8.1      0 2.8.1         1   

2.9.2  Training of health workers, doctors and nurses 2.9.2      0 2.9.2         1 

2.9.3  Health control system and bio-fortification 2.93       0 2.93          1 

2.10.1 Agricultural market information system (SIMA) completed 2.10.1    0 2.10.1       1 

2.11   Institutional support programme is implemented 2.11       0 2.11          1 

III. PROJECT MANAGEMENT 3.1    Number of technicians trained 3.1         0 3.1          100 
PCU report 

PCU report 

PP 
SAP system 

Audit reports 

Progress reports 
Mission aide-mémoire 

Risk: 

 MINADER’s weak institutional 
capacity 

Mitigation Measures: 
The project envisages a programme 

of institutional support to 

MINADER and various structures 
involved in the project’s 

implementation, especially in 

monitoring/evaluation. 

3.2    Number of work plans and budgets (PTBA) produced and implemented 3.2         0 3.2            5 

3.3    Number of quarterly reports/annual audit reports approved 3.3         0 3.3           20/5 

3.4    Number of PPs produced and updated 3.4         0 3.4            5  

3.5    Number of steering committee meetings held 3.5         0 3.5           10 

3.6    Number of Supervisory Authority/Bank supervision missions undertaken 3.6         0 3.6           20 / 10 

3.7    Number of mid-term review/completion reports produced 3.7        0/0  3.7          1/1 

 3.8   Installation of project website 3.8         0 3.8             1  

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Component 1: Restoration of productive capital:  UA 57.07 million (59%) 

 Component 2: Development of Value Chains:                  UA 32.88 million (34%) 

 Component 3: Project Management:                                  UA 7.05 million (7%)  

 TOTAL:                    UA 97.00 million 

ADF (Loan/Grant):                  UA 29.44 million   

ADB (Loan):                         EUR 64.36 million          

Government/Beneficiaries:       UA 17.00 million  

Total:                                    UA 97.00 million 

 
 



 

viii 

Implementation Schedule 
  

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Board Approval 
                        

2 
Publication of General Procurement 

Notice 

                        

3 
Signature of Financing Agreement 

(ADB and ADF) 

                        

4 Loan Effectiveness 
                        

5 1st Disbursement Authorization 
                        

6 Commencement of Project 
                        

7 Bid Invitation 
                        

8 Contract Award 
                        

9 Works Implementation 
                        

10 Procurement of Goods 
                        

11 
Implementation of Capacity-

building Activities 

                        

12 Mid-Term Review 
                        

13 Audits 
                        

14 Government’s Completion Report 
                        

15 Completion of Activities 
                        

16 Closure 
                        

 



 

1 

BÉLIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT (2PAI-BÉLIER) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend 

an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADB loan of EUR 

64.360 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE  

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 After a period of economic recession caused by the armed conflict of 1999-2011, the 

Ivorian economy gradually picked up thanks to political stability and the support of International 

Technical and Financial Partners. After a negative growth of -4.7% in 2011, GDP growth rose 

to 9.8% in 2012 and 8.3% in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Concurrently, the poverty rate at the national 

level dropped slightly from 48.9% in 2008 to 46.3% in 2015. The National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020) that followed the previous PND 2012-2015, is a unique frame of reference 

for public action. It hinges on five strategic thrusts: (1) Strengthen the quality of institutions and 

good governance; (2) Speed up human capital development and promote well-being; (3) Speed 

up structural transformations and industrialization; (4) Develop infrastructure spread 

harmoniously across the country and preserve the environment; and (5) Strengthen regional 

integration and international cooperation. In the area of gender, it intends to promote enrolment 

and literacy among young girls/women and women’s empowerment. Strategic Thrust 3 involves 

developing the agricultural sector as a means for the structural transformation of the country, 

especially by: (i) improving the quality of agricultural produce; (ii) speeding up the 

modernization and enhanced productivity of the agricultural sector; and (iii) speeding up 

product processing. The project is in line with Pillar 2 (Development of support infrastructure 

for economic recovery) of the CSP (2013-2017), confirmed during the March 2016 mid-term 

review.  

1.1.2 The National Agriculture Investment Programme (PNIA-2010-2016) covers priority 

activities in the crop, livestock and fisheries development sectors. It fits into a common global 

ECOWAS Agricultural Policy Framework and Comprehensive African Agriculture 

Development Programme (ECOWAP/PDDAA). On 13 October 2016, Government launched 

the process to prepare the second-generation PNIA (2017-2025) with NEPAD and ECOWAS 

support, to be implemented by PND 2016-2020. The authorities aim to guide and support 

regional and national efforts in the agricultural sector to guarantee that the 6% growth target is 

met and at least 10% of the budget is allocated to the sector (Maputo Commitment). The 

Government plans to increase this allocation rate from 5.4% in 2016 to 7-8% from 2017, and at 

least 10% from 2018. The Government adopted the agropoles development approach in 

designing this new programme and intends to organise a Donors’ Roundtable to ensure its 

financing.  

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 During the implementation of PNIA, the Government identified a programme jointly 

with the Bank for the transformation of the agricultural sector based on the agropoles approach. 

Given the availability of resources, the country’s absorptive capacity and the security situation, 

dialogue with the authorities led to the planning of this programme, which is divided into three 

agropoles projects whose order of priority was adopted by common agreement during the 

preparation of CSP 2013-2017, and confirmed during the mid-term review. The first project 

titled “Bélier Region Agro-Industrial Pole Project” benefited from a Project Preparation Facility 

(PPF) advance. The second, the Agro-Industrial Support Project in the North of Côte d’Ivoire, 

will be the subject of a PPF advance being studied. The third project concerning the Tonkpi 



 

2 

Region will be studied subsequently. This report is for the first selected project covering the 

Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro and Attiégouakro Départements) and 

the Bélier administrative region (Didiévi, Djékanou, Tiébissou and Toumodi Départements). 

This zone is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan, covers 11,695 km2 and has 702,000 

inhabitants. It has significant agricultural potentials that is yet to be fully tapped, highly 

degraded infrastructure and several private agro-industrial initiatives being developed. This 

zone has been marked by economic recession for three decades, after the decline of the cocoa-

coffee sub-sector (1980s and 90s) and the military-political crisis of 2000 to 2010, then the post-

electoral crisis of 2010-2011 (see Annexes A, B and C).  

1.2.2 Various Bank missions to the project area and the concerted approach highlighted a 

number of major constraints: (i) serious degradation and insufficiency of irrigation and pastoral 

infrastructure (dams, schemes) as well as socio-economic infrastructure (roads, markets, storage 

facilities, schools, drinking water, etc.); (ii) insufficient social cohesion and organization of 

actors, making it impossible for farmers/processing operators/traders to optimize their joint 

activities; (iii) weak land security; (iv) poor mastery of production techniques; (v) inadequate 

access to the factors of production (e.g. quality seeds); (vi) poor mechanization of agricultural 

activities; and (vii) inexistence of a framework of technical and financial support to private 

initiatives, industrialization and value chains integration, particularly those that are promising 

for youths. A few development projects exist in the region and private initiatives are emerging 

(SIPRA, INTERVALLE, Aurore, etc.). These offer opportunities for ultimately developing 

PPP-type operations. Although local development is constrained by farmer/grazier conflicts and 

climate change, the region (whose headquarter is Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative 

capital) has first-class infrastructure suitable for economic revitalization, particularly with the 

commissioning of the Abidjan-Yamoussoukro motorway in 2014, the existence of an 

international airport and the presence of a world-class university complex. By virtue of its 

integrated approach, the project is consistent with four (4) of the Bank’s High 5s: (1) Feed 

Africa; (2) Light up Africa; (3) Industrialize Africa; and (5) Improve the quality of life for the 

people of Africa. In particular, it is in line with the Bank’s new Feed Africa: Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, which implements Pillar 1 focused inter alia 

on higher investments in tangible and intangible infrastructure, mobilization of agricultural 

financial flows, agricultural produce processing, youth employment, the development of 

agropoles and agro-food industry. It is also consistent with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-

2018), especially its second pillar aimed at strengthening women’s economic empowerment, 

and the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience, 2014-2019. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 The Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in Indénié-Djuablin 

Region (PAIA-ID) is the Bank’s only active project in the agricultural sector. It was approved 

in March 2012 (UA 21.6 million grant) and, since October 2016, benefited from a 

supplementary NTF loan of UA 4 million to strengthen agri-business activities. The project 

status is satisfactory since the disbursement rate in November 2016 was 57%. Apart from the 

Bank, many development partners have interventions in the agricultural sector in Côte d’Ivoire 

including the FAO, the World Bank, WADB, the EU, AFD, WFP, IsDB, IFAD, BADEA, JICA, 

GIZ, Spanish Cooperation, Chinese Economic Cooperation and the Indian Government. These 

partners belong to the “Agriculture, Rural Development and Environment” Sector Group, which 

seeks to facilitate consultation and dialogue with the Ivorian Government. Another partner 

group, the Nutrition Sector Group, also works closely with the Agriculture Sector Group.  

1.3.2 FAO supported the Government in several post-crisis operations as well as in the 

design of development thrusts and operationalization of PNIA, especially in the area of rural 

land. In particular, the World Bank finances a multi-national Research Programme in West 

Africa (PPAAO/WAAPP, 2013-2016) that promotes agricultural sector productivity. Its 



 

3 

innovative outcomes can be capitalized in 2PAI-Bélier, especially in terms of new food 

processing technologies for vegetables and cassava. Since 2013, AFD has been financing the 

Project for the Acceleration of Agricultural Sub-Sectors in Côte d’Ivoire (PARFACI) and co-

finances with the World Bank the Agricultural Sector Promotion Project in Côte d’Ivoire 

(PSAC). PARFACI supports the market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors as well as the land 

sector in Bélier, Gontougo, Poro and Tchologo regions. On completion in mid-2017, it will be 

relayed in its foodstuff component in Bélier region by 2PAI-Bélier especially by supporting the 

market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors. The EU interventions are in the cash crop/food 

crop sub-sectors, rural land security, agricultural training, the fight against infectious animal 

diseases (epizooty), as well as the health safety of export products. JICA intervention in Bélier 

Region via the Local Rice Promotion Project (PRORIL) is in the form of a technical assistance 

operation to strengthen the capacity of actors in the local rice sub-sector. JICA also supported 

Government to prepare an agricultural mechanization strategy and is preparing a project for its 

operationalization. 2PAI-BÉLIER will forge synergies with all ongoing projects, including 

PARFACI, PRORIL and PPAAO/WAAPP. 

1.3.3 FAO and AFD play a leading role in the “Agriculture, Rural Development and 

Environment” Technical and Financial Partners Group (TFPG). This group has an internal land 

security sub-group with the EU as lead agency and the AfDB, AFD, WB and FAO as members. 

As part of the TFPG, regular consultations are organized in Abidjan, with Bank participation. 

 
Table 1.3: Aid Coordination 

 

Sector or Sub-Sector* 
Scale  (in 2015) 

GDP Exports Labour  

Agriculture and Rural Development 26.5% 36.9% 66% 
Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF)** 

Government (Average 2013-2015) Donors (Averages 2013-2015) 

CFAF 7.6 billion 

(4.83% of total expenditure)* 

IsDB 10,469,647,585 

IDA 2,005,098,519 

IFAD 9,974,171,755 

AfDB 7,779,132,814 

BOAD (WADB) 5,617,649,943 

GIZ 9,467,612,936 

EU 44,618,527,507 

AFD 22,126,947,537 

AMB Spain 2,572,000,000 

EXIMBANK GROUP 3,160,233,060 

WAEMU 1,606,560,235 

OTHERS 30,163,941,069 

Total 149,561,522,960 

Level of Aid Coordination 

 Existence of thematic working groups [Yes, established under PNIA] 

 Existence of a global sector programme [No, PNIA prepared along with detailed investment plan   

 Role of AfDB in aid coordination Member (not lead agency) 

(*) Sources: Detailed Investment Plan for the implementation of PNIA, MINADER, 6 April 2016 

(**) Source : DPPF, MINADER, 2016 

 

  



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 The project’s sector objective is to contribute to enhancing food and nutritional 

security. The specific objective is to contribute to the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in 

Bélier Region through the revitalization of promising agricultural sub-sectors and greater 

involvement of the private sector, youths and women.  

 

2.1.2 Project Design Elements. The project aims to put in place the prerequisite conditions 

for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole to transform and modernize agriculture in the 

erstwhile prosperous Bélier Region, which has experienced economic decline for three decades, 

despite its significant potential. To revive agriculture around promising value chains, the project 

prioritizes an integrated approach to resolve the many impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector (infrastructure, factors of production, organization of 

actors and sub-sectors, market integration, access to financing, etc.). The paradigm underlying 

the project’s design is to consider the agricultural and rural sector as a system with mutually 

inter-acting constituent elements. The novelty of this approach, which represents a clean break 

from the sector-based approach, lies in the critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

reviving and sustainably transforming economic activity at the local level. The project is 

founded on the value-chains and sector-integration approach to create a conducive environment 

for private sector involvement, development of community initiatives and employment of 

youths and women. It will bring about the region’s industrialization through the creation of a 

technical assistance framework, a financial arrangement, the promotion of private investments 

and the implementation of several ambitious mechanization, technical innovation, youth 

employment and human capital development programmes. The financial arrangement to 

accompany the approach will comprise: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity 

of banks and decentralized financing systems through a refinancing line; (ii) a Guarantee Fund 

to contribute to mitigating the risk; (iii) an interest rate improvement fund; and (iv) technical 

assistance to financing institutions and targeted beneficiaries (the details of this component are 

given in paragraphs C3.47 to C3.52 of Annex C3 of Volume 2). 

 

2.1.3 Summary of Components: Project implementation will span five years. It will have 

three components whose main outputs are described in Annex C3 and summarized in the table 

below:   
 
Component Cost Description 

Component A 

Restoration of 

productive capital 

UA 

57.07 

million 

(59%) 

Irrigation schemes: Rehabilitation of 3 dams, about 1,835 ha of irrigated areas/marshy rice-growing 

land and 335 ha of market gardening areas. Socio-economic infrastructure: Rehabilitation of 700 km 

of tracks; Rehabilitation/extension of classrooms and canteens in 20 schools; Equipment of 30 health 

structures with malnutrition screening equipment; Establishment of 5 therapeutic nutrition units, 20 

mobile therapeutic nutrition units, and 28 nutrition and supplementation units; Repair of 100 manual 

pumps; Installation of 50 new boreholes equipped with hand pumps; Rehabilitation of 10 HVA systems; 

Establishment of 15 new HVA systems; Extension of 2 DWS systems; Construction of 30 latrines. 

Storage and marketing infrastructure: Construction of 4 agricultural produce consolidation 

centres; Rehabilitation of 17 rural markets; Construction of 10 foodstuff storage facilities, 20 rice 

drying areas and 15 premises for warehousing market gardening products. Stock-breeding 

infrastructure: Development of two pilot pastoral zones; Construction of one slaughter-house; 

Rehabilitation of 3 slaughterhouses and laying out of related cattle markets; Construction of 4 

modern butcher’s shops, 4 pig slaughter areas and 2 pork sales points; Distribution of backyard 

rearing kits to 250 women; Development of 2 fingerlings multiplication farms; Operationalization 

of fish markets; Installation of 50 fish-farmers and about two rice-cultivation/fish-farming parcels; 

Provision of feed manufacture equipment. Energy component: Laying of a 33kV underground 

electric line from the current Yamoussoukro-Industrial Zone sub-station to raise capacity in the 

industrial zone and laying of a second 33 kV line (32 km) from the current Yamoussoukro sub-

station to the Didiévi sub-station to secure the power supply of the Département.   

  



 

5 

Component B 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

32.88 

million 

(34%) 

Land security: (i) Support to mechanisms in place for land clarification and issuance of land 

certificates; (ii) Training of actors of both sexes; Demarcation of some ten village territories. 

Organization and structuring of actors: Strengthening of the capacity of about 42 SCOOPs and 

40 farmers’ groupings including unions at regional level as well as inter-professions (rice, maize, 

cassava) being created. Support for the employment of young graduates: Implementation of a 

programme to employ 800 young boys and girls in line with Enable Youth Côte d’Ivoire: (i) increase 

the teaching facilities and technological infrastructure of 5 vocational training institutions in the 

region (including INP-ESA); and (ii) set up an incubator for young entrepreneurs and project 

developers in the agricultural value chains to foster the emergence of very small enterprises. 

Technical and managerial support of actors: Supply of quality seeds (design and implementation 

of a seed production programme, technical assistance to MINADER’s seed service); Advisory-

support (design and implementation of a programme to disseminate production good practice based 

on an innovative approach). Research-development (in partnership with CNRA and ANADER); 

Technical support for investment promotion (technical assistance to support developers refine their 

feasibility studies and business plans). Value-chain development fund: Put a financing mechanism 

in place comprising: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity of partner decentralized 

financial systems through a medium-term refinancing line called Refinancing Facility as well as a 

Guarantee Fund to contribute to mitigating bank risks in financing agricultural SMEs; and (ii) 

technical assistance aimed at supporting the project’s partner financing institutions for the 

development and marketing of new financial products. Agricultural mechanization: Design and 

implementation of a mechanization support programme, including promoting tried and tested 

technologies; Support for innovation and for procurement of agricultural machines (including 

manufacturers, public utility companies and financial services); and Strengthening of users’ 

technical and organizational capacity. Promotion of the agro-food industry: Support for the 

revitalization of the Yamoussoukro industrial zone and private initiatives (reinforcement in power, 

water and ICTs); Support to community agro-industrial units, including those run by women (rice 

steaming, cassava processing, etc.); Support for contacts/contracting between industrialists and 

producers; Study on the creation of a technopolis around the University of Yamoussoukro and the 

industrial zone. Promotion of information and communication technologies: Establishment of 

core infrastructure in terms of telephony, internet and mobility; Creation of a GIS; Putting in place 

of IT/media resources; Support for the agricultural market information system; Establishment of 

SMS-based communication services; and Building on the major achievements and contributions at 

national level of the e-agriculture programme implemented since 2012 and steered by ANSUT. 

Nutrition support: Training of 60 health workers, medical doctors, nurses and mid-wives; 

Establishment of structures for management and tools for malnutrition screening; Organization of 

malnutrition screening campaigns; Promotion of maternal breast-feeding; Broadcast of local-

language radio programmes on good nutritional practices; Technical support (training, technical 

assistance, logistics) for establishing a food health control system and a bio-fortification programme. 

Marketing support: Modernization of markets (component A); Organization of markets and 

support for their functionality; Support for the procurement of suitable means of transport, 

conservation and warehousing; Support to the agricultural markets information system (ICT sub-

component); Study of the wholesale market in the city of Yamoussoukro. Complementary support 

for gender promotion: Strengthening of actors’ technical capacity to mainstream gender; 

Strengthening of literacy among women; Support for the empowerment of women and young girls; 

and Development of women’s entrepreneurship. Institutional support: Support for the project’s 

partner structures to make them more efficient and enable them ensure in a sustainable manner the 

implementation of activities assigned.  

Component C : 

Project 

management 

UA 7.05 

million 

(7%) 

Coordination of project activities with stakeholders; Equipment and operation of the project; 

Rehabilitation of ECP premises; Procurement of goods, services and works; Administrative, 

accounting and financial management; Project’s internal and external monitoring/evaluation; Audit; 

Information and communication activities. 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

 

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for infrastructure are based on standards ensuring the 

sustainability of investments at acceptable costs and targeting good beneficiary ownership. 

Rural roads will be rehabilitated in accordance with the technical standards defined by the Road 

Management Agency (AGEROUTE). Special attention will be given to the treatment of critical 

points as this will allow for an uninterrupted flow of traffic in all seasons to and from most 

localities. For irrigated areas, the project prioritized the rehabilitation of existing gravity-based 

structures upstream the dam, extending somewhere available water so allows. Some degraded 

dams will also be consolidated to avoid the risk of submersion or rupture. As regards the 

development of marshy areas and market gardens, the traditional techniques used will be 

improved and modernized to lighten the work and introduce greater efficiency. For marshy 

areas, the concern will be to better regulate high-water levels and gravity-based distribution of 



 

6 

water through suitable works. For gardens, this will involve ensuring water drainage while 

promoting localized irrigation techniques (drip method, spray irrigation, etc.). New areas will 

be irrigated to encourage private community initiatives and meet different market needs. 

Marketing buildings will be constructed according to standards usually applied in the country 

through various projects. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternative Solutions Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Solution Brief Description 

 

Reason for Rejection 

 

Construction of new dams 

with schemes downstream 

Creation of new retention dams by 

developing irrigated areas. 

 Numerous existing dams with under-developed schemes 
downstream whose rehabilitation is priority, considering 

the available financial resources. 

 Costly investments not justified given the potential already 
in place but not fully tapped. 

Laying out of large 

schemes fed via pumping 

Develop new irrigated areas of 

several hectares while ensuring 

water supply through pumping 

 High cost of maintaining schemes than for gravity-based 
networks. 

 Priority given to medium-sized and insufficiently 
developed gravity-based schemes. 

Light re-profiling of roads Light treatment of wearing course 

in place 

 Life cycle generally below one year. 
 Unsuitable solution for roads not having been the subject 

of initial rehabilitation. 

 Accessibility not assured because of many critical points 
and crossings. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

 

2PAI-BÉLIER is an autonomous operation in the form of a Loan/Grant for an investment 

project. The country is far advanced in the PDDAA process with the existence of PNIA and 

preparation of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Pending completion of the 

process, most donor interventions in the sector are undertaken through targeted investment 

projects.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

 

2.4.1 The project’s total cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at UA 97 million 

(approximately CFAF 80.99 billion), including UA 32.50 million (CFAF 27.14 billion) in 

foreign exchange and UA 64.49 million (CFAF 53.85 billion) in local currency. A rate of 5 to 

10% for physical contingencies on works and equipment, making a total of UA 4.4 million for 

this heading or 4.5% of the total project cost, was also factored in. A provision of 3% for 

composite price escalation was applied to all components. Summary cost estimates by 

component and by expenditure category are presented in the tables below. Detailed tables of 

project costs and the list of goods and services are attached as Annexes D5 and D6 of Volume 

2. 
Table 2.3: Cost Estimates by Component 

Components 

 

(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local 

Cur. 

For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Restoration of productive capital 22,709,325 18,787,485 41,496,810 27,197 22,500 49,698 51.2 

Development of value chains 21,594,780 2,848,370 24,443,150 25,862 3,411 29,274 30.2 

Project management 3,078,450 2,168,450 5,246,900 3,687 2,597 6,284 6.5 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

 

 

 



 

7 

Table 2.4: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

Expenditure Categories 
(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Works 20,495,560 18,704,500 39,200,060 24,546 22,401 46,947 48.4 

Goods 1,698,400 1,081,000 2,779,400 2,034 1,295 3,329 3.4 

Services 9,886,345 3,607,755 13,494,100 11,840 4,321 16,161 16.7 

Miscellaneous* 11,220,900  11,220,900 13,438  13,438 13.9 

Staff 321,425  321,425 385  385 0.4 

Operating costs 3,073,425 255,950 3,329,375 3,681 306 3,987 4.1 

PPF 686,500 155,100 841,600 822 186 1,008 1.0 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

  (*) Value Chains Development Fund and settlement of customary rights. 

  

2.4.2 Project Financing. The project will be financed by: (i) an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 

million (UA 50.56 million), an ADF Grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADF Loan of UA 26.04 

million, making a total of UA 80 million (82.5% of total cost); and (ii) the counterpart 

contribution by the Government and beneficiaries amounting to UA 17 million (CFAF 14.1 

billion), or 17.5% of the total cost. The grant includes the Bank’s UA 998,000 PPF advance to 

the Ivorian Government in February 2015 as well as the service fee. This advance will be 

reimbursed in accordance with PPF’s operational guidelines. Government’s counterpart 

contribution will finance the cost of irrigation schemes, the routine maintenance of roads 

(RMF), the settlement of customary rights in the industrial zone, the rehabilitation/extension of 

the erstwhile PADER-Lakes buildings to serve as project offices and part of operating costs. 

Beneficiaries’ contribution of UA 267,000 (CFAF 223 million), or 3% of the total project cost, 

will be used for irrigation scheme and human water works. The distribution of project financing 

is indicated in Table 2.5 below while Tables 2.6 and 2.7 show the distribution of the grant and 

loans by expenditure category. 

 
Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

Sources 

Amount (CFAF '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For Exch. Local Cur. Total 

For. 

Exch. 

Local 

Cur. 
Total 

ADB loan 19,004,459 23,212,706 42,217,165 22,760 27,800 50,560 52.1 

ADF loan 5,389,115 16,354,187 21,743,302 6,454 19,586 26,040 26.8 

ADF grant 262,677 2,576,444 2,839,121 315 3,086 3,400 3.5 

   Including PPF 155,100 686,500 841,600 186 822 1,008 1.0 

Total AfDB Group 24,656,251 42,143,337 66,799,588 29,529 50,472 80,001 82.5 

Government  2,485,128 11,485,663 13,970,791 2,977 13,755 16,732 17.2 

Beneficiaries - 223,353 223,353 - 267 267 0.3 

Total 27,141,379 53,852,353 80,993,732 32,506 64,494 97,000 100.0 

 

 

  



 

8 

Table 2.6: Distribution of ADF Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories 

ADF Loan (UA Thousand) ADF Grant (UA Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total L.C. 

For. 

Exch. Total 

Works 2,405 1,300 3,705    

Goods 1,148 801 1,949    

Services 7,691 3,912 11,603 2,156 125 2,281 

Operating costs 3,491 201 3,692    

Miscellaneous 3,944  3,944    

PPF   ,, 822 186 1,008 

Not Allocated 906 241 1,147 107 4 111 

Total 19,585 6,455 26,040 3,085 315 3,400 

 

Table 2.7: Distribution of ADB Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories  
ADB (UA Thousand) ADB Loan (EUR Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local Cur. For. Exch. Total 

Works 22,643 20,413 43,056 28,823 25,985 54,808 

Goods 1,042 452 1,494 1,327 575 1,902 

Services 2,554 692 3,246 3,251 880 4,131 

Not allocated 1,561 1,203 2,764 1,987 1,532 3,519 

Total 27,800 22,760 50,560 35,388 28,972 64,360 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area covers the Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro 

and Attiégouakro Départements) and Bélier Administrative Region (Diediévi, Djékanou, 

Tiebessou and Toumodi Départements). It is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan and covers 

11,695 km2. The climate is of the humid tropical or Sudano-Guinean type. Recent studies on 

rainfall in this region over a period of 30 years (1980-2010) show an irregular distribution of 

rain with annual values ranging between 1,000 and 1,200 mm. The effects of climate change 

are increasingly felt, leading to disruptions in the planting/harvest calendar. Nevertheless, the 

project area has high agricultural and water potential, characterized by a fairly flat relief crossed 

by a dense hydrographic network (Bandama, N’Zi and Kan Rivers) This hydrography offers the 

region good opportunities for rice cultivation, fishing and fish-farming, which remain untapped. 

According to the 2014 General Population and Housing Census (RGPH 2014), the project area 

has a population of 702,000 of which 51% male and 49% female. Poverty rose from 41.4% in 

2002 to 61.8% in 2015 in Bélier Region and from 25% to 39.4% in Yamoussoukro District 

(INS-ENV2015). Average annual income per capita is CFAF 373,504 in urban areas and CFAF 

246,122 in rural areas. These values are lower than at the national level where they are CFAF 

467,080 and CFAF 256,538. The prevalence of chronic malnutrition stands at 30.4% (SMART 

2011) and underweight at 17.3% (EDS 2012). These ratios reflect a very preoccupying 

nutritional situation, considering that the acceptable threshold of chronic malnutrition is 20%.  

2.5.2 Due to the major constraints for the region’s development and economic recovery (see 

1.2.2), Bélier Region was prioritized during the identification mission undertaken with Bank 

support (see Annex B of Volume 2). This choice was also guided by the significant potential 

that exists but which remains untapped, the existing anchor infrastructure (motorway, airport), 

the existence of a world-class university complex (INPHB), the need to revitalize the region 

around Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative capital, which has experienced economic 

decline for several decades. It was also guided by the urgency to help the region’s population 

who expect a far-reaching development intervention (the Lacs Region Rural Development 

Support Project assessed by ADF in 2000 was not implemented because disbursements were 



 

9 

suspended in 2002 at the start of the armed conflict in Côte d’Ivoire). The project’s beneficiaries 

are value chain actors, organized as groups or cooperatives, as well as private operators with 

SME status. The project will directly benefit about 112,000 people in all. Its impact on 

employment is significant due to the creation of the equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs 

(approximately 4.8 million workdays). 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

The project was the subject of wide consultations at all stages of its study. Contacts made during 

the identification mission in March 2013 were continued during the preparatory (June 2015) 

and appraisal (June 2016) phases in Bélier Region, Yamoussoukro District and Abidjan. 

Meetings were held with the administrative authorities, local communities, technical structures, 

farmers’ organizations, women’s groups, private partners, ongoing projects and TFPs involved. 

Several workshops were organized during PPF implementation to select irrigation sites and road 

sections to be rehabilitated. Moreover, the project’s implementation will require the putting in 

place of mechanisms closely involving and empowering the various value chain actors. Since 

the sustainability of interventions, especially those concerning irrigation infrastructure, would 

require the full ownership of the parties concerned, the option was taken to target in priority the 

most committed communities that also fulfil the selection criteria (explicitly made request, land 

security, organization method, contributions and commitments, etc.). For the different sub-

sectors affected, the project will support the establishment of platforms to facilitate synergy 

among stakeholders and by systematically involving those of the private sector. Periodic 

meetings and information campaigns will be financed by the project to ensure proper 

communication and enable participatory decision-making by the actors. 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in Project Design 

The Bank finances the Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in the Indénié-

Djuablin Region (see 1.3.1). Lessons drawn from the project’s mid-term review were considered 

in the design of 2PAI-BÉLIER, including: (i) greater consideration of the value chains approach 

and promotion of private investment; (ii) optimization of the performance of delegated 

contracting authorities through a better definition of roles and tasks; (iii) expected improvement 

of the procurement process by enhancing the quality of procurement dossiers with a view to 

recruiting competent contractors and firms; and (iv) establishment of competent human 

resources for an efficient management of activities, including cross-cutting aspects 

(environment and gender). The table in Annex C1 details measures taken to reflect the lessons 

learned. An additional NTF financing in the form of a UA 4 million loan was approved by the 

Bank Board of Directors on 21 October 2016 to support agri-business activities. Value chains 

and the role played by the private sector was reflected in the project design. Overall, the project 

design benefited from the pilot initiatives of the Feed Africa Strategy in terms of the 

development of agropoles, youth employment and agriculture financing with shared risks.  

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The key performance indicators presented in the logical framework will be refined 

through the project’s baseline situation. The outcome indicators include: (i) outputs and 

production; (ii) additional production processed and marketed; (iii) higher revenue and income 

generation for farmers and settled youths; (iv) the number of women and youths having 

benefited from project support; (v) the average time of electricity cuts in the industrial zone and 

in the town of Didiévi. The main output indicators are: (i) the irrigated surface area laid out, 

rehabilitated or developed; (ii) the number of infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 

(consolidation centres, rural markets, storage facilities, etc.); (iii) the number of bore holes and 

pumps for rehabilitated DWS; (iv) the linear distance of roads and electric lines restored; (v) 

the number of agricultural groupings and professional organizations (OPA), youths and women 



 

10 

trained or settled in various fields; (vi) the effectiveness of support systems in place 

(mechanization programme, development fund, ICT, etc.); and (vii) the number of senior staff 

and agents of technical services trained.  

2.8.2 Other gender-specific indicators will be added during finalization of the 

monitoring/evaluation system and establishment of the baseline situation, according to the 

results-based management approach. These include: (i) the proportion of women in each 

beneficiary group; (ii) the involvement of women and youths in farmers’ and infrastructure 

management groupings; (iii) the number of land certificates issued to women and youths; (iv) 

the number of women and young graduates settled; and (v) the number of people benefiting 

from the bio-fortification programme. Special emphasis will be laid on the monitoring of socio-

economic impacts (gender- and youth-disaggregated data, monitoring of FO performance, 

turnover of very small enterprises, etc.).  

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic performance was assessed over a 25-year 

period. The calculation of project benefits was based on an estimation of additional outputs 

under the project combined with the effects of an increase in the sown land surface due to works 

(Component A) and the technology package adopted (Component B). The analysis took into 

account the characteristics of agricultural plantations in a without-project and with-project 

scenarios, and the trend of the technical level illustrated by activity fact sheets. More precisely, 

the project benefits come from: (i) the increase in productivity (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, 

pork and fish); (ii) the increase in the productivity and surface area of rain-fed cultivation; (iii) 

and the increase in the income of youths and SMEs benefiting from the project’s technical and 

financial support.  

3.1.2 In terms of economic profitability, the project has an economic rate of return (ERR) of 

30% and Net Present Value (NPV) of CFAF 123 billion at an opportunity cost of capital of 

12%. These results are deemed satisfactory in light of project activities. The project is more 

sensitive to a decrease in production than to an increase in investment costs. A 10% decrease in 

expected production induces an ERR of 26.8% and a 10% increase in investment costs gives an 

ERR of 28.7%. A 10% decrease in production at the same time as a 10% increase in investment 

costs gives an ERR of 24.9%, which is still above the opportunity cost of capital (12%). The 

assumptions and detailed calculation of financial and economic analyses are presented in Annex 

E1 of Volume 2.  

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

Outcome Assessment Economic 

NPV (baseline scenario: discount rate: 12%) CFAF 123 billion 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 30% 

3.1.3 The analysis of the project’s financial performance shows positive additional income 

for all operating models studied. The project will benefit about 11,900 farmers including about 

1,600 for irrigated areas, 8,500 for rain-fed crops and 800 young graduates, as well as 200 SMEs 

(50 of them in produce processing), 150 pig breeders and 100 fish farmers. The project’s impact 

is significant for all plantation types studied, returns being higher for models representing 

irrigated agriculture. The additional income by model are as follows: CFAF 1.2 million for 

Model M1 representing farmers in rice-growing areas (about CFAF 1.2 billion in all), CFAF 7.2 

million for Model M2 representing market gardening farmers (CFAF 4.9 billion in all), CFAF 



 

11 

2.5 million for Model M3 representing rain-fed activities (CFAF 22 billion in all), CFAF 4.8 

million for Model M4 representing young farmers (CFAF 3.8 billion in all), and CFAF 20 

million for Model M5 representing SMEs (CFAF 2 billion in all), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 

M6 representing pig breeders (CFAF 375 million in all) and CFAF 4.5 million for Model M7 

representing fish farmers (CFAF 450 million in all). The project will directly benefit about 

112,000 people with 107,000 of them are expected to be eased out of poverty. It will create the 

equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs in the region (see Annex E1 of Volume 2).  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment. The project was classified in Environmental Category 2 since it has 
negligible impact on the environment and will not require population displacement. The 

Environmental and Social Management Plan was approved by ORQR and published on the Bank’s 

website on 18 November 2016. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and 

social impacts. The rehabilitation of irrigated areas (dykes and networks) will cause little 

destruction to ecosystems. Possible scheme extensions will lead only to the felling of a few 

shrubs and uprooting of secondary bushes made up largely by pennisetum purpureum. The same 

is true for impacts of the construction zone of the Raviart mini-dam where: (i) the water storage 

area has deteriorated greatly due to frequent bush fires and illegal logging of the gallery forest; 

and (ii) the poor exploitation of marshy areas by farmers who are not accustomed to it; the few 

cashew nut trees planted close to the marshy areas cover small areas that can easily be 

compensated by the activities of the Climate Change Based Project undertaken concurrently in 

the 2PAI-BÉLIER zone. Socially, the rehabilitation of structures can lead some land owners, 

most of whom are settlers, to over-price agricultural plantations in marshy zones. The 

rehabilitation of rural roads will not cause significant environmental impacts. The same is true 

of the rehabilitation and extension of socio-economic infrastructure (markets, health centres, 

schools and canteens, energy and ICT, fishing and livestock infrastructure, etc.). This 

infrastructure can only improve and ensure the sustainability of the positive impacts expected 

from the implementation of 2PAI-BÉLIER Project activities. The analysis of negative impacts 

reveals two major observations: (i) project activities will neither cause population displacement 

nor seriously undermine biological diversity; and (ii) negative impacts can be mitigated or 

minimized through the measures defined in the 2PAI-BÉLIER ESMP that was prepared during 

the appraisal mission (Annex E of Volume 2). 

3.2.2 Climate Change: Spatial and temporal variations in rainfall patterns are a real cause 

for concern for the conduct of activities in the project area as well as across the country. 

Activities directly concerned are rain-fed agriculture and activities undertaken in lowlands 

developed as water catchment in case of pronounced water shortages. For lowlands on dams to 

be rehabilitated, technical measures will be taken during works to minimize the effects of high-

water level in case of abundant rains (overflow for excess water and networks of drains). To 

mitigate erosion of the banks of lowlands, the project will ensure that good agricultural practices 

are applied, while encouraging farmers to build anti-erosion strips. Tools for implementing alert 

procedures (i.e. collection and processing of climate data and mechanisms for their 

communication to actors) are inadequate and/or obsolete. The project will contribute to 

improving these procedures in the region by: (i) increasing the number of rain gauges in the 

sub-prefectures and villages hosting project sites; and (ii) providing more equipment, 

strengthening capacity to collect and process data and means of communication. The emphasis 

on the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes is in itself a contribution to build the resilience of 

agricultural production systems. The project will support all activities already undertaken in the 

region by WAAPP/PPAAO and CNRA concerning the dissemination of reputedly drought-

resistant plant varieties. The energy component will help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

by resorting less to diesel generators (the alternative source when power supplied by the national 

grid becomes unavailable). Besides, as part of the Global Climate Change Initiative (FIP, 

REDD+) financed by the Climate Strategy Fund (SCF), the Bank will support agroforestry and 



 

12 

the creation of forest plantations in the Centre, including in Bélier Region. This intervention 

will be in the form of a project whose appraisal will take place in the first quarter of 2017. This 

project is to be implemented in synergy with 2PAI BÉLIER. It will help to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions, increase carbon sequestration and build the resilience of production systems. 

3.2.3 Gender Impacts. Women make up 49.6% of the population in the project area. Most 

of them engage in agriculture, in particular in the food value chains (cassava production and 

processing, market gardening produce production and marketing, rice steaming, etc.). Women 

are often confined to less fertile and less irrigated parcels due to the difficulty they encounter in 

accessing landed property. In general, women farm extensively on small areas (about one ha), 

practicing shifting cultivation with few factors of production. Often, agricultural outreach is 

undertaken at their expense because it targets cash crops and organized sub-sectors that are 

dominated by men. Women use old and precarious processing equipment. Most of them do not 

know their rights, are poorly organized and are victims of all manners of violence (sexual, 

physical, psychological, economic, harmful traditional practices, denial of opportunities). 

3.2.4 Considering these constraints and the concentration of 2PAI Bélier on food sub-

sectors, the project’s gender strategy will promote women’s empowerment and gender equality 

in access to project services and resources, the implementation of each of its components, 

community representation and decision-making. In this regard, the project will facilitate 

women’s access to land by facilitating the access of close to 2,200 women to the restored 

irrigated areas. Furthermore, 50% of land certificates, the issuance of which will be facilitated 

by the project, will be set aside for women. The project will lay special emphasis on promoting 

women’s equitable access to technologies, mechanized equipment, inputs (seeds, fertilizers and 

pest-control products), supervision services and financing on a par with men. It will support 

women to procure modern cassava processing and rice-steaming equipment. Rehabilitated 

markets will take into account the specific needs of women, especially cold rooms, and include 

gender-separate sanitation facilities, day care facilities and literacy centres. The project will 

facilitate the evacuation and sale of agricultural produce by establishing platforms, setting up 

farmer/trader contracting systems and rehabilitating rural roads. The project’s “Youth training 

and settlement programme” component will reach about 400 young girls, or 50% of the 

beneficiaries of the said programme. In addition, at least 40% of enterprises managed by women 

will be integrated in the project’s “SME support” component.  

3.2.5 At the strategic level, specific measures and actions will be taken to develop women’s 

leadership and remedy the significant illiteracy rate. A package of integrated services aimed at 

building suitable technical and social capacity, as well as life skills (family planning, HIV/AIDS 

control and violence against women, etc.) necessary for their empowerment will be provided. 

The project will also work to better structure women’s organizations around selected sites by 

ensuring that woman represent 50% of members of various committees and bureaus of 

cooperatives or professional organizations targeted. The project will also work to endow the 

selected support, supervisory or training structures and agricultural professional organizations 

and management units with real technical capacity in gender mainstreaming/inclusion based on 

a gender organizational audit. The Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (Advanced School of 

Agronomy, ESA) will be supported to incorporate gender-based modules in its training 

curriculum to enable the country have agronomy and agricultural specialists who are sensitive 

to gender issues. The project will produce the gender profile of the Bélier Region agricultural 

sector, including Yamoussoukro District, which will serve to define indicators for measuring 

gender equality. A gender specialist within the Project Management Unit will monitor gender 

activities. 

3.2.6 Achieving this project’s gender-mainstreaming objectives depends on the knowledge 

and capacity of different sector actors. Therefore, it is necessary from project commencement, 

to undertake training, sensitization and communication actions for a change of behaviour. 



 

13 

Furthermore, the project must sustain the achievements of women in their sectors of activity. In 

this regard, a strict monitoring must be undertaken so that women are not excluded in their 

production sectors (these sectors are bound to become more attractive for men due to the 

modernization of factors of production and an increase in income accruing therefrom).  

3.2.7 Women will benefit from all project activities for a cost amounting to approximately 

UA 58 million. Moreover, a budget of CFAF 1.4 billion (or UA 1.7 million) will be allocated 

specifically to implement targeted actions to empower women and promote gender in the project 

area’s agricultural sector. 

3.2.8 Youth Employment and Inclusion: The project area had 702,000 inhabitants in 2014 

(RGPH data), a third of whom are youths. Despite their predominance in the labour force, 

youths are less occupied and the most vulnerable on the labour market. The national 

employment situation prepared by AGEPE based on 2014 employment data reveals that youths 

are the least active in terms of occupation (59.2% against 66% for the entire labour force), the 

most unemployed (8.3% against 7% for the whole) and the most inactive (32.7% against 2.7%). 

Young men are relatively more occupied (53.5%) whereas young woman are relatively more 

unemployed (58.6%). The level of education of youths is higher (average duration of studies of 

8.8 years against 6.6 years for the entire population of working age). Furthermore, the level of 

education is higher among unemployed youths than among active employed youths (average 

duration of studies is 9.9 years against 7.9 years). Further, youths aged 14-24 years constitute a 

significant percentage of labour in the informal sector compared to the entire population 

(91.1%), more so for young men (94.1%).  

3.2.9 The project will contribute to improving youth employment indicators. It will also 

enhance production and marketing conditions (irrigation infrastructure, roads, markets, etc.), as 

well as access to innovative technologies and factors of production (inputs, equipment, etc.). 

This material capacity building, coupled with stronger technical and financial capacity, will 

boost the productivity of activities undertaken, increase income and prompt the youths to return 

to farming. Besides, during the establishment and/or rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, youths 

will be called up to provide labour. The young artisans of the region will also see their capacity 

strengthened and will thus ensure better services to the satisfaction of producers. This capacity 

building will be undertaken jointly with the Regional Trades Chamber. The platforms envisaged 

by the project for different sub-sectors will help to increase the number of clients and young 

artisans, and resolve issues of unpaid services due to poor produce sales. The project will 

facilitate the implementation of a specific study on the situation of artisans in Bélier Region, 

including Yamoussoukro District. This will provide exhaustive and relevant data for the 

professionalization of the sector, and a better participation of artisans in the establishment of 

the envisaged agro-industrial pole.  

3.2.10 Under its “Support to entrepreneurship” component, the project will foster youth self-

employment. Ongoing initiatives in different local communities (Yamoussoukro Autonomous 

District, Tiébissou mayor) to establish young entrepreneurs will be supported by the project. To 

that end, grants for the establishment of youths will awarded for the conduct of short-duration 

(at most three months) qualifying training programmes. For that, the project will build on the 

expertise of École Supérieure d’Agronomie (ESA). A consultancy firm will be solicited to 

support young entrepreneurs to prepare their feasibility studies. Young girls will make up at 

least 30% of young entrepreneurs supported. The installation of agro-industrial units will also 

contribute to increasing youth employment, as is the case with the Toumodi cassava industrial 

processing unit. Therefore, the project should support access to financing to develop ongoing 

initiatives and facilitate the establishment of new operators. 

 



 

14 

IV IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1 Implementation Arrangement 

4.1.1 Implementation Arrangements: The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

(MINADER) will be the project executing agency. The day-to-day management of the project 

will be ensured by the project coordination team, which will be under the supervision of the 

General Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Projects (DGPSP) based in the vacant premises 

of defunct PADER-Lakes that will be enlarged. The project is in line with Presidential Directive 

No. 02/2015 particularly paragraphs 3, 4 and 4.1. Staff for the coordination team are being 

recruited and studies and BDs of flagship components (rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and 

roads) are available, thanks to activities undertaken under the PPF advance (see Annex C). 

4.1.2 The main tasks of the team are the coordination, control and monitoring of all project 

activities, as well as the information and contact of the different actors. The team will comprise 

a Coordinator, a specialist in charge of technical operations, an Administrative and Finance 

Specialist, a Monitoring/Evaluation Specialist, a specialist responsible for the farmers’ 

organizations support service, a Procurement Specialist, a Rural Engineering Specialist, a 

Specialist in Agri-business, a Specialist in the Livestock and Fisheries Sub-sector, a Specialist 

in Agricultural Credit, an Environmentalist Specialist, a Gender Specialist and support staff. 

The members of the coordination team being recruited as part of the PPF advance will sign 

performance contracts with the implementation unit. Renewal of such contracts shall be subject 

to annual review. Only senior staff whose performance is deemed satisfactory will be 

maintained. The Borrower will submit to the Bank evidence of appointment of the project 

coordinator (“Condition Precedent to First Disbursement”) within at most six months after 

effectiveness and evidence of the designation of the rest of the team (“Other Condition”). A 

technical committee will support DGPSP in activities to render the loan effective and implement 

the project (monitor the recruitment of the coordination team, etc.). It will comprise members 

from MINADER, technical directorates of Ministries in charge of youth employment and 

livestock/fishery resources and technical advisers from Ministries in charge of the Budget, 

Economy and Finance. The committee’s mandate shall not exceed six months following the 

signature of Agreements. The travel expenses of members of this committee will be borne by 

the State’s counterpart contribution to PPF.  

4.1.3 Steering: The project will be steered by a national committee bringing together the 

representatives of the following Ministries: (i) Ministry of Planning and Development; (ii); 

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; (iii) Ministry in charge of the Economy and 

Finance; (iv) Ministry in charge of the Budget; (v) Ministry of Trade; (vi) Ministry of Economic 

Infrastructure; (vii) Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development; (viii) Ministry 
of the Family, the Woman and the Child; (ix) Ministry of Livestock and Fishery Resources; (x) 

Ministry of Youth Promotion and Employment and Civil Service; (xi) Ministry of Industry and 

Mines; (xii) General Confederation of Enterprises of Côte d’Ivoire; (xiii) the National 

Association of Agricultural Professional Organizations; and (xiv) the Group of Women’s 

Organizations for Gender Equality. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the 

representative of the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, and its technical 

secretariat will be managed by the Directorate in charge of Planning in the DGPSP. An inter-

ministerial order will be signed in this regard. This committee will meet at least twice yearly to 

consider the outputs and outcomes obtained, approve progress reports and annual work 

programmes and budgets, clear possible blockages and constraints, and ensure that activities 

implemented are consistent with national strategies and policies. The Borrower will submit to 

the Bank evidence of creating a National Steering Committee latest six months following 

effectiveness of the loans. This constitutes the “Other Condition”. 

 



 

15 

4.1.4 Regional Consultative Framework (CRC): This framework targets the harmonization 

of development interventions, local arbitration and the quest for regional balance. It will be 

chaired by the Préfet of the region. The Regional Director of Agriculture will handle the 

technical secretariat. A ministerial order will be signed to that end (Annex D1.3 of Volume 2). 

4.1.5 Associated Agencies: The project will forge partnership or delegated supervisory 

(MOD) relations, through agreements, with specialized experienced agencies to execute or 

monitor tasks falling within their spheres of competence. These include the National Rural 

Development Support Agency (ANADER) for agricultural supervision and outreach; ONDR 

for monitoring works in rice-growing areas; the Foodstuffs Marketing Assistance Authority 

(OCPV) for marketing related arrangements; the Roads Management Agency (AGEROUTE) 

for the delegated supervision of roads; the Territorial Directorate of Human Water Management 

(DTHH), for the supervision of drinking water works; the Investment Promotion Centre of Côte 

d’Ivoire (CEPICI) to monitor the projects of agricultural enterprises; the National Polytechnic 

Institute – Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (INP-ESA) and the Youth Employment Agency for the 

implementation of the youth training/incubation/settlement programme and some technical 

directorates of MINADER, MIRAH, Ministries in charge of the environment, women’s 

advancement and the child and the Ministry of Industry for activities falling within their 

respective spheres of competence.  

4.1.6 Procurement Procedures: The procurement of goods (including services other than 

those of consultants), works and consultancy services financed by the Bank as part of this 

project, will be done in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded 

Operations, October 2015 edition and pursuant to the terms of the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, procurements will be done in accordance with: (i) Côte d’Ivoire’s procurement 

system (SPM): Procurement methods and procedures (MPA) as part of the procurement system 

of Côte d’Ivoire comprising its laws and implementing decrees (Decree No. 2009-259 of 6 

August 2009 instituting the Public Procurement Code as amended and supplemented by 

Decrees No. 2014-306 of 27 May 2014 and No. 2015-525 of 15 July 2015 and various 

implementing orders), using standard national bidding documents (DNSAO) or other bidding 

documents approved during project negotiations for various types of activities envisaged; (ii) 

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): standard Bank procurement methods, 

based on relevant standard BDs for consulting service contracts deemed to be most suitable.  

4.1.7 Risk Assessment and Procurement Capacity (RAPC): The risk at country, project 

and sector level, and executing agency’s capacity in project-related procurements were assessed 

and the results are reflected in Table D2.20 of Annex D2. Deemed moderate, the risk guided 

the choice of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank or Third Party) used for given activities 

or all similar activities under the project. The appropriate risk mitigation measures identified 

were included in the PERCA action plan indicated in para. D.2.30. of Annex D2. 

4.1.8 Waiver of Eligibility: Considering that part of this project’s financing is through the 

ADB Window and that some procurements will be done pursuant to the Côte d’Ivoire 

procurement system, a formal request is made to the Board of Directors of the Bank to waive 

the rule of origin for procurements made pursuant to the national procurement system. Since 

the public procurement eligibility rules in Ivorian law are not the same as those of the ADB 

Window, it is necessary to prevent any practical incompatibility. For project procurements using 

the national system, the eligibility rules are national ones in addition to the provisions of 

paragraph 5.c of the Bank Policy on Procurement. Consequently, even using the national 

system, Bank resources cannot serve to finance a contract awarded to a bidder under sanctions 

by the African Development Bank Group. If or in spite of these provisions, a contract is 

concluded with a bidder under sanction by the Bank Group, such contract shall not be financed 

with Bank resources. However, procurements made pursuant to the Bank’s Procurement 

Methods and Procedures will comply with the rule of origin as defined in Article 17 (1) (d) of 

the Agreement Establishing the African Development Bank. 



 

16 

4.1.9 Financial Management and Disbursement: The overall fiduciary risk of the 

project executing agency was assessed and deemed moderate. Côte d’Ivoire issued Decree 

No. 2015-415 in July 2015 to organize the preparation, implementation and closing of projects 

co-financed with Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs). It is in line with the Paris Declaration 

on Development Aid Effectiveness, especially the use of the recipient’s national procedures. 

The decree determines all administration and management structures that must be established 

before the Bank Board of Directors rules on the project, especially the Project Coordination 

Team (ECP) and the recruitment or appointment of its members as well as the National Steering 

Committee (CNP). The project budget will be incorporated fully in the State budget and 

implemented following the simplified expenditure procedure. Project accounts will be kept with 

the SIGFIP (Integrated Public Finance Management System) software, which handles only the 

budgetary module. To have complete accounts bringing together budgetary, cost and general 

accounting modules, a private management software will be procured. Financial reports and 

statements will be published for the public as well as private systems. A procedures manual 

harmonizing public and private procedures will be prepared for the project’s management and 

financed by PPF funds.  

4.1.10 Disbursements. Project resources will be disbursed using the reimbursement, direct 

payment and revolving fund methods, pursuant to the provisions of the Bank’s Disbursement 

Manual. Four accounts will be opened in a bank acceptable to AfDB Group to receive ADF 

resources: a special account to receive revolving funds serving for the operation of the project 

coordination and three accounts to receive resources for the Value Chains Development Fund: 

(i) a dedicated account for the operations and operating expenses of this Fund; (ii) a 

“Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance banks and project partner SFDs, and to 

guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SMEs; and (iii) an account meant for interest rate 

subsidies. These accounts have only one signatory, the public accountant who is personally 

responsible for funds entrusted to him. He/she must be sworn-in and pay a deposit in the public 

Treasury before assuming duty. Expenses linked to the services of consultants, contractors and 

suppliers will be settled by direct payment. Counterpart funds will be used to pay for expenses 

either by direct payment or by a project account opened for that purpose. 

4.1.11 Audit: An independent auditor will be recruited through competitive bidding for the 

annual audit of project accounts. He/she will be recruited based on terms of reference approved 

by the Bank for a maximum period of three years. The auditor’s continued services will be 

contingent on the approval of his/her first report. Audit reports must reach the Bank latest six 

(6) months after the close of the fiscal year. In parallel, the project is subject to control by the 

General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF) and verification by the Court of Auditors, as indicated in 

Decree No. 2015-475. 

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 Project implementation will span five years from the second quarter of 2017. Once the 

project team is recruited, the Bank will organize the start-up mission to put in place all 

requirement for a rapid and efficient commencement of project activities. 

4.2.2 The project’s internal Monitoring/Evaluation Service (SSEI) will monitor the project 

internally at the physical and financial level, and by expenditure category as well as assess the 

project’s impact on beneficiaries and the environment based on relevant and jointly established 

indicators. It will be aligned on a geographic information system (GIS) included in the project’s 

ICT components. At start-up (PPF budget), SSEI will be supported by a consultant to set up the 

baseline situation and establish a monitoring/evaluation system, including verifiable indicators. 

The baseline situation study will include the gender profile in agriculture, to deepen knowledge 

of beneficiary groups especially with regard to socio-economic aspects (income, capital, 

agricultural activities). This system is expected to be functional latest six months following 



 

17 

project commencement. On that basis, the project will produce quarterly and annual progress 

reports indicating especially the implementation rates and outcomes of the different 

components, linked to the performance indicators of the logical framework. 

4.2.3 External monitoring/evaluation will be undertaken by the Directorate of Projects 

Evaluation (DEP), working closely with the directorates in charge of projects of technical 

ministries involved as well as the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). Half-yearly 

external monitoring/evaluation reports will seek to measure progress made, identify possible 

constraints and make recommendations to resolve problems encountered. DEP will involve 

technical directorates of ministries in external monitoring missions to consider particular 

technical problems and compliance with sector strategies. Considering the project’s linkages 

with ECOWAP, external monitoring/evaluation will ensure harmonization with indictors 

selected for PNIA. The project will place at the disposal of DEP, DPPF of MINADER, the 

Directorate of Public Debt and the directorates of technical ministries involved, the necessary 

means to enable them accomplish this mission. A mid-term review is planned to establish the 

interim implementation situation, ensure the overall good progress of the project and, if 

necessary, propose adjustments. A final joint evaluation is also programmed towards project 

completion to draw lessons and build on project achievements. 

4.2.4 The project implementation schedule is presented in Table 4.7 below. 

Table 4.7: Implementation and Supervision Schedule 

N° ACTIVITIES RESPONSIBILITY TIME FRAME 

1 Approval of loans and the grant ADB/ADF January 2017 

2 Signing of agreements (loans and grant)  ADB/ADF/Government 1st quarter 2017 

3 Effectiveness of loan agreements ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

3 Fulfilment conditions 1st disbursement ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

4 Start-up mission ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

5 Publication BD/DCR  ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

6 Start-up of works and services Government 2nd half of 2017 

7 Mid-term review ADB/ADF/Government 1st half of 2020 

8 Completion report ADB/ADF/Government 2nd half of 2019 

9 Completion of activities ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2021 

10 Closing of project ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2022 

4.3 Governance 

Under Pillar I of the Bank’s CSP 2013-2017, the Bank supports the connection of the Integrated 

Local Government Management System (SIGESCOD) to the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System and the Integrated Public Procurement Management System within the 

framework of the Economic and Financial Management Support Project (PAGEF 2017-2019). 

The aim is to reduce the risk of financial loss during the management of public finances and 

support the capacity building of actors of sector ministries and local governments. This project 

will also support local governance by better securing land tenure systems, establishing concerted 

systems to limit farmer/grazier conflicts, and strengthening the capacity of local communities 

and organs to manage infrastructure whose competencies are sometimes weak. The other 

measures adopted concern: (i) the conduct of annual financial audits; (ii) efficient coordination 

by the Project Coordination Team (ECP); and (iii) the conduct of at least two supervision 

missions per year. 

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 The project aims to initiate truly sustainable development by placing local 

stakeholders, including farmers, at the heart of decision-making while also strengthening their 

capacity to assume new responsibilities. During PPF preparation and site identification studies, 

an intervention process was adopted governed by a number of eligibility criteria to ensure the 



 

18 

effective commitment of the farmers concerned and the absence of potential conflicts. The 

communities concerned will provide financial or in-kind contribution for all support 

infrastructure, based on good governance mechanisms in force. The project will accompany 

them to engage a process aimed at sustaining infrastructure put in place. They will be supported 

to strengthen their capacity at the technical and organizational level, which will create expertise 

and greater ownership at their level. In particular, committees will be created or revitalized at 

each of the sites to ensure sound management and regular maintenance of community 

infrastructure. Mayors will be involved and accompanied in the management of communal 

infrastructure (markets, slaughter areas, etc.). Private sector involvement in processing and 

marketing actions is also a guarantee of the sustainability of actions undertaken through value 

chain dynamics and actor networking. 

4.4.2 The issue of the sustainability of actions implemented, especially infrastructure 

maintenance and management, is a central concern in the project’s design. For each type of 

infrastructure, specific measures will be taken to ensure management and maintenance under 

good conditions: (i) the maintenance of rehabilitated rural roads is ensured by budgeting related 

works on counterpart funds (FER financing) and piloted programming by AGEROUTE (global 

agreement with 2PAIA-Bélier); (ii) gravity-based operation of rice cultivation works, limiting 

management and maintenance costs; (iii) involvement and training of local structures to manage 

markets with higher receipts due to increased activities and sensitization; (iv) training and 

revitalization of committees for the management of HVA systems and irrigation sites, including 

water rates based on recognized practices and activities; (v) support of settled young farmers 

with tracking of trading accounts etc. Regarding the conservation of the physical environment, 

targeted actions will not have negative effects on the environment, which will foster the 

sustainability of actions undertaken. 

4.5 Risk Management 

4.5.1 The main risks that might limit results and measures for mitigating them are as follows: 

climate change related risk: Bélier Region faces serious climatic impacts, including: (i) 

recurrent flooding; and (ii) drought and its repercussions on the farming calendar and choice of 

varieties. The project will undertake mitigation measures including: (a) structures that can resist 

high intensity swells; (b) promotion of varieties and practices suited to drought cycles; (c) the 

dissemination of knowledge of climate-related risks and data; and (d) sensitization and 

communication at the level of the population of zones concerned. 

4.5.2 Risk of land-related conflicts: To ensure non-discriminatory access to works 

undertaken (gravity-based irrigation works, lowlands, market gardens, stores, etc.), the project 

will support the process of social evaluation on all sites to be developed before any intervention 

is undertaken. On development sites with full water mastery and lowland sites, the project will 

finance the land security of sites to be developed. Capacity-building support will also be 

provided to communes for better dissemination of land transaction tools and issuance of 

exploitation certificates.  

4.5.3 Risk of transhumance-related conflicts: With regard to the prevention of 

transhumance-related conflicts, the project will support devolved structures and communes to 

accompany endogenous transhumance-related conflict management mechanisms by setting up 

consultative frameworks and drafting local agreements for natural resources management. Two 

pilot sites integrating structuring works will also be selected in the region. 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Particularly through its development of the value chains component, 2PAI-Bélier will contribute 

to train different actors and disseminate new knowledge primarily to farmers, thanks to the 



 

19 

support and training offered by operators and technical services in advisory support, structuring 

and organization. It will come up with technical innovations based on research outcomes and 

also enable youths and women inclusively to develop technical and entrepreneurial capacity and 

settle on land equipped with infrastructure and modern means of operation. As part of training 

and settling of youths, the project will support agricultural training centres and INP-ESA by 

introducing new curricula and training modules to better respond to the requirements of 

agricultural entrepreneurship and promote the emergence of technological innovations. Lastly, 

the project will set up an integrated system for managing and sharing knowledge on project 

activities through the regular dissemination of knowledge and experience acquired on its 

website and that of MINADER. 

V LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework will be a Loan and Grant Agreement between the Republic of Côte 

d’Ivoire and the African Development Fund and a Loan Agreement between the Government 

of Côte d’Ivoire and the African Development Bank. These documents will comprise the terms 

and conditions of the loans and grant. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Involvement  

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to the Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loans and the ADF 

Grant: Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB loans shall be contingent on the fulfilment by the 

Borrower of the conditions stipulated in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to 

Bank Loan and Guarantee Agreements (sovereign entities). Effectiveness of the ADF grant shall 

be subject to signature by the Donee and the Bank of the related Agreement. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The first disbursement of the ADF and 

ADB loans and the ADF grant shall be subject to the effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loan 

Agreements and the ADF Grant Agreement in accordance with the above provisions and 

evidence of fulfilment to the satisfaction of the Bank Group in both form and substance of the 

following conditions: 

i. Forward to the Bank evidence of the appointment of the 2PAI-BÉLIER Coordinator 
whose qualification and experience will have been judged satisfactory by the Bank 

Group (par. 4.1.1); 

ii. Forward to the Bank evidence of opening a special account in a bank acceptable by the 
latter to receive revolving funds from ADF resources. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions 

In addition, the Borrower shall: 

i. Show to the Bank latest six months following signature of the Agreements, evidence 
of the appointment of the rest of the Project Coordination Team, comprising a specialist 

in charge of technical matters, a specialist responsible for administrative and financial 

matters, a monitoring/evaluation specialist, a specialist responsible for support to the 

service in charge of farmers’ organizations, a public procurement specialist, a rural 

engineering specialist, a specialist in agribusiness, and specialist in the livestock and 

fisheries sub-sectors, a specialist in agricultural credit, an environmentalist and a 

gender specialist (par. 4.1.1);  

ii. Provide, latest most six months following loan effectiveness, evidence of establishing 
the project National Steering Committee (par. 4.1.2);  



 

20 

iii. Provide evidence of opening a special dedicated account for the operations and 
operating expenses of the Value Chains Development Fund, not more than six months 

following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10);  

iv. Provide evidence of opening a “Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance 
project partner banks and SFDs and to guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SEs, not 

more than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10); and  

v. Provide evidence of opening a dedicated account for interest rate subsidies, not more 
than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10). 

5.2.4 Commitments  

The Borrower commits to:  

i. Implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and have it 
implemented by co-contracting parties pursuant to: (a) Bank rules and procedures; (b) 

national laws; and (c) the recommendations, prescriptions and procedures contained in 

the ESMP; and 

ii. Submit to the Bank annual reports on the ESMP implementation, including where 
applicable, weaknesses and corrective actions taken or to be taken. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

The project is aligned on Thrusts 1 (Light up Africa), 2 (Feed Africa), 3 (Industrialize 

Africa) and 5 (Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) of the High 5s, the Strategy 

for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, as well as the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 

(LTS 2013-2022) and the Gender Strategy, 2014-2018. Furthermore, the project is in line with 

Presidential Directive No. 02/2015 relating to the process of consideration of operations. Studies 

of the project’s flagship components are available and staff of the project coordination team are 

being recruited thanks to a PPF advance.  

VI RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Boards of Directors: (i) exceptionally grant a waiver 

on the application of the rule of origin mentioned in Article 17 (1) (d) of the Agreement 

Establishing the African Development Bank and, to enable procurements to be made using the 

national public procurement system of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, authorize the application 

of the eligibility rules contained in this system in addition to the provisions of paragraph 5.3 (c) 

of the Procurement Policy for operations funded by the Bank Group, October 2015 edition; and 

(ii) approve the proposal to extend an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 

million and an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the 

Bélier Region Agro Industrial Pole Project. 

 directly 
 to the justice system, it treats the 

underlying issue of inclusion, 


























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK



 

 

 

GHANA 

 

 
SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (SAPIP) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


December 2017 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

(SAZAPIP) aims at transforming agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job 

and wealth creation in the Northern Savannah Zone of Ghana. The project will increase farmers’ 

food and nutrition security and incomes through increased agricultural productivity and 

diversification; and enhance the creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase 

incomes of actors along selected value chains on a sustainable basis. The project has four 

Components: (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value Chains & Agribusiness 

Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Coordination, Management, 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project will be implemented over a five-year period (2018 – 

2023) at a total cost of UA 40.38 million. 

 
Needs Assessment: The Savannah Zone holds major agricultural promise that when harnessed 

will transform the lives of the zone's inhabitants quite significantly, yet the zone constitutes the 

poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double the national 

average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological conditions, 

low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in infrastructure and 

services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for Ghana’s balance 

of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition security, job 

creation and poverty reduction. 

 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed SAZAPIP will contribute 

towards the High 5 goals of the Bank Group. The project fits with the two key pillars of the 

draft Bank Group Country Strategy Paper (CSP) (2017-2021) for Ghana namely: (i) Agriculture 

Enhancing Inclusive Growth and Economic Development; and (ii) Support to Industrialization 

through Private Sector Development. The Bank Group has a comparative advantage in 

supporting the agriculture value chains development activities that will transform the 

impoverished rural areas of the northern part of the country into zones of economic prosperity 

drawing on lessons from experiences gained from previous projects financed by the Bank in 

Ghana. The project will also leverage on the complementary Ghana Incentive Based Risk 

Sharing for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established by the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture as well as the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded Rural 

Enterprises Project (REP).  
 

Knowledge Management: Knowledge will be captured through the establishment of a 

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system by the project.  The M&E system will coordinate all 

results and measurement activities, ensure the quality control and provide the necessary 

capacity building. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-based 

framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect advancement towards the 

translation of outputs into development outcomes. Data for analysis will be captured from the 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and 

field exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge will be generated by the pilot 

demonstration plots to form the basis for private sector investment in the agribusiness in the 

ecological zone as part of TASI. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution 

by showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short 

documentaries on Bank website, etc.). 

 



 

iv 

Loan information 

Client’s information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

RECIPIENT :  Republic of Ghana 

EXECUTING AGENCY :              Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

Financing plan 

Source 

 

Amount (million) 

 
Instrument 

UA USD 
African Development Fund (ADF) 27.86 39.01 Loan 

Government of Ghana (GoG)   6.50 9.10 Counterpart  

Beneficiaries    6.01 8.42 Beneficiary 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 40.38 56.53 - 

 

ADF’s key financing information (to be determined at loan negotiations) 

 
Loan currency UA 

Interest type*  

Interest rate spread*  

Tenure  

Grace period  

Commitment fee  

Other fees  

       *if applicable 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Identification Mission May, 2017 

Preparation Mission August 2017 

Concept Note Approval September, 2017 

Appraisal Mission September, 2017 

Programme approval 15 December, 2017 

Effectiveness 15 January, 2018 

Completion 31 December 2022 

Last Disbursement 31 March, 2023 

 

  



 

v 

Ghana: Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Result-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) 

Country and project name: Ghana : Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Purpose of the project:  To transform agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation. 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2023) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Jobs and wealth are generated along the value 

chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is enhanced 

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.1   Increased domestic food supply for key commodities (rice, maize, 

soybean and vegetables,)  

2.2. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting   

1. n.a  

2. n.a  

3. 33% 

1. 20,000 (50% women; 20% youth) 

2. 600,000 mt. 

3. 40% reduction in the number of stunted 

children under five 

MoFA reports, Project Reports 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 1. Additional household incomes  USD500 p.a. 

 

USD3,000 p.a. Project Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

  

2. Increased minimum diet diversity  2. % of children 6-23 mths consumed more than 4 food groups 33.3% 50% UNICEF/MOH data Risk 1: Slow economic 

growth and deterioration 

of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to 

fall in cocoa and other 

commodity prices.  

 
Mitigation 1:  The Bank 

will intensify the 

dialogue with the 

government to adopt 

supportive macro-

economic policies to 

rationalize fiscal 

expenditure. 
 

3. Productivity and diversification Improved 

 

3.1 Quantity (mt) of crops produced:                   1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Maize 

                                                                              3. Soybean 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

283,109 mt 

85,000 mt 

80,000 mt 

30,000  

350,000 mt 

150,000 mt 

140,000 mt 

  60,000 mt 

Projects Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

3.2 Crop yield (t/ha)                                             1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Soybean 
                                                                              3. Maize 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

2 

1.65 
2.5 

n.a 

6 

3.0 
6 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 
Household surveys 

 

4. Increased private sector investment in 

priority value chains 

4.1 Domestic and foreign investment (USD) in: 1. Rice 

                                                                             2. Maize 

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

USD120 million 

USD40 million 

USD60 million 

tbd 

MoFA reports, Ghana Investment 

Promotion Centre reports 

 OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1:  Crop Productivity Improvement 

1. Improved seeds production 1.1 Quantity of breeder seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

16 

71 

n.a 

n.a 

250 

1,500  

tbd 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

 

 

Risk 2:  The proposed 

project area is prone to 

climate change impacts 

 

Mitigation 2:  ESMPs 
will incorporate 

integrated pest 
management plans and 

climate risk mitigation 

and adaptation measures. 
  

1.2 Volume of foundation seeds produced (mt): 1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

Rice – 96 
Maize – 120 

Soybean - 140  

Vegetables n.a 

Rice – 5,400 
Maize – 4,000 

Soybean - 4,000 

Vegetables 150 

1.3 Volume of certified seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  

                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

578  

80,000 

213 

n.a 

28,100 

350,000 

4,250 

 tbd 

2. Mechanization along the value chains 
(segments of value chains mechanized) 

2.1 Mechanized land preparation (ha) 120 10,000   

2.2 Mechanized crop husbandry practices  (ha) 200 10,000  

2.3 Mechanized harvesting (ha) 150 10,000  

3. Crop nutrition enhanced 3.1 Area of land with soils tested for fertility; 0 10,000   



 

vi 

 

 

 

3.2 % of farmers using recommended fertilizer blends. 0 70%  

4. Nutrition Promotion activities implemented 4.1 % of households reached on Nutrition activities 0 80%   

5. Introduction and deployment of new yield 
enhancing technologies  

6. Demonstration of climate smart agriculture 
principles 

5.1 Establishment of 3, 20-ha demonstration plots  

5.2 Training of extension agents in new approaches to crop production 

5.3 Training in conservation agriculture, zero tillage  

2.5 mt/ha of maize and 

1 mt/ha of soybean 

 
0 

6 mt/ha of maize; 3 mt/ha soybean 

3, 20-ha demonstration trials established 

200 extension agents trained 
6 

MoFA reports, 

Program reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports 

 

Component 2:   Commodity Value Chains Development 

7. Rice processing zone development 6. No of processing zones developed - 1 Projects reports, MoFA reports, 
Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 
Monitoring reports 

Supervision records 

 

 

8. Enhanced capacity of commodity value 
chain actors 

9. Private sector investment  

7.1 No. of value chain development platforms created/strengthened. 2 10  

7.2  No of value chain actors trained 0 20,000 

 

7.3 Percentage of outgrower contracts executed effectively 

8.1 No. of private sector investments attracted to the ecological zone  

8.2 Innovation Platforms established 

0 

0 

0 

80% 

3 

1 

 Component 3:   Infrastructure Development 

 

10. Rehabilitate and expand existing seed 
processing and storage facilities. 

9.1 No of seed processing and storage centres rehabilitated 

9.2 No. of seed processing and storage centres constructed for research 

institutions 

0 

 

0 

4 

 

2 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 
Program reports 

Supervision records 

  

 11. Rehabilitation of road infrastructure  10.1 Length of feeder roads rehabilitated (km) 0 100 

 

12. Area of agriculture water management 
schemes rehabilitated / constructed 

11. Area of land under irrigation (ha)   

improved field water management systems 

2,000 10,000 

 13. Rehabilitation of warehouses 12. No of warehouses rehabilitated 0 12   

 14. E-agriculture. 13.1 National E-agriculture system strengthened 
13.2 No of farmers registered and placed on platform 

0 

20,000 

1 

500,000 

  

 Component 4:    Program Management/ Monitoring & Evaluation  

 15. Work plan and operations are implemented 14.1 Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 
14.2  Development & implementation of the site-specific ESMPs 

0 

0 

100% 

100% 

Program agreements, funding documents 

Supervision mission Financial 

management reports M&E reports 

 

 16. Program activities monitored and 
information produced regularly 

15.1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 0 20 

 

15.2 No. of audit reports produced annually 

15.3 No. of monitoring visits conducted by MOFA/MOF headoffice 

15.4 No. of NPSC meetings held 

0 

0 

0 

5 

10 

1 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS     SOURCES OF 

FINANCE 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Crop Productivity Improvement 

Improved seeds production; Build capacity for rice and maize seed inspection and certification; Develop an efficient system of production, storage and distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed; mechanization along the 

production chains; Soil fertility management; and nutrition promotion.  Introduction and demonstration of modern technologies to increase maize and soybean production and dissemination to these technologies to commercial, 

smallholder, and youth farmers 

 

Total Project Cost  

(UA million) :   40.38 

ADF Loan     :   27.86 
 

Other sources 

GoG               :    6.50  

Beneficiaries  :    6.01 

Component 1 :  28.64 

Component 2 :    2.97 

Component 3 :    7.33 

Component 4 :    1.43 

Component 2: Value Chains Development 

Maize and rice processing zone development; Support existing aggregation/marketing centres equipped with drying floors, and storage facilities; training entrepreneurship and business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; Number of Value Chain Development Platforms created / strengthened; Percentage of contracts executed effectively. 

Component 3: Infrastructure Development 
Rehabilitation of transport infrastructure (feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure; Rehabilitation of warehouses; and E-agriculture; 

Rehabilitate and expand existing storage facilities for seed. 

Component 4: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; development and implementation of site specific ESMPs; development of a results based framework for M&E; and procurement, 

disbursement and audit functions. 



 

vii 

 

Programme Timeframe 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                      

Board approval                      

Signature of Loan and Grant Agreement                      

Appointing remaining PCMU team members                      

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement                      

Programme launch                      

Finalization and validation of procedures manuals                       

Conducting baseline studies                      

Preparing, signing agreement/protocols with implementing partners                      

Prepare, approve Bid docs and contract awards for Goods, Works & Services                      

Contracts execution for Goods, Works and Services                      

Quarterly reports submission                      

Annual reports submission                      

Programme Work plans and Budgets                        

Steering committee meetings                      

Bank’s supervision missions                      

Audit                      

Mid-term review                      

Programme Completion Reporting                       

Impact assessment and technical audit                      

 

 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT FOR THE PROPOSED 

ADF LOAN OF UA 27.86 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA FOR THE 

FINANCING OF THE SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT  

 

Management submits the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan of UA 27.86 

million to finance the Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project in Ghana. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1.  Programme linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP) is 

designed within the context of the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II” 

(GSGDA II). The underlying theme of the GSGDA II is socio-economic transformation, which 

involves a change in the structure and composition of the national output in ways that enhance 

broad-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. It stimulates the innovative process of 

production through skills and technological upgrading; enhancing the competitiveness of 

industry and trade; lifting workers from low-productive agriculture to higher productive 

activities; and putting the economy on a growth path that creates jobs, opens up decent work 

opportunities for all, alleviates poverty and reduces income and social inequalities.  

1.1.2 It is guided by country’s Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy 

(FASDEP) which has the following as its pillars: (i) Food Security and Emergency 

Preparedness; (ii) Increased Growth in Incomes and Reduced Income Variability; (iii) Increased 

Competitiveness and Enhanced Integration into Domestic and International Markets;  (iv) 

Sustainable Management of Land and Environment; (v) Science and Technology Applied in 

Food and Agriculture Development; and (vi) Improved Institutional Coordination. The 

FASDEP anchors on sub-sector policies including the Crop Development Policy; Cocoa 

Strategy; Livestock Development Policy; Fisheries Policy and Policies for Services Delivery 

(Extension. Irrigation, Plant Protection, Agricultural Mechanization). 

1.1.3 The Government has targeted enhancing agricultural productivity and production 

through its Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) Campaign. The major interventions under the 

PFJ are organized around the following five pillars: (i) Seed: The program will catalyse market-

led production of adequate quantities of quality seeds by private enterprises; (ii) Fertilizer: 

Private companies engaged in fertilizer production/blending and importation will be facilitated 

in meeting the fertilizer demands of the beneficiary farmers; (iii) Extension Services: In 

partnerships with the local governments and private inputs and service providers, the extension 

services will provide reliable and programmed technical assistance to beneficiaries; (iv) 

Marketing: It is envisaged that the facilitation of increased uptake of inputs will lead to 

increase in production of the targeted crops by the provision of storage warehouses; and (v) E-

Agriculture: The PFJ Campaign will profile the beneficiaries by e-registering them and 

developing a state-of-art information and communication technology (ICT) platform. 

1.1.4 While the PFJ Campaign is a nationwide program, the SAZAPIP will focus on three of 

the six agri-business clusters of the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone (NSEZ). The NSEZ 

constitutes the poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double 

the national average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological 

conditions, low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in 

infrastructure and services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for 



 

2 

Ghana’s balance of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition 

security, job creation and poverty reduction.  

 

1.1.5 The Project is anchored in the PFJ Campaign of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

as well as the One District One Factory (1D1F) initiative of the Government of Ghana. The PFJ 

Campaign seeks to enhance agricultural production while the 1D1F looks at agro-industrial 

development aspects of the project. The Project will target four (i, ii, iv and v) of the above 

mentioned pillars and thereby contribute to the High-5 priorities that are crucial for accelerating 

Africa’s economic transformation: Feed Africa; Industrialize Africa; and Improve the quality 

of life for the people of Africa. It will particularly contribute to the Feed Africa priority which 

focuses on transformation, scaling up agriculture as a business through value addition, led by 

the private sector and enabled by the Government. It will concentrate on one of the eight 

identified Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) under TAAT - Transforming African Savannahs into 

breadbaskets and promote four of the 18 identified priority commodity value chains – rice, 

maize, soybean and vegetables. In line with the Feed Africa Strategy’s focus on priority value 

chains, the project will contribute towards the Transformation of the African Savannah 

Initiative (TASI) by serving as a precursor pilot project for proven technologies and knowledge. 

Details of TASI are in Section C6 of the Technical Annexes.  

 

1.1.6 The Bank has a comparative advantage in supporting the agriculture value chains 

development activities that will transform the impoverished rural areas of the northern part of 

the country into zones of economic prosperity with attendant benefits of employment and social 

development. This Project will achieve this by creating strategic, competitive agribusinesses 

around rice, maize, soybean and vegetable value chains that are widely produced in the northern 

parts of the country. The Project will consolidate the gains made through various previous Bank 

interventions such as the Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP), Fufulso-Sawla and 

Techiman - Kintampo Roads Project; optimise on the usage of infrastructure that were 

constructed in those interventions; and leverage on private sector investment to the 

establishment of a rice processing zone around Tamale and commercial farming in the Northern 

Savanna – the RMG projects in Yagaba and Babato.  

 

1.1.7 SAZAPIP is aligned to 2012-2017 Ghana Country Strategy Paper (CSP) which has been 

extended to December 2018. The strategy has two pillars namely: (i) Support for infrastructure 

development; and (ii) Support for improved governance and accountability. During the CSP 

extension period, the Bank will focus on developing and supporting priority skills for industry, 

improving access to sanitation and providing diverse opportunities for rural employment and 

income generation for a more equitable growth. Over the CSP extension period, the Bank will 

meet this objective through the implementation of the Development of Skills for Industry 

Project, and the Greater Accra Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project. 

Other projects that are envisaged to support this objective include: the Savannah Zone 

Agriculture Productivity Improvement Project and the Establishment of Ghana Incentive-Based 

Risk Sharing for Agriculture Lending.  

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The project has a great potential in contributing to the twin objectives of the Bank’s 10-

Year Strategy (TYS). It contributes to inclusive growth across geographical locations, age and 

gender in that the major interventions of the project are concentrated in commodity value chain 

intervention in the NSEZ where poverty is highest in the country and youth and women agri-

preneurs are targeted by the project. 



 

3 

1.2.2 The project will enhance agriculture transformation through increased productivity of 

rice, maize, soybean and vegetables; and investment in both hard infrastructure (seed processing 

and storage, irrigation, produce warehouses and feeder roads); as well as soft infrastructure 

(farmer e-registration and e-agriculture). The project will also leverage on the complementary 

innovative agricultural financing mechanisms (the Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established with the assistance of the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture in the savannah zone of Ghana. Furthermore, the project will provide 

entrepreneurship and business management training to value chain actors in order for them to 

be eligible to assess resources in the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded 

Rural Enterprises Project (REP).  

1.3. Donors’ coordination 

1.3.1 The key development partners that are active in the sector are: L'Agence française de 

développement (AFD); Department for International Development (DFID); Global Affairs 

Canada; European Union; German Dev. Co-op (KfW Development Bank and GiZ); 

Netherlands Embassy; Australian High Commission; JICA; USAID and World Bank; UN 

Agencies (IFAD, FAO and WFP). Others are IFPRI, AGRA and international NGOs such as 

SNV and Catholic Relief Services. Donor activities cuts across ranges mostly targets various 

commodity value chains development, productivity enhancement, agricultural production and 

processing infrastructure development, mechanization, irrigation, sustainable land 

management, climate change adaptation and mitigation, nutrition, food safety, MSE and 

agribusiness development, access to finance, access to land and ICT for agriculture.  

 

1.3.2 Donor coordination mechanisms for the Agriculture Sector in Ghana are effective. 

Coordination under the Agriculture Sector Working Group (ASWG) began in 2002 and 

provides a platform for sharing information on ongoing and planned future activities with the 

aim of harmonizing interventions. The group holds annual joint sector reviews where donors, 

Government, implementation partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private 

sector review the performance of the sector to inform planning and decision making. The 

ASWG is an open group of donors; quasi donors; implementers including NGOs, CSOs, private 

sector, etc.; and Government Ministries.  

 

1.3.3 Key on-going/pipeline interventions by donors include a EUR160 million support for 

productive investment for sustainable agriculture development capacity building of 

decentralized institutions and community development in the part of the SADA Zone. The 

Government of Canada is also supporting the sector with a CAD125 million facility for 

Modernizing Agriculture in Ghana (MAG). IFAD has provided USD71.60 million as loan for 

sustainable rural poverty reduction in rural areas and a grant of USD10.0 million to mitigate 

the effects of climate change. The Bank has successfully co-financed projects in the sector with 

other donors. Notable among these is the just ended Northern Rural Growth Program and the 

on-going Rural Enterprises Program which were/are both co-financed with IFAD. A matrix of 

interventions by donors is presented in Annex A1 of the Technical Annexes. The coordination 

of aid through the ASWG is enhancing aid effectiveness through harmonization and alignment 

of development partner support.  

 

 



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives 

2.1.1 Project development goal: The development objective of the project is to transform 

agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

2.1.2 Specific project objectives: To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and 

incomes through increased agricultural productivity and diversification; and enhance the 

creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase incomes of actors along selected value 

chains on a sustainable basis. 

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The project will have four Components. (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value 

Chains & Agribusiness Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project 

Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The summary of activities are 

indicated in Table 2.1 below. 

 

Component 1 – Crop Productivity Improvement: This component will seek to increase the crop 

productivity through the use of improved and more nutritious seed varieties. The project will 

assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt productivity– improving 

technologies such as soil fertility interventions, mechanization, and extension services. 

Nutrition promotion activities will be implemented in order to promote dietary diversity, and 

in particular to increase consumption of vegetables in the project area. Infrastructure of the 

decrepit national seed production centers will be renovated, equipped with modern machinery 

and supported to ensure national self-sufficiency in breeder, foundation and certified seeds 

production for strategic commodities. Essential expected outcomes under this component will 

be disseminating technologies selected under the Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) for the target commodities. These technologies will be complemented 

by other proven technologies within the TASI framework. Demonstration of high gross margin 

crop production technology and conservation agriculture will also be carried out at four selected 

locations. Private and public sector extension agents, commercial farmers, and young farmers 

will also be trained in the new maize and soybean production technologies. 

 

Component 2: Value Chain and Agribusiness Development: The objective of this component 

is to set up sustainable agribusinesses along the commodity value chains by entrepreneurship 

training to value chain actors. It will further strengthen the local governance structures such as 

the District Value Chain Committees (DVCCs), which is an innovative concept that links 

farmers to value chain’s actors to more ably participate in the ownership and management of 

facilities that will be set up. It will orchestrate linkages to other flagship programmes of the 

Bank particularly the on-going ENABLE Youth Program in the Rural Enterprises Program and 

the up-coming Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) through Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL and facilitation of the establishment of an Innovation Platform.  

This component will ultimately contribute to the achievement of the Government flagship 

program of 1D1F as it will promote private sector investments in the Project operational area. 

 

Component 3:  The infrastructure development component will provide for both hard and soft 

infrastructure. The hard infrastructure will include: (i) Development of Transport Infrastructure 

(feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); (ii) Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; (iii) 

Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as corporate rural 



 

5 

enterprises; and (iv) Rehabilitation of warehouses. The soft infrastructure will leverage on on-

going e-agriculture activities in the sector to consolidate the various registration of farmers into 

an agriculture sector database for input supply system. 

 

Component 4: The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for the day to 

day management of the project. It will also be responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E), gender equality and women’s empowerment and implementation of the Project 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 
Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 1: Crop 

Productivity 

Improvement 

28.6  (70.9) This component will seek to increase crop productivity through:  

- Development of an efficient system of production, storage and 
distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed  

- Use of improved and more nutritious rice, maize, soybean and 
vegetable seed varieties. 

- Rehabilitate and expand existing seed processing and storage facilities  
- Building capacity for seed inspection and certification; 
- Assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt 

productivity improvement technologies including soil fertility 

interventions, mechanization, and improved extension using DVCC 

as Innovation Platforms.  

- Disseminating technologies selected under the auspices of TAAT, 
some of which will add nutrition value to the crops 

- Introduction and dissemination of complementary high gross margin 
technologies under the TASI Pilot 

- Training of private and public sector extension agents, commercial 
farmers, and youth farmers.  Technical manuals in English and local 

languages describing the new methods will be produced  

- Promotion of community based nutrition promotion activities 
including appropriate Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices, and 

hygiene sensitization through capacity strengthening of the 

Community Health Worker System in the Upper East region 

- Linkage of small holder farmers to the school meal programme,  
nutrition and hygiene education and support in schools through the 

Regional School Health Education Programme and the School Meal 

Programme in the Northern region 

Component 2: 

Value Chain and 

Agribusiness 

Development  

3 (7.4%) The objective of this component is to set up sustainable agribusinesses 

along the rice value chains. This component will: 

- Strengthen the local governance structures (DVCCs) to more ably 
participate in the ownership and management of facilities will be set 

up. 

- register farmers within the project area on the e-registration platform 
and develop database for input supply system 

- Support the establishment of an Innovation Platform, which will work 
to address policy, infrastructure, fiscal and land tenure bottlenecks in 

order to facilitate the flow of private capital into game changing 

agribusiness investments in the region.  

- Provide incentives to crowd in private investments in project area to 
harness the business opportunities enabled through the public 

investments in the area through this and other projects including 

innovative financing (e.g. GIRSAL), infrastructure development 

(roads, power, irrigation etc.), land tenure reforms and others.   



 

6 

Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 3:  

Infrastructure 

Development 

Component 

7.3 (18.2%) The infrastructure development component will consider:  

- Rehabilitation of feeder roads and farm-tracks) 
- Rehabilitation of irrigation canals;  
- Improvement of water harvesting and distribution for lowland rice  
- Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as 

corporate rural enterprises; and 

- Rehabilitation of warehouses.  

Component 4: 

Project 

Management, 

Monitoring & 

Evaluation  

1.4 (3.5%) The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for:  

- the day to day management of the project.  
- M&E,  
- Gender equality and women’s empowerment,  
- Implementation of the Project ESMP 

2.2 Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

2.2.1 Table 2.2 presents design options considered and reasons for their rejection. 

Table 2.2: Project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

2.3 Project type 

This is an investment project financed with an ADF loan. 

2.4  Programme cost and financing arrangements 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at UA40.38 million, net of taxes, and based on 

2017 prices, comprising of UA27.56 million (68%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

UA12.81 million (30%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively.  

 

2.4.2 The project cost of UA40.21 million will be part financed by an ADF loan of UA27.86 

million (69% of project costs) covering all major activities including rehabilitation and 

construction of infrastructure. The Government of Ghana will contribute UA6.5 million (16.1% 

of project costs) through the provision of office space and allied facilities, payment of salaries 

of Government staff attached to the project, and provision of tractors and subsidies on fertilizers 

and seeds. The farmer beneficiaries’ contribution of UA6.0 million (14.9% of project cost) will 

be towards the payment for inputs delivered in the Government subsidy scheme. The summary 

of estimated costs by component and category of expenditure are presented in Tables 2.3 and 

2.4 below. 

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Instrument: Project 

vs. sector budget 

support 

Under sector budget support, resources are disbursed in 

tranches based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector 

fiduciary environment 

was not conclusive and 

had high level of 

uncertainty 

Intervening in other 

value chains including 

livestock. 

Livestock is one of the key value chains that was identified 

in five of the six agribusiness zones. The per-capita 

consumption meat has almost doubled in past 15 years. 

The growth in meat production however lags far behind 

the growth in consumption of meat hence large volumes of 

imported meat.. Livestock development integrates well 

with crops development especially with crops such as 

soybean and maize which are used for livestock feed in 

semi-intensive and intensive production systems 

Budgetary allocation for 

the project cannot 

accommodate the livestock 

intervention. Furthermore, 

livestock is yet to be 

considered a priority 

commodity under the 

Planting for Food and Jobs. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD/UA) 
 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % 

Foreign 

Cost 

% 

Total 

Costs 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost Total Cost 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total 

Cost 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 10,763.83 28,900.31 39,664.14 7,688.45 20,643.08 28,331.53 73 70 

2. Value Chain & Agribusiness 

Development 2,272.49 1,737.47 4,009.96 1,623.21 1,241.05 2,864.26 43 7 

3. Infrastructure Development 3,218.59 6,013.66 9,232.25 2,298.99 4,295.47 6,594.46 65 16 

4. Project Management, M&E 1,247.76 726.74 1,974.50 891.26 519.10 1,410.36 37 4 

Total Baseline Costs 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

Price Contingencies 172.61 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total Project Costs 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68  

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (USD/UA)  
 

CATEGORY 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

%Foreign 

Exchange 

% 

Total  

Costs Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

  I. Investment Costs         

  A. WORKS         

   Construction & Rehabilitation 2,607.87 7,461.53 10,069.40 1,862.77 5,329.66 7,192.43 74 18 

  B. GOODS         

   1. VEHICLES         

    Vehicles 463.75 768.75 1,232.50 331.25 549.11 880.36 62 2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS         

    Equipment 1,130.85 2,199.45 3,330.30 807.75 1,571.04 2,378.79 66 6 

    Furniture 15.85 22.05 37.90 11.32 15.75 27.07 58 - 

    Materials 8,589.92 24,299.25 32,889.17 6,135.66 17,356.61 23,492.27 74 60 

   Subtotal 9,736.62 26,520.75 36,257.37 6,954.73 18,943.39 25,898.12 73 66 

  Subtotal 10,200.37 27,289.50 37,489.87 7,285.98 19,492.50 26,778.48 73 68 

  C. SERVICES         

   
Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 97.38 14.00 111.38 69.55 10.00 79.55 13 - 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,032.15 1,770.85 3,803.00 1,451.54 1,264.89 2,716.43 47 7 

   Contractual Services 1,736.75 454.95 2,191.70 1,240.54 324.96 1,565.50 21 4 

   Audit 91.00 49.00 140.00 65.00 35.00 100.00 35 - 

  Subtotal 3,957.28 2,288.80 6,246.08 2,826.63 1,634.85 4,461.48 37 11 

 Total Investment Costs 16,765.52 37,039.83 53,805.35 11,975.37 26,457.02 38,432.39 69 95 

 II. Recurrent Costs         

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE         

   Vehicles 17.25 40.25 57.50 12.32 28.75 41.07 70 - 

   Infrastructures 162.50 87.50 250.00 116.07 62.50 178.57 35 - 

  Subtotal 179.75 127.75 307.50 128.39 91.25 219.64 42 1 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 557.40 210.60 768.00 398.14 150.43 548.57 27 1 

 Total Recurrent Costs 737.15 338.35 1,075.50 526.53 241.68 768.21 31 2 

Total BASELINE COSTS 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

  Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

  Price Contingencies 172.60 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total PROJECT COSTS 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68 103 

 

 

 



 

8 

2.4.3 The summary of project costs schedule component, source of finance by category of 

expenditure and sources of finance are presented in Tables 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 below. Detailed 

project cost tables are presented in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 
 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA ‘000) 
 
 

Components 
Totals including contingencies 

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 25,419.94 2,960.79 87.22 93.20 77.44 28,638.59 

2. Commodity Value Chain & 

Agribusiness Development 400.00 876.27 883.20 414.29 400.00 2,973.76 

3. Infrastructure Development - 2,718.95 3,124.01 1,399.57 91.08 7,333.61 

4. Project Management, M&E 405.79 290.09 250.80 265.08 218.29 1,430.05 

Total PROJECT COSTS 26,225.73 6,846.10 4,345.23 2,172.14 786.81 40,376.01 

 

Table 2.6 Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (UA ‘000) 

 

Expenditure Category 

ADF 

Loan Government Beneficiaries Total %  

 I. Investment Costs      

  A. WORKS      

   Construction & Rehabilitation 8,086.38 - - 8,086.38 20.0 

  B. GOODS      

   1. VEHICLES      

    Vehicles 438.62 456.98 - 895.60 2.2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS      

    Equipment 2,425.60 - - 2,425.60 6.0 

    Furniture 27.27 - - 27.27 0.1 

    Materials 12,010.60 5,828.93 5,828.93 23,668.46 58.6 

   Subtotal 14,463.47 5,828.93 5,828.93 26,121.33 64.7 

  Subtotal 14,902.10 6,285.90 5,828.93 27,016.93 66.9 

  C. SERVICES      

   

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 79.55 - - 79.55 0.2 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,729.90 - - 2,729.90 6.8 

   Contractual Services 1,583.11 - - 1,583.11 3.9 

   Audit 100.00 - - 100.00 0.2 

  Subtotal 4,492.56 - - 4,492.56 11.1 

 Total Investment Costs 27,481.04 6,285.91 5,828.93 39,595.87 98.1 

 II. Recurrent Costs      

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE      

   Vehicles 41.07 - - 41.07 0.1 

   Infrastructures - - 182.14 182.14 0.5 

  Subtotal 41.07 - 182.14 223.21 0.6 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 342.64 214.29 - 556.93 1.4 

 Total Recurrent Costs 383.71 214.29 182.14 780.14 1.9 

Total PROJECT COSTS 27,864.75 6,500.19 6,011.07 40,376.01 100.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

9 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (UA ‘000) 
 

Sources of finance Foreign Cost Local Cost Total Cost % Total Cost 

 ADF Loan 18,418.01 9,446.74 27,864.75 69.0 

 Government 4,714.42 1,785.77 6,500.19 16.1 

 Beneficiaries 4,435.45 1,575.62 6,011.07 14.9 

Total 27,567.88 12,808.13 40,376.01 100.0 

 

2.4.4 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The ADF loan of UA 27.86 million will 

finance 100% of Works; 55% of Goods and Materials; 100% of Services; and 68% of recurrent 

costs. The loan will finance 67% of foreign costs and 72% of local costs. The Government of 

Ghana does not have the capacity to finance all local costs of the project as a result of the current 

economic hardship and fiscal deficit facing the country. Consequently, local costs have been 

factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.   

2.5 Programme’s target area and population 

The Project will be implemented in three agribusiness zones (1, 2 & 5) defined by SADA 

covering the following towns: Savelugu-Nanton (Nasia/Nabogu); Builsa South 

(Fumbisi/Gbedembilisi); Tolon (Golinga); Kumbungu (Bontanga); West Gonja (Nabori, 

Busumu); and West Mamprusi (Walewale). Additionally, four seed centres at Winneba, Ho, 

Kumasi and Tamale would be rehabilitated. The direct beneficiaries are about 50,000 

economically active smallholders living in the selected agro-processing zones; and the 

processing firms that serve as a direct market for the farmers. The indirect beneficiaries include 

the entire population (consumers) that will benefit from the availability of food and business 

associations who provide services to the producers and processors. This number is expected to 

increase significantly when other economically active value chain entrepreneurs get involved 

in the Project. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop production, 

processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. About 50% of beneficiaries (women) 

will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits. 

2.6 Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation 

The preparation mission had a general consultation and technical working sessions with 

Government personnel and key stakeholder groups in agriculture including development 

partners. The outcome of the discussions was the development of a logical framework for the 

Project and the preparation report that is forming the basis for the appraisal report. Stakeholders 

will also be consulted during the preparation of the ESMF and site specific ESMPs and their 

inputs will be taken into consideration during planning, design and implementation. A 

stakeholder engagement plan will be developed for the implementation phase of the project. 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the programme design 

2.7.1 As at 30 December 2016, the overall performance of the Bank’s portfolio in Ghana was 

rated satisfactory, with an overall rating of 3.0 on a scale of 1 to 4, with 4 being highly 
satisfactory. The portfolio was rated 2.9 for implementation progress, and 3.4 for development 

outcome. The portfolio has six (6) project at risk, of which three projects (i) Rural Enterprise 

Programme III; (ii) Development of Skills for Industry (DSIP), and (iii) the Electricity 
Distribution Systems Reinforcement are experiencing slow implementation. The Greater Accra 

Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project experienced signature delays, 
which have now been surmounted with the signing of the loan in September 2017. The Ghana 



 

10 

Country Office (COGH) improved in most of the key performance indicators during the period 
2013 to 2017. Average time lapse between approval and first disbursement has reduced to an 

all-time low of 5.4 months compared to 18 months in 2015. The pace of implementation of the 
lending program and portfolio was adversely impacted by Government’s imposition of a 

moratorium on new loans, between 2013 and 2015, as part of its debt management strategy. 

This moratorium contributed to the drop in the disbursement ratio from 28% in 2015 to 18% in 
2016. Disbursement is now on the upward path, at 22.4% as at August 2017. Further details are 

provided in Annex B1.2 of the Technical annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in the country has enhanced project 

design for implementation efficiency and sustainability. For example the CSPE (2002-2015) 

indicated that the sustainability of agriculture sector projects was limited by project design 

flaws, particularly the lack of clear management plans for the maintenance of key assets such 

as pack houses and markets. This flaw has been addressed in this project by the new approaches 

which considers intervening to fill the gaps in the operations of actors along the value chains of 

interest as against the concentration of the activities supported by the program around just the 

farmers. The project designs also builds on lessons learnt form the NRGP in the areas of 

Appropriate exit strategy for project implementing support agencies; Readiness of project for 

implementation at design; and Matching grants. Specifically, based on the experiences of this 

project and others, APIP is designed to support existing government institutions such as the 

CSIR-SARI, SRI to strengthen their delivery of services that are under their mandate such as 

breeder and foundation seed production; and soil nutrient analysis as against using NGOs or 

private sector. It is also designed to leverage on private sector investment on the ground, such 

as existing AMSECs and AVNASH and catalyse their activities (e.g. mechanization and 

primary processing), without creating dependency of the project funds. APIP has already 

identified the major infrastructure for which feasibilities had already been done including 

rehabilitation works on the existing Golinga and Botanga Irrigation Schemes; improvement of 

water management infrastructure for selected flood recession schemes, rehabilitation of 12 

warehouses have all be identified. APIP is not introducing any one fit all matching grant 

program. It will leverage on the government’s own input and mechanization support program 

in which case mechanized service provides are able to acquire machinery / equipment from the 

government with a concessionary repayment arrangement including a grant element.  In the 

cases of non-existing technologies, particularly for mechanization such as using laser levellers, 

mouldboard plough, rice transplanters etc. the project will provide for full grants to the 

mechanization service providers to acquire the technology and promote them 

2.8 Key performance indicators 

The overall impact of the SAZAPIP include improved food and nutrition security, job creation 

and wealth creation for commodity value chain actors. Through improved agricultural 

production, productivity and market linkages, about 20,000 jobs will be created, of which 

women and youths account for about 60%, along the value chains. It is envisaged that there will 

be income increase by 25% along the value chains and employment of women and youth in the 

agriculture sector. The crowding in of private sector investment in terms of investment volume 

as a result of the demonstration of improved technologies and production systems will be a key 

indicator of success.  

 

 



 

11 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Financial and economic performance 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of prevailing market prices. The key assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) 

50,000 farmers being actively engaged in farming at full capacity of the project; (ii) additional 

25% increase in income will be earned under the project, (iii) farmers will adopt the improved 

seed varieties (iii) a 20-year time period was used to measure the incremental benefits from the 

project; (iv) the opportunity cost of capital (OCC) used for discounting future benefits was 

estimated to be 12%. For the economic analysis, (v) hired labour value was adjusted by a 

conversion factor of 0.75; (vi) the rehabilitation of the seed system will ensure national quality 

seed supply. These analyses were carried-out with financial and economic costs generated using 

Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in Annex VII and further elaborated 

in Annex B6 in Volume II of the appraisal report. The project is expected generate the following 

benefits: (i) increase in food production; (ii) increased private sector investment; (iii) improved 

seed production and storage; (iv) improve average household income; (v) provide employment 

for 50,000 farmers and entrepreneurs; and (vi) enhanced crop nutrition. 

 

 Table 3.1: key economic and financial figures 
 

FIRR : 23%    NPV (base case) is USD   2,333,835.26   

EIRR : 28%    NPV (base case)  is USD  2,683,910.55      

   NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

 

3.1.2 Financial analysis 

 

Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated Net Present Value (NPV) of 

USD2,333,835.26 and financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 23%, as captured in the 

technical annexes (B6). Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially feasible. 

The FIRR of 23% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

3.1.4 Economic analysis 

 

The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the financial analysis, on the 

basis of shadow prices of tradable goods, producer (farm gate) prices and total cost of project. 

In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, such as, reduction in post-harvest losses; 

provision of mechanic service centre for agro equipment, reliable soil information system for 

fertilizer blends, efficient input distribution system through the farmer database system and 

lower cost of transportation of goods and services. However, these additional benefits were 

difficult to adequately value in monetary terms due to the limited scope of this report. In these 

conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD2,683,910.55 and the economic 

internal rate of return (EIRR) of 28% as captured in the technical annexes. 

3.2. Environmental and social impacts 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture, has made efforts to ensure sustainable land and 

environmental management within the sector through implementation of several policies and 

programmes and these include: Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy (FASDEP II) 



 

12 

and an Agricultural Sustainable Land Management Strategy and Action Plan was developed to 

operationalize the policy objective. MoFA works in collaboration EPA at all levels to ensure 

that environmental sustainability policy and programmes are implemented. The proposed 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project is classified as a Category 2 

because the project activities are expected to have impacts that can be avoided and minimised 

and will mostly be site-specific environmental and social impacts. The Project also falls under 

Schedule 2 of the Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999 LI 1652 of the Ghana 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The project is expected to finance construction and 

rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, processing, marketing and storage facilities as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. The project’s precise 

location, scope and scale of the project interventions will not be known before project 

implementation; hence, an overarching environmental and social management framework 

(ESMF) needs to be developed to provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social risks/issues of the project. This will guide the preparation of environmental and social 

impact assessment (ESIA) and development of site specific ESMP during project 

implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and agricultural production and value-chain development activities and 

include:  (i) loss of vegetation cover and habitat fragmentation due to site clearing (ii) land 

degradation, soil erosion, and pollution (iii) degradation of water resources through siltation 

and pollution (iv) disruption of water flows and hydrologic cycle which may impact activities 

of other water users, (v) noise, vibration and emissions from construction works and operation 

of machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (vi) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers that may have impacts on human health and 

biodiversity (vii) solid and liquid wastes generated from processing and marketing facilities 

(viii) increase in bush fires through the slush and burn traditional agricultural systems; (ix) 

climate risk impacts of GHG emissions and cumulative impacts of flooding if infrastructure is 

not well designed (x) increase in public health concerns (vector borne diseases, HIV/AIDs and 

other STDs) due to creation of vector habitats such as stagnant waters and influx of workers in 

project site areas and increased land conflicts due to commercialization, most lands are 

customary. The project is not expected to have land acquisition because the infrastructure 

development will be done on existing irrigation schemes and feeder roads with existing right of 

way. During operation phase, agriculture activities of value chain actors may lead to (i) 

increased use of agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, which may contribute to 

soil and water (surface and groundwater) contamination, and increase health-risks of people 

exposed to pesticides, (ii) maintenance of irrigation infrastructure can generate dredged 

materials and waste and effluents from processing and marketing facilities can result in soil and 

water contamination when not properly disposed of. These impacts are mostly site specific and 

can be readily managed with the application of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific 

ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) restricting clearance of vegetation to construction and farming areas 

and revegetation by planting of trees; (ii) rehabilitation and filling of the exposed or excavated 

soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing compaction of soils, (ii) 

ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing sustainable water management 

and flood mitigation systems, and (iv) reduction of GHG emissions by ensuring well serviced 

machinery is used and proper processing facilities waste management; (v) capacity building of 

value chain actors to promote good agriculture and sustainable environment and land 

management practices (vi) use of improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy; (vii) 

using lessons learned from similar projects. In addition, the project will ensure that institutional 



 

13 

and technical capacity that currently exist within MoFA is strengthened by having an 

Environmental Safeguard specialist in the Program Management Unit and training of 

Environmental Desk Officers at the local level to ensure effective site specific ESMP 

development, implementation and monitoring/reporting.  

 

3.2.1.3 Ghana SAZAPIP will generate significant positive impacts including (i) improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors including vulnerable groups, and support 

the local economy of the northern regions of Ghana; (ii) improved access to irrigation that will 

foster water management and reduce the vulnerability of farmers to precarious weather 

conditions and ensure all year round agriculture activities; (iii) improved agronomic practices 

and technologies for selected crops and improved varieties that are adapted to different climatic 

conditions; and (iv) improved agricultural production, productivity and market linkages that 

will foster job creation along the value chains. 

  

3.2.2  Climate change 

 

3.2.2.1 Ghanaian agriculture and food systems are climate dependent and recognized as one of 

the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. Indications are that the Northern Region of 

Ghana is currently experiencing seasonal variability of climate and rainfall. Consultations with 

MoFA and EPA indicated that the region is susceptible to flooding and drought that are 

unpredictable. The current increase in rain intensity is aggravating flooding events causing 

riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure damages, crop failure, fisheries 

destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant implications on livelihoods of 

agricultural communities who are mostly dependent of rain fed agriculture. Recommendations 

were made to incorporate climate risk mitigation and management strategies in the project 

design. 

 

3.2.2.2 The project will mainstream climate risk mitigation and adaptation activities in the 

project design and implementation that will focus on reducing the dependency on rainfall for 

agricultural activities as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other natural or anthropogenic 

hazards that accompany floods, drought and other land use changes.  The program will explore 

climate change adaptation technologies for agriculture consistent with priorities established in 

Ghana’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA), Climate Change Policy, and the 

MoFA’s National Climate Smart Agriculture and Food Security Action Plan (2016-2020). This 

will ensure that the project facilitates and promotes greater resilience and adaptation to climate 

change by promoting climate smart agriculture through use of improved agriculture 

technologies and conservation agriculture.  

 

3.2.3 Social Impact and Nutrition 

 

According to the most recent data in the 2014 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 

the prevalence of stunting is significantly higher in the Northern Region, with 33% stunting in 

children under five as compared to the national prevalence of 19%. Also the prevalence of 

anaemia in children under five is very high (82.1%). The Project will contribute to increased 

dietary diversity among households, and especially among women and children, in the Northern 

and Upper East regions. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good 

nutrition and hygiene practices, and enhanced management of acute malnutrition, through 

strengthening of the Community Health Workers system; (ii) equipment of health facilities with 

materials for anthropometric measurements where there is an identified need (based on 



 

14 

assessment by Ghana Health Services); (iii) linkage of small holder farmers to the Ghana School 

Feeding Programme and (iv) nutrition and hygiene education in schools, complemented by fruit 

tree planting and school gardens. To link the School Feeding Programme to the smallholder 

farmers benefiting from the project, agriculture extension officers will be involved, who will 

also be engaged in the school gardens and fruit tree planting. In order to accommodate all these 

activities, a total of UA3 million will be earmarked for the support to the Community Health 

Workers system, the provision of equipment to health centres, and the nutrition and hygiene 

education in schools, complemented by fruit tree planting and school gardens. Part of the budget 

will also be used to support the cost of a representative Food Security and Nutrition Survey to 

support the M&E component of the Project and evaluate impact in terms of household dietary 

diversity at district levels.  

 

3.2.4 Gender Aspects 

 

3.2.4.1 In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the national Agricultural labour force, contribute 

46% to the total GDP and also produce 70% of subsistence crops (MOFA, 2002). In the SADA 

zone, where the project will be implemented, women play a major role in farming and food 

processing. Women are engaged in planting, weeding, harvesting, processing and marketing of 

agricultural produce in the region. Women are involved in the agricultural processing and 

contribute at more than 70% of agriculture transformation. The gender analysis of the 

agriculture sector in the area revealed the gender gaps along the value chain, with women in a 

disadvantaged side. Most of the gender gaps are outlined in  access to land and farming 

equipment’s, access to extension services delivery, access to certified seeds supply, fertilizer 

and crop protection materials, access to agricultural technologies, agriculture processing, access 

to credit and financial services. The Project will contribute to implement the Gender and 

agriculture Strategy by empowering women in the agriculture production. 

 

3.2.4.2 To address the identified gender gaps, the project will implement specific activities and 

put in place measures to uplift the conditions of women in the agriculture value chain, as 

follows: i) Engage with the traditional authorities and family heads to ensure land security for 

women in the project; ii) Ensure that equipment is easy to use and woman-friendly; iii) Ensure 

that women have equal access to improved inputs; iv) Train women and men on safe storage 

options for their produce and utilization of fertilizers; (v) ensure that women have equal access 

to marketing networks; and vi) Organize training for women in the areas of improved 

production, business management, financial literacy, packaging, leadership and decision 

making; good nutrition especially to pregnant women and under five-year children; and (vi) 

organise sensitizations on women’s rights and access to land. The total budget allocated to 

gender equality promotion and nutrition is around UA I million.  

 

3.2.5 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the 

Project activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agricultural 

systems but if any loss occurs it will be compensated based on AfDB requirements.  

 

 

 

 

 



 

15 

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is the Executing Agency of the 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP). A National Project 

Steering Committee (NPSC) will be constituted chaired by the Hon. Minister of MOFA or his 

representative, to provide strategic direction and oversight guidance to the project. To ensure 

effective project coordination and monitoring, the day-to-day project administration will be 

managed by a Project Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU) within MOFA, under the 

direct supervision of the Chief Director. The PCMU will be headed by a Project Coordinator 

who will report to the Chief Director, and also to the Northern Regional Director of Agriculture. 

The Ministry had used a similar arrangement to successfully implement Bank financed projects 

such as the Northern Rural Growth Program (NRGP), Export Marketing and Quality Awareness 

Project (EMQAP), and Afram Plains District Agricultural Development Project (APDADP). 

The Ministry is thus familiar with the Bunk’s financial management rules, procurement 

requirements and disbursements procedures. MOFA is already connected to the government 

integrated financial information management system (GIFMIS), although the system is yet to 

be fully deployed for all projects. Thus, the PCMU of the proposed project will adopt the Sun 

Accounting software of the just completed NRGP for financial accounting and reporting, and 

migrate to the GIFMIS when the system is fully deployed to projects.  
  
4.1.2 The PCMU staff will be competitively recruited by MOFA and located in the office 

premises of the Regional Department of Agriculture at Tamale. The staff requirement will 

include: the Project Coordinator, a Financial Controller, an Accounts Officer, Agronomist, a 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists, an Agribusiness specialist, an Agricultural Engineer and 

a Procurement Specialist. The services of other experts such as Irrigation specialist, Gender and 

Nutrition specialist and Environmental specialist will be drawn from regional government 

institutions. For implementation of nutrition related activities, the PCMU will collaborate with 

other Government stakeholders including the Ghana Health Services, the Ghana School 

Feeding Program and the Ghana Education Regional Offices. SADA will play an active role in 

work activity planning, implementation monitoring and also attracting investors to collaborate 

with the Project. Relevant government agencies such as Projects Coordination Unit, Crop 

Services Directorate, Agricultural Engineering Services Directorate (AESD), Ghana Irrigation 

Development Authority (GIDA), Plant Protection and Regulatory Services Directorate 

(PPRSD), Ghana Grains and Legumes Development Board (GLDB), Environmental Protection 

Authority and Ministry of Trade Industry (MoTI) will be supported to conduct macro-

monitoring of the project’s activities.  
 

4.1.3 A National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will be established to provide 

strategic policy direction and oversight guidance for the project implementation. Its core 

activities shall include implementation of program strategy, oversee planning, review progress 

and impact, review/ approval of annual work plans and budgets as well as ensuring effective 

linkages with related programs. The NPSC membership would include: (i) one representative 

each from the relevant ministries (MOFA, MOTI MOF, MLGRD, MORH); (ii) one 

representative from selected public-sector agencies and institutions (BoG, DFR, EPA, SADA); 

(iii) three representatives from the Farmer Based Organizations; (v) three representatives from 

large-scale private sector traders/processors; and (vi) four representative from private investors 

and management firms of commodity chains facilities. NPSC meetings would be chaired by the 

Hon. Minister of MOFA or his designated representative, with the Project Coordinator as 

secretary. The NPSC would meet at least twice a year. Costs related to the meetings of the 

NPSC will be financed from ADF loan. 



 

16 

 

Procurement arrangements 
 

4.1.4 “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition 

of consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), 

dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following: 

 

4.1.5 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Procurement through Open competitive Bidding 

National (OCBN) procedures will be carried out using BPS comprising its Laws and 

Regulations (Ghana Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663), as amended Act, 2016 (Act 914) 

using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) agreed during project negotiations” 

for various group of transactions to be entailed under the project, detailed in annex B 5.1 and 

the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  

 

4.1.6 Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the 

relevant Bank Standard Solicitation Documents (SDDs), will be used for Open Competitive 

Bidding International (OCBI) contracts for both goods and works and Acquisition of 

Consulting Services as indicated in the Technical Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2.  

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement 

risks at the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing 

Agency (EA), were undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on 

the procurement regimes (BPS and Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups 

of similar transactions under the project. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para 5.3.2. The project 

activities derived from these components has informed the procurement risk and capacity 

assessment as well as the market analysis based on which the procurement strategy of the 

project has been developed. In addition some of the identified activities will require that MoUs 

are adopted to engage the services of some of the project partners including research institutions 

and the details of these arrangements are clearly defined in the technical annexes, B5. 

 

 Financial management and disbursement arrangements  

 

4.1.8 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) through its Project Coordination and 

Management Unit model will be directly responsible for the financial management 

arrangements of the project. The Project financial management will be headed by the FMS, 

who shall be a seasoned chartered accountant with hands-on experience on AfDB FM rules and 

procedures, assisted by an experienced Accounts Officer and Accounts Assistant/ Clerk. MOFA 

has not identified qualified accountants from within its ranks that can fill the top project FM 

positions, and would thus be expected to competitively fill the FMS and Accounts Officer 

positions. Both persons will be required to be proficient in the use of Sun Accounting Software 

and the practical application of IPSAS Cash Basis of Accounting. The Accounts Assistant 

position shall however be deployed from existing MOFA staff for staff capacity building and 

knowledge transfer purposes. In harmony with Government of Ghana (GoG) accounting 

standards and practices within MOFA, the project shall adopt the IPSAS Cash Basis for 

financial reporting.  

4.1.9 In terms of information flow, the FMS will report to the PC and to the Finance Director 

of MOFA (to ensure project results are correctly included in the overall consolidated accounts 



 

17 

of the Ministry). The FMS will be required to produce quarterly unaudited interim financial 

reports (IFRs) and annual financial reports in accordance with IPSAS Cash Basis, from the Sun 

Accounting software. The IFRs must be submitted to the Bank within 30 days after the end of 

the quarter reported on, while the annual audited financial reports must be submitted not later 

than six (6) months after the end of the applicable financial year. MOFA internal control 

systems, including the internal audit function (which appears adequate and operating 

effectively) shall be extended to the cover project operations too. A Project Implementation 

Manual (PIM) consisting of Technical Implementation, FM procedures and Administrative 

procedures components will be developed and adopted from the NRGP PIM, to guide project 

implementation, streamline FM practices and administrative procedures. Previous audits of 

MOFA managed Bank financed projects were generally satisfactory, however the finance staff 

tended to leave the service of MOFA/the project on completion of the project activities. 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement: Two of the Bank’s four disbursement methods are recommended to be 

used in disbursing funds to the project: (i) Direct payments; and (ii) Payments through Special 

Account (SA). Direct payments method will generally be used for the larger contracts signed 

between project management and contractors/suppliers/ service providers, while the SA method 

will be used for meeting recurrent/ administrative expenses and smaller contracts. A US Dollar 

denominated SA will be opened at the Bank of Ghana (BoG), to receive ADF resources from 

the Bank. A GHS (local currency) account will be opened at BoG to receive transfers from the 

SA for making payments in Ghana Cedis. A second GHS account will be opened at the BoG to 

receive counterpart cash contributions from the Government of Ghana. All project accounts 

will be managed by the PCMU. All disbursements under the project will follow the 

disbursements procedures outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook.  

 

4.1.11 Audit: The project will be audited by an external audit firm, selected competitively, and 

in accordance with agreed procedures involving the Ghana Audit Service (GAS), which despite 

having the constitutional mandate for all government audits, tends to outsource the audits of 

donor projects to acceptable audit firms. The audit will be conducted on terms of reference 

acceptable to the Bank, and shall be submitted to the Bank no later than six months after the 

end of the year audited.  

 

4.1.12 Overall Conclusion: The overall FM risk is assessed as moderate. To mitigate the risk 

further, MOFA is expected to hire an FMS and Accounts Officer for the project; develop a PIM 

which includes technical, financial management and administrative procedures components; 

and adopt/ upgrade the existing Sun Systems accounting software for use by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual 

(POM) which will be prepared by the PCMU shortly after project loan approval. MOFA will 

monitor overall operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of 

the project, implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national 

standards. The PCMU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project including 

environmental and social compliance and performance and compile the project’s quarterly and 

annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, MOFA, other line ministries, and SADA. 

A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken two years after project start to review the 

project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon completion of project investments at 

the end of program year four, the PCMU will prepare a Borrower’s project completion report.  

 



 

18 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Ghana 

Statistical Service leads the efficient production and management of quality official statistics 

based on international standards, and will be used to assess the contribution of the project 

towards the country and regional development goals and objectives as defined in the relevant 

development plans. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-

based framework, project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected 

to take special note of changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into 

development outcomes. In developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be gender 

disaggregated. The key functions of the M&E Officer in the PCMU will be to ensure quality 

and accountability of monitoring; information management; facilitation of knowledge building; 

and knowledge sharing on monitoring and evaluation. 

4.3. Governance 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Ghana, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of SAZAPIP 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to District levels. This is in relation to 

better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of resources. 

Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will 

serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4. Sustainability 

 

The ownership of the SAZAPIP is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders played 

during formulation and preparation of the Project. The Ministry of Food and Agriculture put up 

a technical team of experts to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The 

maintenance of the access roads and sundry infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the District Assemblies where the project sites reside. The present Project 

will build capacities of the Regional agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure 

profitability for the value chain actors. 

4.5 Risk management 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Ghana have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group 

will engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-sensitive approaches 

and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. SAZAPIP is expected to be 

classified as a Category 2 because the project activities are expected to have environmental and 

social impacts that can be avoided and minimised since they will mostly be site-specific. 

Climate screening is yet to be done. The following are the main risks identified and with 

mitigation measures.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

19 

Risks  Mitigation measures 

Macroeconomic risks - High 

probability: slow economic growth 

and deterioration of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to fall in cocoa 

and other commodity prices.  

Mitigation measure: The Bank will intensify the dialogue with 

the government to adopt supportive macroeconomic policies to 

rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce exchange rate flexibility, 

strengthen the banking system to prevent systemic crisis, and 

implement structural reforms for economic diversification. 

Environmental, Social and Climate 

Risk – Medium probability: The 

project activities are anticipated to 

have site specific environmental and 

social risks. The proposed project 

area is prone to climate change 

impacts. 

Mitigation measures: An ESMF has been developed for the 

project. During project implementation, site specific ESMPs will 

incorporate integrated pest management plans and climate risk 

mitigation and adaptation measures. ESMP development and 

implementation will be part of the monitoring and reporting of the 

project activities.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach 

in agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be 

monitored closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized 

implementation unit located in the District; the role of value chain actors including farmers and 

farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge 

will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and 

periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside 

the production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the 

Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). For the purposes of publicity and sharing of project results, the project could 

recruit a local firm as and when the need be. The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of 

innovative knowledge and information sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other 

actors of the value chain to train their peers, share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing 

their overdependence on the public extension agents. This will also expand significantly the 

number of value chain actors having access to the disseminated knowledge and information. 

The technical assistance supports will introduce and consolidate knowledge and skills, and 

facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the community and national levels. It is 

envisaged that knowledge generated by the pilot demonstration plots will form the basis for 

private sector investment in the agribusiness in the ecological zone as part of TASI.  

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1.  Legal instrument 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an ADF loan agreement for UA 27.86 million 

between the Republic of Ghana and the Bank.  

5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank Group intervention  

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 

 



 

20 

A. Conditions precedent to first disbursement 
 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the members of the Project Coordination 
and Management Unit (PCMU), which will comprise the following key officers: 

(a) Project Coordinator; (b) Financial Controller; (c) Accounts Officer; (d) 

Agronomist; (e) Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists; (f) Agribusiness 

Specialist (g) Agricultural Engineer; and (h) Procurement Specialist, whose 

experience and qualifications shall be acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 

4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

(ii) Provide evidence satisfactory to the Fund that it has opened a foreign currency 
Special Account (SA) and a local currency account (LCA) with a bank acceptable 

to the Fund 

  

Other Conditions:  
 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(ii) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(iii) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable 
to the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including 

any implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF loan of UA 27.86 

million to the Republic of Ghana for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report. 

























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 

 

 
 

 

GUINEA-BISSAU 

 

 

 
RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA 

AND OIO REGIONS 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Project Information Sheet  

 

Client Information  

 

BORROWER /DONEE: Republic of Guinea-Bissau  
 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development   

   (MADR) 

 

Financing Plan  

Source  Amount  Instrument 

ADF 
 UA 0.493 million 

 UA 3.722 million 

Grant 

Loan 

Government  UA 0.14 million - 

Beneficiaries   UA 0.21 million - 

TOTAL COST  UA 4.56 million  

 

Key Information on ADF Financing  

 

Distribution of ADF resources 
Loan 

(UA M) 

Grant 

(UA M) 

Total 

(UA M) 

Country allocation under ADF-13 - PBA 0.118 0.082 0.200 

Country allocation under ATF-13 Pilar 1 3.325 -0.008 3.317 

Remainder of resources deriving from ADF cancellations 0.279 0.017 0.296 

Remainder of resources deriving from ATF Pilar 1 cancellations - 0.402 0.402 

TOTAL  3.722 0.493 4.215 

 

ADF grant currency  

ADF loan currency  

UA 

UA 

  

Loan maturity  40 years 

Grace period  10 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) 

ERR 

NPV 

 

14.6% 

17.1% 

CFAF 7.378 million 

 

Timeframe – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note approval  3 October 2016 

Project approval  14 December 2016 

Effectiveness  February 2017 

Closing of the loan and grant  31 December 2020 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

iv 

Executive Summary 

Project overview: The Rice Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) was designed as part of a 

participatory and inclusive process bringing together all the stakeholders, including producer 

organizations, local communities and local technical services. Those discussions as well as the studies 

conducted by the Bank helped to make a thorough assessment of the situation and identify the 

development needs of the rice value chain, and the most suitable methods of implementation in the two 

regions concerned. The formulation of PDCV-Riz also took into account the fragile context in the 

country, lessons drawn from Bank projects and those of other partners in Guinea-Bissau, while 

developing synergies and complementarities. Factoring in the Bank’s strategic orientations for the 

country, the project was formulated with special emphasis on the following: (i) hydro-agricultural 

infrastructure and access to markets; (ii) food and nutrition security; (iii) value chain development; (iv) 

employment of young people and women; and (v) adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 

The specific goal of the proposed project, which is expected to cost UA 4.56 million and last four years, 

will be to ensure the sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the Bafata and Oio regions. In 

addition to basic structuring infrastructure resulting from the project (development of 470 hectares of 

lowlands and mangroves, 7 km of roads, 2 markets, 5 stores and shops, etc.), innovative techniques 

needed for quality assurance, conservation and processing of food products will also be developed and 

disseminated. These activities will be accompanied by local and organizational capacity building, and 

specific focus will be placed on women’s access to land and all project benefits. The project will affect 

close to 1 720 farmers directly, 55% of whom will be women, representing about 12 000 members of 

agricultural households. It will have an indirect impact on approximately 60 000 people. 

Needs assessment: The project area is located in two of Guinea-Bissau’s nine regions, namely Bafata 

and Oio, which occupy 31.5% of the national territory and in 2015 had a population estimated at 494 

000 (27% of the national population). The project area is rich in water and land resources, owing in 

particular to the Corubal, Geba and Mansôa river basins. In keeping with the country’s strategic 

orientations, the project will help to improve productivity and production in the flagship sector for food 

security: rice. The country has an annual rice deficit of more than 80 000 tonnes. The project will also 

develop market gardening, the current production of which covers only 60% of needs, for certain sites 

and school canteens. This activity will help to improve the nutritional status of the beneficiary 

population, particularly women and children. The project will serve as a catalyst for agricultural 

development in the area by facilitating water control, strengthening agricultural infrastructure, 

promoting sustainable production, packaging and processing technologies, and facilitating access to 

product markets by supporting the development of the strategic sectors of rice and market gardening. 

Value added for the African Development Bank: Agriculture remains the main focus of development 

policies and the principal source of employment. In 2006, the Bank financed the Agricultural and Rural 

Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR), which was followed by three studies on the agricultural 

sector financed by trust funds between 2012 and 2014. These operations helped to develop specific 

expertise and shed new light on key areas (irrigation, seed production and control, solar energy, 

processing, etc.). To consolidate these gains, the Bank and the Government elected to finance the Rice 

Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz), as a way of setting up production areas. By supporting 

the development of infrastructure in areas that are economically and socially depressed but have 

considerable irrigation potential, the Bank’s activities will help to reduce poverty, promote the 

employment of young people and women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the 

resilience of people who are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.  

Knowledge management: PDCV-Riz will contribute to farmers’ training and consolidate their 

expertise. It will allow young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial skills in an 

inclusive manner by setting up operations on land that has modern operational resources and 

infrastructure, and promote the expansion of para-agricultural activities. With regard to resilience to 

climate change, the project will develop and disseminate innovative agricultural technologies for 



 

v 

production, storage and processing, while promoting local expertise. It will support the development of 

drip irrigation expertise with the establishment of a demonstration site. Knowledge management will 

also be carried out through mechanisms for communication and capitalization of project results and best 

practices, and through the process of generating endogenous value for vulnerable groups by developing 

value chains.  

 



 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework  

 

 Guinea-Bissau: Rice Value Chain Development Project in the Bafata and Oio Regions (PDCV-RIZ)  

 Project Goal: The goal of the PDCV-Riz is to contribute to the improvement of the of food and nutrition security, and poverty reduction in at the national level 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline Situation  Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Food and nutrition security is improved and the 

incidence of poverty reduced 

Prevalence of severe/moderate food insecurity 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (0-23 

months) 

Percentage of the total population of poor 

people, including women  

19% (2014) 

34.7% (2014) 

 69.3% and 75.6%) (2010) 

18% (2018) and 15 % (2020) 

32% (2018) and 28% (2020) 

65.5% and 70% (2018) and 60% and 65% 

(2020) 

-PRP/AGIR/EDS 

-MICS  

-ILAP/CILSS 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

The volume of rice and market gardening production is 

increased 

Volume of rice production  

Volume of market gardening production  

Rice: 819 T (2015) 

Market gardening: 35 T 

(2015) 

Rice: 3 058 tonnes (2020) 

Market gardening products: 570 tonnes 

(2020) 

-Annual reports; Agricultural  

statistics  

 

- Periodic project monitoring 

reports  

 

-Mid-term review report and 

project completion report  

Risks:  

- Political instability coupled with a difficult 

economic situation  

- Weak project ownership  

 

Mitigation measures:  

- Contribution to the improvement of socio-

economic and environmental resilience to 

ensure greater stability  

- Involvement and participation of 

beneficiaries in all stages and capacity-

building (producers and MADR) 

- Stakeholder involvement in the project’s 

external communication  

 

Improved additional income for producers in rural areas 

and in the two regions  

 

Average annual income of rice-producing 

households (including women) 

 

Average annual income of market gardeners 

 

CFAF 114 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 37 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 359 000 / per farmer (2020) 

 

 

CFAF 373 100 /per farmer (2020) 



 

vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Agric. infrastructure s modernisation and development 

 

Rehabilitation/development of rice-growing areas 

1.1 Development of lowlands 

1.2 Development of mangroves/anti-salt structures 

1.3 Areas under full control 

 Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas 

1.4 Improved areas with wells and motor pumps 

1.5 Market gardening areas with solar energy 

1.6 Pilot market gardening areas used as ADPP training 

centres 

 Agricultural infrastructure  

1.7 Development of access roads 

1.8 Rehabilitation/revitalization of markets 

1.9 Construction of shops for sale of agricultural inputs 

1.10 Construction of stores for market gardening 

 products 
 

 

 

 

1.1 Area of lowland developed  

1.2  Area of mangroves developed 

1.3 Area of lowland under full control 

 

1.4 Developed area with wells and pumps 

1.5 Area equipped with solar energy panels 

1.6  ADPP developed drip irrigation area  

 

 

1.7 Length of road rehabilitated  

1.8 Number of markets rehabilitated  

1.9 Number of input shops built 

1.10 Number of stores built 

  

 

 

 

1.1 NA 

1.2  0 

1.3 NA 

 

1.4 NA 

1.5 0 ha 

1.6 0 ha 

 

 

1.7 0 km 

1.8 0  

1.9 NA 

1.10 NA 

 

Target indicator in 2020 

 

1.1 185 ha (50% W) 

1.2 180 ha (10% W) 

1.3 105 ha (50% W) 

 

1.4 15 ha (80% W) 

1.5 4 ha (80% W) 

1.6 1 ha (50% W) 

 

 

1.7 7 km 

1.8 2 

1.9 2 (50% of beneficiaries are women) 

1.10 3 irrigated areas for women market 

gardeners  

-Progress reports of technical 

services in charge of 

monitoring the 

implementation  

 

-Contracts signed with 

enterprises 

 

-Reports of control agencies  

 

- Project progress reports  

Risks 

 

- Procurement delays, weak capacity of 

technical services  

- Weak capacity of enterprises  

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Preparation of priority CBDs based on 

available BOAD studies  

- Use of PRESAR’s Project Management 

Unit (PMU)  

- Use of specialized NGOs  

- Central State services supported in the 

sovereign activity  

  2.  Development of value chains 

  Advisory support  and structuring 

2.1 Demonstration Units (DUs) set up 

2.2 Number of farms monitored and support 

2.3 Developed sites secured in terms of land use 

2.4 Conflict management committees established 

2.5 AHA management committees set up 

2.6 Grassroots POs and their umbrella organizations  

established  

Access to means of production and processing 

2.7 Revolving funds in place for procurement of seeds 

2.8 Input shops operationalized 

2.9 Drivers of tillers and artisans trained 

2.10 Post-harvest equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Women's processing EIG set up 

Agricultural and nutrition entrepreneurship 

2.12 Young entrepreneurs trained at ADPP and established 

2.13 Youth trained, business plan and  established 

2.14 Pilot school canteens supported 

2.15 Women's awareness raised concerning  nutrition 

education 

 

 

2.1 Number of DUs in place 

2.2 Number of farms monitored 

2.3 Number of sites secured 

2.4 Number of local agreements established 

2.5 Number of management committees 

established 

2.6 Number of POs and umbrella 

organizations set up 

 

2.7 Quantity of seeds procured 

2.8 Number of shops operational 

2.9 Number of beneficiaries trained 

2.10 Number of equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Number of women's EIGs set up 

 

2.12 Number of youths trained at DAPP 

centres and established 

2.13 Number of other youths trained  and 

established 

2.14 Number of school canteens supported 

2.15 Number of women sensitized 

 

 

2.1 0  

2.2 0  

2.3 0 

2.4 0 

2.5 0  

2.6 NA 

 

 

2.7 0 

2.8 0 

2.9 NA 

2.10 NA 

2.11 NA 

 

 

2.12 NA 

2.13 0  

2.14 NA 

2.15 NA 

 

2.1 75 

2.2 1 720, including 960 owned by 

women- 

2.3 11 (55% of them belonging to women) 

2.4 5 

2.5 30 (10 irrigated areas for women 

market gardeners) 

2.6 60 (30% F) and 10 (umbrella org.) 

 

2.7 4.5 t (base) 50 t (certified) in 2017 

2.8 2 in 2018 (50% benefiting women) 

2.9 Drivers (15), artisans (8) 

2.10 20 (50% for women) 

2.11 15 (all - 100%- belonging to women) 

 

2.12 70, of whom 40 are established (30% 

of them women 

2.13 8 trained and established (30% of them 

women) 

2.14 3 (2017 and 2018)  

2.15 2 000 (all of them women) 

-Project progress reports  

 

 

- Bank’s supervision  reports  

 

 

- Government’s external 

monitoring reports  

Risks 

 

- Mobilization of counterpart funding 

- Limited infrastructure ownership and 

management 

- Conflicts between farmers /herders 

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Counterpart funding limited to the 

provision of premises and payment of the 

salaries of project employees (3.5% of the 

project's total cost) 

- Participatory approach initiated 

- Involvement, organization and training of 

local actors 

- Framework for consultation between 

farmers and stockbreeders, facilities 

designed in a concerted manner, 

development, fencing of market gardens. 



 

viii 

 

3.  Project Management  

3.1 Procurement activities 

3.2 Project activities carried out 

3.3 Financial management assured 

3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 

3.5 Communication ensured  

 

 

3.1  Procurement plan (PP) adopted and 

implemented 

3.2  Compliant disbursement rate 

3.3  Audit reports produced   

3.4  Operational M&E system 

3.5  Communication plan implemented 

 

 

3.1  PP prepared (end-2016) 

3.2  0% (December 2016) 

3.3  Firm hired (June 2017) 

3.4  Established (1st half of 

2017) 

3.5  Plan developed (2017) 

 

 

3.1  PP updated at least once a year  

3.2  25% a year on average  

3.3  Four annual audit reports validated 

3.4 Mid-term final M&E reports produced   

3.5  Communication tools disseminated  

 

 

PP 

SAP system 

Audit reports  

Progress and M&E  reports  

Brochures, website, films, etc. 

Risks 

- Weak capacity 

 

Mitigation measures  

- Confirmation of PRESAR’s PMU after 

evaluation, performance contracts, review of 

accounting and monitoring tools  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  

COMPOSANTES RESOURCES 

Component A: Agricultural infrastructure modernisation and development  

Studies, works implementation and control (lowlands, mangroves, market gardening, irrigated areas, roads, markets, shops and stores, etc.).  

Component B:   Development of value chains  

Advisory support, structuring, securing of land, access to seeds and fertilizers, support for mechanization, training and installation of young 

people, support for women, nutrition support, etc.  

Component C:   Project management  

Coordination, procurement, monitoring/evaluation, financial management, audit, communication, leadership, etc. 

Components  Sources of Financing 

Component A           :  UA 2.57 million (56%) ADF (loan and grant) :  UA 4.215 million (92.4%) 

Component B           :  UA 1.23 million (27%) Govt. : UA 0.14 million (3.0%) 

Component C           : UA 0.76 million (17%) Beneficiaries  :  UA 0.21 (4.6 %) 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Implementation Schedule  

 

 
 

 Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

 Quarter T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                        

 PDCV-Riz financing negotiations                        

 ADF grant and loan approval                       

 Signing of financing agreements                        

 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to 1st  disbursement                        

 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                       

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                       

 PMU staff Confirmation                       

 Preparation of priority procurement  agreements and documents                       

 PDCV-Rice launching mission                       

 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, IT, etc.)                       

 Signing of agreements with partner entities                       

3 AGRIC. INFRASTRUCTURE MODERNIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT.                       

 Development of documents on priority infrastructure and projects                       

 Procurement for priority infrastructure and structures                       

 Studies on  complementary hydro-agricultural infrastructure, roads and buildings                       

 Works on irrigation and roads                       

 Works on marketing and processing infrastructure                       

 Implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plan                       

4 VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT                       

 Extension and improvement of access to production resources                       

 Support for the structuring and of POs and umbrella organisations                       

 Support for the conservation, processing and marketing of products                       

 
Development of agricultural entrepreneurship and mechanization in collaboration 

with DAPP 
                  

    

 Support for nutrition and 3 school canteens                       

 
Support for the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) and 

Stakeholders 
                  

    

5  PROJECT MANAGEMENT                       

 Updating management and monitoring-evaluation tools                       

 Baseline situation and implementation of the monitoring and evaluation system                       

 Coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation and communication activities                       

 Annual accounts audit                       

 Mid-term review                       

 ADF and Government Completion Report                       



 

1 

RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA  

AND OIO REGIONS  
 

Management hereby submits this report concerning a proposal to extend a loan of UA 3.722 million 

and award a grant of UA 0.493 million to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to finance the Rice Value 

Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) in the Bafata and Oio regions. 

I Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 Accounting for 67% of GDP and 80% of jobs, agriculture remains the focus of development 
policies and, over the medium term, will continue to be the driver of growth and the main source of 

employment. Rice is the dominant food crop and the food deficit is made up annually by importing 

approximately 80 000 tonnes of rice. PDCV-Riz, which aims to improve food and nutrition security and 

boost producers’ income by promoting rice production and market gardening in targeted areas, is in line 

with the strategic objectives for Guinea-Bissau.1 These are set out in such documents as the Letter of 

Agricultural Development Policy (LPDA) and its plan of action, aimed at ensuring food security, 

increasing and diversifying agricultural exports, while ensuring sustainable management of agricultural, 

silvicultural and pastoral resources, and improving the living conditions of the rural population. Similarly, 

the strategic pillars of the strategic and operational plan for the period 2015-2020, known as Terra Ranka, 

developed and adopted by the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, includes the following 

pillars: (a) governance and peace; (b) infrastructure; (c) industrialization; (d) urban development; (e) human 

development; and (f) biodiversity. The strategy underscores the need to work towards economic recovery 

based on structural reforms, in order to ensure sustainable development. It also highlights the four main 

engines of economic growth, including agriculture and agro-industry, which will be based on the 

development of cashew and rice production, while aiming for gender parity, equity and women’s 

empowerment. 

1.1.2 PDCV-Riz also plugs into Sub-programme 1 of the National Agricultural Investment Programme 
(PNIA) (“Promotion of Plant Production”), which focuses on the development of food crops (including 

rice) and market gardening, through better control of water and factors of production. It is also in line with 

the orientations of (a) the National Food Security Programme (PNSA), which aims to contribute to the 

gradual eradication of hunger and food insecurity, and promotion of the people’s comprehensive and 

sustainable socio-economic development; (b) the National Medium-Term Investment Programme 

(PNIMT), whose major goal is to speed up the growth of the agricultural and fisheries sector by increasing 

the flow of capital directed towards the sector, but also by enhancing the effectiveness of investments in 

terms of growth and poverty reduction; and (c) the Rice Farming Development Programme (PDR - 2016), 

which aims to stimulate rice production in sufficient quantity and quality to ensure supply and improve the 

balance of trade. The project is in keeping with the “Develop infrastructure to promote inclusive growth” 

pillar of the CSP 2015-2019 through the development of agricultural infrastructure and opportunities in 

agriculture (in particular for young people and women).  

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.2.1 According to the agriculture sector study conducted in 2014 (Portuguese Cooperation Trust 

Fund), it is essential to optimize the use of farmland, considering the limited land resources, to create added 

value for products, but also to enable households to generate sufficient income to purchase certain 

commodities that have to be imported. Rice is the staple foodstuff and food deficit is made up annually by 

rice imports of about 80 000 tonnes. The constraints in the sector are primarily the remoteness of production 

areas, the degradation of production systems, particularly mangroves, caused by salinity and acidity, 

                                                 
1  It also draws on the main findings of studies conducted by the Bank on the gender profile (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund and in partnership with 

UN-Women); agriculture (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund); Fragility in Guinea-Bissau, 2014 (financed by the Bank); and capitalization of 

PRESAR (financed by the South-South Cooperation Fund). 



 

2 

insufficient access to inputs, and weak processing capacity. It is against this backdrop that PDCV-Riz was 

prepared, to support the development of infrastructure in two of the country’s most vulnerable regions 

(poverty rates of 79% in Oio and 72% in Bafata). The Bank’s involvement will help to reduce poverty and 

regional and social disparities. The development of hydro-agricultural facilities, the integration of value 

chains and agricultural entrepreneurship will help to promote the employment of young people and 

women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the resilience of the segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutritional insecurity.  

1.2.2 The objectives of PDCV-Riz are aligned on the Bank’s “High 5s” (five priorities), which 

include feeding the people of Africa by 2025 and improving their living conditions by developing the 

rice value chain, building the capacity of actors, creating jobs and generating income. The project is 

aligned on the Bank’s Long-Term Strategy (LTS 2013-2022) and its two overarching objectives: 

inclusive growth and transition to a green economy. The project is built on the three areas of special 

emphasis of the LTS: fragile States, agriculture and food security, and gender. PDCV-Riz is aligned on 

the Bank’s new strategy: “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-

2025)”, which puts special emphasis on the development of value chains and agricultural 

entrepreneurship. The project also plans to rely heavily on grassroots associations, local NGOs and the 

private sector, thereby fulfilling the requirement for non-State actors to participate in the Bank’s 

operations, identified in the CSP as a way of strengthening the country’s resilience to fragility. The 

project is also in conformity with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-2018) “Investing in Gender 

Equality for Africa’s Transformation”, more specifically Pillar II, “Economic Empowerment”. It also 

follows the recommendations of the gender profile prepared by the Bank and UN-Women in 2015, on 

the need to integrate women into value chains and provide extension services for women’s economic 

entities in rural areas.  

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 Since the crisis of April 2012, the TFP consultation framework that was operating through 

multi-sector thematic groups has been put on hold. However, it should be noted that, in general, aid 

coordination and monitoring mechanisms have always suffered from the structural weaknesses of public 

administration. In this regard, before the coup d’état of 2012, the Bank approved a technical assistance 

project (PECA II) to build coordination capacity. The project included the convening of donor round 

tables in Brussels in March 2015 as well as capacity-building activities organized by the Ministry of 

Economy and Finance. 

1.3.2 Based on the Letter of Agricultural Development Policy, several bilateral and multilateral 

partners provided significant support for rural development and food and nutrition security in Guinea-

Bissau, including Spain, Italy, Brazil, Portugal, China, the European Union, the World Bank, AfDB, 

the West African Development Bank (BOAD), IFAD and the United Nations system. From an 

institutional standpoint, the activities of partners are coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and 

Finance. For agriculture in particular, the partners reached a consensus on the sector strategy, notably 

the PNIA, during the partners’ round table convened in Brussels in March 2015. The Food and 

Agriculture Organization plays a major role in policy support and coordination of activities. More 

broadly, in the rural sector (agriculture, stock raising, fishery, environment), the involvement of the various 

partners is presented in Annex A4 of volume 2 and is summarized as follows: 

 



 

3 

Sector or Sub-sector* 
Size of 

GDP Exports Labour 

[Rural Sector] [+50%] 93% 80% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (on-going programmes or projects) 

Government Donors   Amounts (USD M) 

 
 

  Period 

 World Bank 0.76 2015-2020 

 ADF 0.20 2014-2015 

0.73 IFAD 16.91 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 BOAD 2.95 2015-2020 

 EU 1.21 2014-2019 

 WAEMU 11.34 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 

Existence of thematic working groups No 
Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

AfDB’s role in aid coordination Participation  
 

 

II Project Description 

 

2.1 Project Components 

The overall objective of PDCV-Riz is to help improve nutritional and food security and reduce poverty 

across the country. Its specific objective is to ensure sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the 

Bafata and Oio regions by improving productivity, strengthening infrastructure, ensuring resilience to 

climate change, managing natural agricultural resources in a sustainable manner and reducing gender 

inequality. Lasting four years, PDCV-Riz revolves around three main components: (i) Modernization 

and development of agricultural infrastructure; (ii) Development of value chains; and (iii) Project 

management. The table below shows a summary of the activities selected. A detailed description is 

provided in Annex C3 of Volume 2. 
  



 

4 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Component Cost Description of Components 

A- 

Modernization 

and 

development of 

agricultural 

infrastructure 

UA 

2.57 

million 

(56%) 

A1 Rehabilitation/development of rice production infrastructure and facilities: (i) development 

of 185 hectares of lowland; (ii) development of 180 hectares of mangroves/anti-salt facilities; 

(iii) development of 105 hectares of areas with full water control; (iv) protection of developed 

areas with area dykes and erosion abatement measures. 

A2 Rehabilitation/development of land for market gardeners: (i) development of 15 hectares 

with improved wells and pumping motor units; (ii) setting aside a 4-hectare piece of land for 

market gardening by women, with solar energy; (iii) installation of a 1-hectare drip irrigation 

system at the NGO for People-to-People Development Assistance (ADPP) training centre in 

Bissora. 

A3 Development of various agricultural infrastructure: (i) development of 7 km of access 

roads, including a road dyke for access to the Olom site; (ii) rehabilitation/operation of 2 

markets (Bissora and Bantandjan); (iii) construction of two input shops and three stores for the 

storage and conservation of market gardening products. 

B- 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

1.23 

million  

(27%) 

B1 Advisory support and structuring: (i) advisory support and research/development; (ii) 

support for the emergence and strengthening of the capacity of grassroots producer 

organizations (farmers’ organizations) and associated umbrella groups; (iii) support for the 

securing of developed sites; (iv) establishment and structuring of committees for the 

management of developed infrastructure. 

B2 Improvement of access to means of production and processing: (i) strengthening of access 

to certified seeds and quality inputs (in line with INPA and DCCS); (ii) establishment of 

revolving input funds (Japanese Cooperation); (iii) promotion of mechanization (Japanese 

Cooperation) and supply of post-harvest equipment (threshers, hulling machines, mills); (iv) 

support for 10 women’s economic interest groupings (EIGs) (parboiling of rice, drying and 

processing of vegetables, etc.). 

B3 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship: (i) training of 70 young people (from the 

Oio and Bafata regions) at the ADPP training centre in Bissora; (ii) entrepreneurship training 

for 10 young people or groups proposing agricultural and para-agricultural projects and support 

for them to set up their operations. 

B4 Nutrition support: (i) education, nutritional monitoring and aid for diversification of food 

rations among the population, particularly among infants aged 0 to 23 months; (ii) pilot 

operation for supplying local products to three school canteens (in line with WFP); and (iii) 

support for the promotion of family and community vegetable gardens. 

B5 Support for MADR and partners: (i) capacity building for the services and technicians 

involved in implementing PDCV-Riz; (ii) support for strategic discussions at the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). 

C- 

Project 

management 

UA 

0.76 

million 

(17%) 

(i) Coordination and piloting of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial 

management; (iii) procurement of goods, works and services; (iv) implementation of a 

communication plan; (v) monitoring and evaluation of project execution; and (vi) 

environmental monitoring.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for PDCV-Riz are based on field data and lessons drawn from 

similar projects, including those obtained from the PRESAR capitalization study, and on design 

methods tailored to the specific context of the two regions and each of the sites. 

 

2.2.2 With regard to the pre-selected sites, only the Bafata sites offered conditions conducive to the 

development of facilities with full irrigation water control. Several technical options were available in 

the Bafata region, including that of developing a single large area with water pumped from the Gébà 

River, where the project would be concentrated. That option was rejected in light of the management 

difficulties encountered in the past and the complexity of operating that type of facility, and the 

difficulty of having sufficient labour to develop the investments. The alternative was to develop several 

small areas on different sites, which would be easier to manage and set up. For other lowlands, the 



 

5 

solution adopted was that of partial control of runoff (cascading dykes equipped with regulators), but 

using manufactured structures, to ensure greater durability. For the mangrove sites, partial irrigation 

water control was the only technical solution possible. In essence, the process entails building an anti-

salt dyke equipped with regulators and partitioning the area using dykes and bunds for the retention and 

distribution of irrigation water on the parcels and partitions.  

 

2.2.3 Market gardening is a vitally important activity for improving the nutritional intake of 

households and is also a source of income for women. However, it has been noted that several pieces of 

land belonging to women, developed summarily, are abandoned owing to poor design and technical 

solutions that do not alleviate the tedious work of watering. To develop those pieces of land, the 

underground water will need to be captured by building or using large wells and/or boreholes, and 

equipping them with a dewatering system powered by a generator and/or solar panels. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Brief Description Reason for Rejection 

Develop just one 

large area with total 

control where the 

project would be 

concentrated 

Construction of a large pumping 

station, covered water 

transportation canals with large 

civil engineering structures for 

the collection, carriage and 

distribution of water to the 

various blocks and 

neighbourhoods. 

This alternative does not ensure the availability of 

labour, in terms of quantity or quality, for the 

development of the facilities and the investments 

required. It is quite likely that the area will not be 

fully used, whereas on several sites available labour 

could make better use of the irrigated areas and 

develop the project. 

Develop market 

gardening areas 

with improved 

wells without any 

dewatering 

mechanism 

Construction of one or more 

large wells (one well per hectare) 

where irrigation water is 

collected manually and carried 

to the parcels by the operators.  

The constraint for the development of market 

gardening production is manual dewatering of the 

wells. This takes up an enormous amount of work 

time, makes the task, which is carried out mainly by 

women, very tedious and limits the production 

capacity of women engaged in market gardening, 

causing them to lose interest. 

Develop animal-

drawn cultivation 

in the intermediary 

phase instead of 

motorizing soil 

cultivation 

activities 

Animal-drawn cultivation 

practised in the project regions is 

suited for light soils with limited 

humidity, to ensure high 

productivity. Its effectiveness 

depends a great deal on the 

physical conditions of the area to 

be cultivated.  

Large arable land in the region, the short period 

available for soil preparation and the short rainy 

season are factors militating against animal-drawn 

cultivation and in favour of motorized soil 

cultivation. The consolidation of the network of 

providers of agricultural mechanization services in 

the project region will help to achieve this goal. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

PDCV-Riz is an investment operation financed with ADF resources. The Government of Guinea-Bissau 

has not yet started implementing projects and programmes through the sector-based approach, given a 

number of institutional constraints and the context of fragility. At this juncture, the project approach is 

the most appropriate to ensure effective and efficient use of the resources allocated to the project, which 

will also consolidate the gains achieved with PRESAR. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The project cost is estimated at UA 4.56 million, excluding taxes and custom duty (CFAF 

3.742 billion), with UA 1.45 million (CFAF 1.193 billion) in foreign exchange and UA 3.11 million 

(CFAF 2.549 billion) in local currency. Custom duty and taxes will be covered by the State, which will 

have to take the necessary measures to implement this provision. The foreign exchange portion 

represents 31.9% of the total cost, net of taxes, and the local currency portion represents 68.1%. The 



 

6 

physical contingency rate applied was 5% for works and 5% for equipment. A provision for 

compounded price escalation of 3% was applied on all components. The summary of the project cost 

by component and by expenditure category is presented in Tables 2.3 and 2.4 below. 

 
Table 2.3: Estimated Costs by Component 

COMPONENTS 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. F.E. Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural 

infrastructure 
1 105.8 816.1 1 921.9 1.35  0.99  2.34  42.5% 

Support for the development of value chains 726.6 220.7 947.4 0.89  0.27  1.15  11.9% 

Project management 530.6 55.7 586.3 0.65  0.07  0.71  9.5% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88  1.33  4.21  31.6% 

Physical contingencies 30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04  0.04  0.08  53.2% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19  0.08  0.27  29.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11  1.45  4.56  31.9% 

 

Table 2.4: Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Works 836.7 725.5 1 562.2 1.02 0.88 1.90 46.4 41.8% 

Goods  214.0 250.1 464.1 0.26 0.30 0.57 53.9 12.4% 

Services 802.0 117.0 919.0 0.98 0.14 1.12 12.7 24.6% 

Operation 135.4 0.0 135.4 0.17 - 0.17 - 3.6% 

Personnel 374.9 0.0 374.9 0.46 - 0.46 - 10.0% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88 1.33 4.21 31.6 92.4% 

Physical contingencies  30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04 0.04 0.08 53.2 1.7% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19 0.08 0.27 29.9 5.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.56 31.9 100.0% 

 

2.4.2 The project will be financed by a grant of UA 0.493 million and loan of UA 3.722 million 

from the African Development Fund (ADF), representing 92.4% of the project cost, net of taxes and 

custom duty. Considering the country’s fragile state (see Annexes IV and V), the Government’s 

financial contribution, estimated at UA 0.136 million, will be limited to covering the salaries of civil 

servants seconded to the project and providing office space for the Project Management Unit 

(headquarters in Bafata and liaison office in Bissau), and setting up a revolving fund for the procurement 

of inputs (fertilizers and seeds). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to the computation of 

their participation in easy-to-undertake on-going development and maintenance work, estimated at UA 

0.21 million. The breakdown by source of financing is indicated in Table 2.5 below. 
 

Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

SOURCES 

CFAF Million UA Million 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

ADF loan 2 053.4 999.9 3 053.4 2.50 1.22 3.722 81.6% 

ADF grant 211.3 193.1 404.4 0.26 0.24 0.493 10.8% 

Govt. 112.0 0.0 112.0 0.14 - 0.136 3.0% 

Beneficiaries 172.0 0.0 172.0 0.21 - 0.210 4.6% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.561 100% 



 

7 

2.4.3 The expenditure schedule is as follows: 

 
Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

COMPONENTS 2017 2018 2019 2020 Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural infrastructure  0.41 1.48 0.44 0.02 2.34 

Support for the development of value chains 0.40 0.44 0.24 0.08 1.15 

Project management 0.25 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.71 

Base cost 1.07 2.07 0.83 0.25 4.21 

Physical contingencies 0.01 0.05 0.01 - 0.08 

Price escalation 0.03 0.13 0.08 0.03 0.27 

TOTAL 1.11 2.26 0.92 0.28 4.56 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project target area consists of two regions – Bafata and Oio – out of the eight (in addition 

to the autonomous region of Bissau) in Guinea-Bissau. It covers 31.5% of the national territory 

(representing a surface area of 36 125 km2) and has a population estimated in 2015 and 494 000 

inhabitants, compared with 1 783 000 inhabitants in the country (projection based on the General 

Population and Housing Census, 2009)2 The area is endowed with huge water resources (rain, the 

Corubal, Geba and Mansôa Rivers, sedimentary basin) and has strong potential of lowlands that can be 

developed (especially in Bafata) and mangrove plains (particularly in Oio). 

2.5.2 The project areas were selected following a multi-criteria analysis based on: (i) accessibility; 

(ii) existence of community/local operational dynamic; (iii) absence of latent land conflicts; and (iv) 

overall consistency with the project objectives (availability of labour, level of organization and sense of 

initiative of the future beneficiaries, expertise, participation of women and young people). A wide 

variety of sites were pre-identified: (i) Development of lowlands: (a) with partial irrigation water control 

(Carabina, Gêba, Cumuda and Olom sites); (b) with full irrigation water control (Contuboel, Gêba, 

Cumuda and Ponta Nova sites); (ii) Development of mangroves: partial irrigation water control 

(Binhomi); (iii) Market gardening areas: Contuboel, Carabina, Sormone, and ADPP training centre in 

Bissora.  

2.5.3 The majority of the population of the area is engaged in agriculture (rice, corn, cassava, 

peanuts, sorghum/millet, black-eyed peas, fruits and vegetables, cashew nuts, etc.), stock raising and 

trading. Traditional and family farming faces a variety of constraints, including the absence and age of 

facilities, difficulties in accessing factors of production (certified seeds, quality inputs, tilling and post-

harvest equipment, etc.). Women are involved in all rural farming activities and most participate in rice 

cultivation and market gardening work, and in product processing and marketing. The project target 

group comprises smallholders, in particular women and young people, the main segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity and poverty. The project will affect 1 720 

households/farmers, including 960 women farmers (55%), representing about 12 000 people (direct 

beneficiaries), including 6 400 women. The other direct targets are artisans, processors, traders, young 

entrepreneurs, about 200 students from three pilot school canteens, various service providers and NGOs, 

etc. In addition to infrastructure, innovative techniques needed for quality maintenance, conservation 

and processing of food products will be developed and disseminated, and accompanied by local and 

organizational capacity building. Specific attention will be paid to access to land for women and young 

people and all project beneficiaries. Therefore, PDCV-Riz will affect more than 60 000 people in all. 

 

                                                 
2  National Institute of Statistics (INE) / General Population and Housing Census 2009. 



 

8 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project design was based on a participatory approach involving all stakeholders: 

administration, producer organizations, women’s groups, civil society, private sector, technical and 

financial partners (TFPs), projects, etc. These broad-based consultations, which began with PRESAR 

and during studies supported by the Bank, continued during the PDCV-Riz preparation and appraisal 

mission. The consultation meetings convened in each of the two regions with all the parties (local 

technical services, NGOs and advisory support associations, local communities, representatives of 

beneficiaries, including women) helped with the identification by consensus of constraints and needs in 

the project area and for the two sectors involved. Focused discussions with institutional local partners 

and civil society and visits to different potential sites, followed by working sessions with beneficiaries, 

including women and young people, helped to fully examine the development of the area, identify 

support needs for the two sectors and the most appropriate methods of implementation, as well as the 

appropriate measures for effective implementation. The sites and activities were chosen following 

several investigations and fruitful discussions with beneficiaries and other actors involved. 

2.6.2 This entire participatory process showed that there was great interest for the project, which 

builds on the achievements of PRESAR and other past and on-going projects, and a broad consensus on 

its design and methods of implementation. Producers reaffirmed the need to fully exploit the project 

area’s considerable potential (land, natural watercourses, mangroves, lowlands, etc.). Women expressed 

their interest for market gardening, processing and marketing of farm products, with modernization of 

production and processing tools and improved access to markets. Following visits to various sites, the 

status of the existing facilities and infrastructure was assessed and technological options to be adopted 

for their construction/rehabilitation were proposed. The development of a good communication strategy 

centred on PDCV-Riz and the maintenance of a participatory approach during its implementation are 

guarantees that local actors will take ownership of the project during the execution phase.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience Reflected in and Lessons Learned from Project Design  

2.7.1 It will be recalled that since the start of cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, the Bank has carried 

out operations in the agricultural sector through five projects, the last of which was the Agricultural and 

Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR) costing UA 5.80 million, completed in September 

2012. The project completion report, which was submitted in February 2014, showed satisfactory results 

(score of 3.12 out of 4), in a difficult socio-economic context. PRESAR contributed to the rehabilitation 

of rice farming land and other agricultural community infrastructure, while building administrative 

capacity. The formulation of PDCV-Riz takes into account, to a large extent, lessons drawn from Bank 

projects in Guinea-Bissau, particularly PRESAR, and in the sub-region, while striving to integrate the 

country’s context of fragility, and rectifying some of the weaknesses identified during project 

implementation and highlighted during portfolio reviews and in completion reports. During the last 

review in September 2016, the portfolio’s performance was deemed satisfactory, but efforts will have 

to be made in terms of: (i) availability of studies to improve the quality-at-entry of operations; (ii) timely 

designation of project management teams, including the coordinator and financial management and 

procurement officers; (iii) compliance with the procurement schedule; (iv) systematic establishment of 

performance contracts and annual evaluation of the contracts on an objective basis; and (v) timely 

development of the baseline situation and establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems. It is 

worth noting that even though the current portfolio does not include any problem projects (PPs), two 

projects have suffered considerable implementation delays and may be cancelled pursuant to Directive 

No. 02/2015: (i) the Economic Governance Strengthening Support Project (PARGEF), approved on 1 

July 2015, and the Project to Improve Electricity Service in the City of Bissau (PASEB), approved on 

8 July 2015. 

2.7.2 Therefore, the design of PDCV-Riz took into account: (i) enhancement of the quality-at-entry 

of the project by making feasibility studies available and preparing the first computer-assisted designs 

(CADs); (ii) special focus on the involvement of local actors, in particular producers directly concerned, 



 

9 

through an inclusive participatory process; (iii) involvement of other partners (BOAD, WFP, etc.), to 

ensure coherence, complementarity and synergies in selected activities; (iv) focus on the procurement 

process and methods, relying on an experienced project team that was already in place; and (v) 

indispensable capacity-building needs of the various actors. Taking into account the aforementioned 

strategic guidelines, the project formulation also emphasized certain topics, in particular: (i) food and 

nutrition security; (ii) value chain approach; (iii) employment of young people and women; and (iv) 

resilience to climate change. To ensure good quality-at-entry and to anticipate performance essential to 

the start-up of activities, the initial sites chosen for development were those for which studies were 

available or at an advanced stage (market gardening sites, Contuboel, National Agricultural Research 

Institute (INPA) station, etc.). All these arrangements will help to satisfy the design and implementation 

criteria set out in Presidential Directive No. 002/2015. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation specialist will be responsible for the internal monitoring and evaluation 

of project activities and logical framework indicators, working in liaison with the technical experts (rural 

engineer, food crop specialist and producer organizations). Special emphasis will be placed on the 

targeting of areas that might be monitored and collected internally, and those relating specifically to 

women and young people (data disaggregated for women and young people). The main performance 

indicators that will be monitored from the baseline scenario include: (i) surface area of lowlands and 

mangroves developed with partial control for rice; (ii) surface area of rice-growing areas developed with 

full control; (iii) surface area of market gardening areas developed; (iv) infrastructure developed 

(number of markets commissioned, kilometres of farm roads, number of stores for storage of produce, 

number of input shops, etc.); (v) level of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (vi) 

number of farmers (including women) per type of facility; (vii) number of demonstration units (DUs), 

technological review workshops organized; (viii) number of structured producer organizations and 

management committees established, (ix) growth level of farmers’ income, including those of women 

and young people; (x) number of jobs created for young people and women through entrepreneurial 

initiatives and number of young entrepreneurs who set up operations; (xi) number of producers, 

processors and traders trained and organized; (xii) level of involvement of women in decision-making 

bodies and their rate of access to post-development land; (xiii) number of processing units established 

and allocated (including for women); and (xiv) number of nutrition activities supported and level of 

incidence on food and nutrition security. All indicators selected for the project will be aligned on those 

selected for the PNIA and will help to enhance the performance of the agricultural sector in Guinea-

Bissau. The Bank’s various supervision missions and periodic activity reports will reflect the level of 

achievement of the indicators. 

III Project Feasibility 

 

3.1 Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) CFAF 7,378 million  

IRR (baseline scenario) 14.6% 

ERR (baseline scenario) 17.1% 

 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic analysis was conducted based on cost/benefit of 

additional cash flow from the production models of the two priority sectors (rice and market gardening). 

The following assumptions were used: (i) the period for evaluating the impact of PDCV-Riz is 25 years; 

(ii) the average basic prices, yields and production costs of the 2015/2016 farm year were selected for 

the baseline scenario and realistic projections were made up to the cruising period of the project, taking 

into account the existing potential and the absorptive capacity of beneficiaries; (iii) additional income 

was determined by calculating the difference between the baseline scenario and the with-project 



 

10 

scenario, based on gross proceeds less production costs; (iv) an equal inflation rate was selected for jobs 

and resources on the cash flow table; (v) for the calculation of the economic rate of return, a cost 

correction coefficient was added for factors related to distortions inherent in customs duty. The detailed 

assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, the tables of the operating models (baseline 

scenario and with-project scenario) and financial and economic flows are presented in Annex B7 of 

Volume 2. The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PDCV-Riz is financially and 

economically sustainable. 

3.1.2 Financial performance: The additional income resulting from the different development and 

operating models selected is as follows: (i) mangroves with partial water control (rice): CFAF 555 

000/hectare and CFAF 278 000 per operator; (ii) lowlands with partial water control (rice): FCFA 676 

000/hectare and FCFA 290 000 per operator; (iii) lowlands with full water control (double cropping of 

rice and seeds): CFAF 2 220 000/hectare and CFAF 555 000 per operator; (iv) lowlands with full water 

control (double cropping of rice for final consumption): CFAF 1 376 000/hectare and CFAF 344 000 

per operator; and (v) irrigated market gardening: CFAF 3 415 000/hectare and CFAF 341 000 per 

beneficiary. The additional income generated will help to increase the overall value added of the project 

and hence its contribution to the agricultural GDP. The internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 

14.60%, for an NPV of CFAF 6,974 million. With sensitivity tests established based on a 10% income 

reduction, a 10% cost increase and a 10% simultaneous cost increase and income reduction, the IRR 

comes to 12.3%, 12.5% and 10.3%, respectively. This IRR is relatively satisfactory and will help to 

reduce the poverty rates in the project area.  

3.1.3 Economic performance: The economic rate of return (ERR) stands at 17.1%, for a net present 

value (NPV) of CFAF 7,378 million. In the context of Guinea-Bissau, this amount is significant: by 

comparison, it represented 11.2% of the country’s tax revenue or 1.3% of its GDP in 2014. The 

sensitivity tests established on the same basis as above bring the ERR to 14.6%, 14.8% and 12.5%, 

respectively. The other project economic impacts can be summarized as follows: (i) upstream effects of 

additional income on providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, engineering firms); (ii) downstream 

effects of the generation of additional income on producers, traders and processors, essentially women; 

(iii) decrease in foreign exchange costs owing to the sharp reduction of rice import costs in the trade 

balance; and (iv) the incidence on wealth creation in the country owing to an increase in GDP resulting 

from the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will translate 

into, among other things, better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of child-bearing age 

and the elderly); reduction of medical bills and the difficulty of agricultural tasks, especially those 

performed by women; decrease in the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty; strengthening 

of livelihoods and resilience of the targets of PDCV-Riz in relation to food insecurity and the effects of 

climate change. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The environmental and social impacts of the facilities of PDCV-Riz will not be 

significant. The facilities will be relatively modest and will be built in less environmentally sensitive 

communities. Their dispersion throughout the two regions of Oio and Bafata will also reduce their 

impacts. It is also worth noting that there are no protected areas or reserved forests3 in the project area. 

The main impacts anticipated are quite positive. Appropriate measures will be taken to address the 

potential negative impacts (conflicts between farmers and herders, poor use of pesticides, water-borne 

diseases, etc.). Under the Bank’s Environmental Safeguards Policies, the project was classified in 

Category 2 and was the subject of a strategic environmental assessment, and an environmental and 

social management framework was developed because the sites where the infrastructure will be located 

had not yet been selected. The Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) of Guinea-

Bissau has also classified the project in Category B, the equivalent of the Bank’s Category 2 

                                                 
3 Guinea-Bissau does not have a forest reserve. Its primary forest relics are being gradually replaced by mono-specific cashew farms, considerably 

reducing biodiversity in the two regions.   



 

11 

classification, pursuant to Act No. 10/2010 of 24 September 2010 on environmental assessments. The 

environmental and social management framework as well as its summary were approved by the 

Safeguards Division and published on the Bank’s website on 7 November 2016. 

3.2.2 For the implementation of the environmental aspects of the project, the arrangements made 

with the AAAC include: validation of the environmental and social assessment reports at the national 

level, AAAC’s implication in the environmental screening of sub-projects, validation of impact studies 

related to the sub-projects, and where applicable, oversight of the implementation of mitigation 

measures, as well as environmental monitoring. In this regard, the project will sign a memorandum of 

cooperation with the AAAC for better management of the environmental aspects of the project. The 

budget for future impact studies of sub-projects, implementation of resulting measures, the capacity-

building programme for the administration and the beneficiary population, institutional support for the 

AAAC and environmental monitoring is estimated at slightly more than UA 71 000. The capacity 

building will address directly a constraint identified in the CSP for Guinea-Bissau.  

3.2.3 Climate change: The project was classified a Category 2 project following climate screening 

based on the Bank’s safeguards system against the effects of climate change. This category corresponds 

to projects that may be vulnerable to climate risks and that require a climate risk review and the proposal 

of appropriate adaptation measures to mitigate those risks.  

3.2.4 Main characteristics of the country’s climate: Despite the relative climate stability seen over 

the past few decades, there are still some variability in the country’s climate parameters, in particular 

irregularity in the frequency of rainfall and a worsening of the rainfall deficit in a few regions, notably 

the North and the East. Projections by the Weather Service for 2100 call for an 11.7% decrease in 

rainfall, a 2% increase in temperature and a 50-cm increase in average sea levels. However, rainfall 

surpluses can also be seen from year to year in certain parts of the country, due essentially to exceptional 

climate events attributable, in particular, to global climate disturbances. However, the level of variation 

in rainfall over the past decade remains low. 

3.2.5 Main climate risks in the project area: There is no known history of severe drought in the 

project area. During the rainy season, rice farms may sometimes become flooded in places during 

periods of normal rainfall. This phenomenon is primarily the result of sand silting in the natural canals 

that serve as outlets to the production sites. 

3.2.6 Mitigation measures: To deal with the effects of climate change, the project will adopt the 

measures prescribed by the National Action Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change (PANA) 

following participatory assessments of the country’s vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, 

based on the agricultural sector diagnoses. The PANA offers a set of adaptation measures, most notably 

a significant increase in the level of food security among the people by building the adaptation capacity 

of agricultural production systems, in order to reduce the pressure on forest and fishery resources, while 

improving access to drinking water for human consumption and for cattle. The project fully aligns its 

activities on PANA’s strategic orientations by developing lowlands and horticulture, with a view to 

strengthening the food and nutrition security of the beneficiary population. The project will use a holistic 

approach that is designed to eliminate constraints at all levels of the rice and horticultural value chains. 

More specifically, it will introduce in the horticultural areas solar technology for water control and for 

reducing substantially the use of fossil energies in the dewatering systems.  

3.2.7 For better management of occasional flooding in rice fields, the natural canals of the target 

sites will be drained and resized to allow for the evacuation of any excess flow in the rice-growing 

lowlands concerned. To prevent sanding in rice fields, which is the primary cause of flooding in the 

lowlands, bunds consolidated with soil-fixing plants will be built opposite slopes with strong runoff. At 

the foot of the bunds, evacuators will be created to make it easy for runoff to be drained laterally to 

appropriate deposition areas. Water resources will be better managed with facilities, which will be 

upgraded and equipped with an adequate drainage system. Irrigation will be offered on sites with water 



 

12 

potential that can adequately meet crop water needs. The project will also make it easier for producers 

to acquire certified seeds by putting in place a programme related to the INPA and multiplier 

organizations. It will also introduce reasoned use of fertilizer to improve yields, and hence agricultural 

productivity. The related agricultural infrastructure will be set up and designed with additional measures 

for adapting to climate change, to make them more resilient. 

3.2.8 Involuntary resettlement: The activities of PDCV-Riz will not lead to any resettlement of 

people or restriction of access to goods and means of living. 

3.2.9 Gender: In collaboration with UN-Women, the Bank established a gender profile for Guinea-

Bissau in 2014. The situational analysis shows that, out of a population of 1.7 million people (2014 

estimate), 50.3 % are women. The average number of school enrolment among women is 1.4 and 76.5 

% of women live below the poverty line. This unfavourable situation for women is even more 

pronounced at a time of political instability and weak economic performance in the country. Even 

though more than 80% of women work in the agricultural sector, including in the processing and 

marketing of farm products, access to land, particularly for rice farming, and to factors of production 

remains limited. They are confined to farm work and to processing with rustic implements. In the 

regions targeted by the project, 60% of rice farmers in the lowlands are women. The horticultural areas 

are essentially used by women, who occupy virtually the entire value chain. |For this project, and in 

keeping with its new strategy, the Bank will pay special attention to the strategic interests of women, 

promotion of inclusive growth and improvement of the status of women in the two regions covered.  

3.2.10 The project will give priority to rural activities undertaken by women, for which they have 

recognized expertise (market gardening, lowland rice farming, processing activities, marketing, etc.) 

and from which they can derive an income. The three horticultural areas are essentially reserved for 

women, as is a good portion of lowland rice fields, with land-securing mechanisms that will be 

supported by the project (social assessment, consultation frameworks, licensing, etc.). The increase in 

the purchasing power of beneficiaries (income rising from CFAF 114 000 to 359 000/rice farm and 

from CFAF 37 000 to 373 000/market gardening farm) will enable the 1 720 households concerned, 

particularly the women, to have easier access to basic socio-economic services. The project will apply 

affirmative action in favour of women and vulnerable groups in any area where local practices tend to 

exclude them from decision-making bodies or from certain benefits. In general, the project will ensure 

that women have access to factors of production (developed land, agricultural inputs, production 

equipment and materials), in the organization and management of new infrastructure (stores, markets, 

etc.), as well as access to training. Therefore, it will help to strengthen the economic empowerment and 

decision-making power of women, which will give them greater social visibility and bolster their socio-

economic status. Specifically, the budget allocated specifically to gender promotion activities is UA 

833 000. 

3.2.11 Nutrition: The project will develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality 

of food consumed by the people, especially by women and children, and will collaborate with the World 

Food Programme to develop three school canteens as a pilot. The additional production of rice (2 000 

tonnes) and horticultural products (390 tonnes) will help to improve feeding and nutrition, and hence 

the health of the population. The need to incorporate direct nutrition activities into the project activities 

is essential to have an impact on the nutritional status of the population. Specific and indirect nutrition 

activities of the programme will also help to improve the nutritional status of children and women. The 

setting up of vegetable gardens in some schools with the help of women’s groups will contribute to 

enhancing the food regime within the communities. Activities designed to prevent the resurgence of 

water-borne diseases will also help to improve health and nutrition among the population. 

3.2.12 Social: The different activities undertaken as part of the project (improved access to factors of 

production, technical itineraries for production, processing and marketing) will help considerably in 

ensuring food and nutrition security, and raising income levels. In so doing, they will help to reduce the 

poverty rate considerably. The project will further strengthen connectivity between producers and 



 

13 

markets through partnerships that will be beneficial for all actors of the rice and horticulture value 

chains. Strengthening food security through the developments and raising awareness of good feeding 

practices will help to improve the nutritional status of the population, particularly of vulnerable groups 

such as women of childbearing age and children below the age of five. The rehabilitation of roads, 

construction of storage/conservation stores, rehabilitation of markets and support of processing units 

will contribute to reducing post-harvest losses (expected to decline by at least 20%), make it easier to 

sell products, and therefore increase agricultural production and household income. By making it easier 

for beneficiaries to participate in decision-making processes and to secure land (management of 

community infrastructure, management of conflicts between farmers and herders, maintenance of access 

roads, etc.), the project will also be instrumental in bolstering the local development process and 

promoting good governance.  

3.2.13 The promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women (close to 100 

persons targeted), will help to create a business culture among people proposing projects aimed at 

increasing the income of poor people and creating jobs for young people and women. The development 

of agricultural entrepreneurship will make the rural areas more attractive and create several production 

hubs in the project area, through training of young producers and helping them set up their operations. 

This approach will make it possible to obtain concrete results and ensure that actions are sustainable. 

The project will also make it easier for young promoters to acquire materials, equipment and critical 

inputs (basic kits) based on their business plans and areas of specialization. The training will involve 

basic concepts and specialization modules. There will also be a la carte training, taking into account the 

specific needs identified in the project area  

IV Implementation 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Implementation procedure: The project implementation will hinge on an autonomous 

coordination arrangement, involving a small team based at Bafata and placed under the supervisory 

authority of the MADR, with a liaison office at Bissau. The team will comprise a national coordinator, 

an administrative and financial officer responsible for accounting management, a procurement 

specialist, a monitoring/evaluation officer, a rural engineering expert, an agricultural engineer 

specialized in value chains and a specialist in famer organizations and gender, a liaison officer based in 

Bissau and support staff. Given its experience (proper understanding of Bank procedures, participation 

in formulation, etc.), and good results obtained in the implementation of PRESAR, the PRESAR expert 

team will be responsible for implementing and monitoring PDCV-Riz activities. An order was issued 

by the MADR on 26 October 2016 confirming the team. The experts will all sign a performance 

contract, which will be evaluated annually.  

4.1.2 Considering the weak capacity of State services and actors at the grassroots, NGOs 

(APRODEL and ADPP, which are firmly implanted respectively in Bafata and Oio) will be recruited to 

strengthen the conduct of activities in the areas of leadership, advisory support and training, structuring 

and organization of producers, around value chains. Agreements and protocols will be signed with these 

entities, specifying their respective roles and the expected outcomes. An agreement will also be signed 

with the Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) for the environmental monitoring 

of the project. Furthermore, the project will ensure close involvement of the regional directorates of 

agriculture in Bafata and Oio. Private service providers (contractors, consulting firms, NGOs, individual 

consultants, etc.) will be responsible for the delivery of certain works, goods and services, in accordance 

with the procurement methods defined in the financing agreements. The NGOs known as ADPP and 

APRODEL, which have specific infrastructure and expertise in the project area, will be responsible for 

training, structuring and producer support. The local population will take part in certain labour-intensive 

works (ring dykes, live hedges and routine maintenance) under the supervision of specialized NGOs 

and with the support of the Directorate-General of Forestry and Wildlife. 



 

14 

4.1.3 Supervision of activities: A Steering Committee will be set up, chaired by the Minister in 

charge of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR), or his/her designated 

representative. The Committee's secretarial services will be provided by the Project Coordinator. In 

addition to the relevant MADR technical departments, the Steering Committee will comprise: the 

Directorate-General for Planning, the Ministry of Infrastructure, the Secretariat of State for the 

Environment, the Ministry in charge of Women and Youth, ANAG and QNCOCPA. Its functions will 

include: (i) monitoring the project implementation; (ii) ensuring coherence and planning of eligible 

activities; (iii) conducting an annual review of the progress report, and approving the annual technical 

programme and budget; (iv) evaluating the project impacts and outcomes; (v) identifying constraints to 

and opportunities for the improvement of project impacts; and (vi) ensuring technical and 

methodological compliance with project objectives, the objectives of the Terra Ranka PSO and relevant 

sector policies, including the PNIA and the Rice Development Strategy. The Steering Committee will 

meet twice a year to review the project outcomes, validate the financial statements, discuss the 

programmes and approve the budgets related thereto. 

4.1.4 Procurement: The procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and 

consultancy services financed by the Bank for the project will be carried out in accordance with the 

Procurement Framework for Operations Financed by the Bank Group, October 2015, and in accordance 

with the provisions set out in the financing agreements. However, although progress has been made to 

forge public procurement in Guinea-Bissau into a functional system, substantial progress remains to be 

made, notably in the regulatory and management frameworks, internal and external oversight, the 

complaints mechanism, building the capacity of all actors in public procurement, and putting in place 

mechanisms for the coherent and effective operationalization of the various bodies involved in the 

process (ANAP, DGCP and ARCP). Risk assessment was carried out at the country, sector and project 

levels and the procurement capacity of the executing agency evaluated. The outcomes (substantial risks 

for the most part) helped to guide the selection of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third 

Party) used for specific activities or for a set of similar activities under the project. Therefore, the Bank's 

Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPMPs) based on the relevant standard competitive bidding 

documents (SCBDs) will be used for the procurement of goods, works and consultancy services. 

Appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA Action Plan provided in 

paragraph B.5.2 of Annex B5, Volume 2.  

4.1.5 Financial management: Given that the public management system in force in the MADR was 

deemed unsatisfactory upon assessment, a parallel accounting system based on the SYSCOHADA 

accrual accounting method will be set up and managed by a PMU officer responsible for the 

administrative, financial and accounting management of the project. The PMU of PDCV-Riz will 

comprise, in addition to the other experts, an Administrative and Financial Officer (AFO) who will have 

at his/her disposal the management tools that were procured under PRESAR. These tools, comprising 

the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and the accounting management 

software package, will be updated and adapted to the new project prior to its start-up and the staff trained 

in the use of such tools. The AFO will produce quarterly financial monitoring reports providing details 

on the implementation of activities and the use of the financial resources of the project, and an annual 

financial statements consisting of the balance sheet, table of supply and use, status of the capital assets 

and notes to the financial statements to which the reconciliation statement of the special account will be 

annexed. The satisfactory experience acquired by the Project Management Unit of the Bank-financed 

PRESAR project warrants the maintenance of the same financial management staff since they have the 

requisite qualifications. Training on Bank financial management requirements will be provided by Bank 

experts at project launch. 

4.1.6 Disbursements: The financial implementation of the project will mainly involve the 

reimbursement, special account and direct payment methods. An account will be opened with a 

commercial bank acceptable to the Bank to receive part of the ADF loan resources and will be used to 

finance operating expenses. Opening of this account will be a condition precedent to first disbursement. 



 

15 

This special account will be used for an initial advance whose amount will be determined based on the 

estimated budget for six months of project activities. The special account will be replenished on the 

same basis after the borrower must have justified the use of at least 50% of the amount of the previous 

advance. The direct payment method will be used for expenses relating to goods, services and works 

contracts. Training in Bank disbursement rules and procedures will be provided at the project launch. 

4.1.7 Audits: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to African Development Fund 

financing agreements, the country shall account for the use of the resources that it will be allocated. 

Therefore, an independent and competent external audit firm will verify once a year the reliability of 

the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the project management team, and will assess 

the functioning of the internal oversight system of the entire project. The audit firm will be recruited 

according the Bank’s terms of reference and following a competitive bidding procedure recommended 

by the Bank. The terms of reference shall be subject to the Bank’s prior approval. The continuation of 

audit services during the last two years will be contingent on the Bank's validation of the audit report 

for the first year. The audit expenses will be financed with ADF resources. Audit reports will be 

forwarded to the Bank on an annual basis latest six months following the close of the audited fiscal year. 

4.2 Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The project's monitoring and evaluation system will be designed in 

relation to the activities selected and the expected outputs and outcomes contained in the logical 

framework of the project. The system will be participatory and will provide regular information on 

performance and impact indicators as well as on the implementation of planned activities. The project 

partners will be systematically involved in the data collection and monitoring effort. A baseline situation 

will be established, based on the final hydro-agricultural sites selected. The monitoring and evaluation 

framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to make the outcomes concerning 

women, youths and the most vulnerable groups more visible. Targeted surveys will also be conducted 

to better understand issues relating to income, food security, nutrition, job creation, gender 

mainstreaming, and aspects related to vulnerability and resilience. The information collected will be fed 

into the computerized monitoring and evaluation system to capture actual values and gauge the impacts 

and outcomes of the project. This information will be recorded in periodic progress reports, highlighting 

the level of progress of the project and the achievement of outcomes. External monitoring and evaluation 

missions involving the relevant sector departments and GAPLA will also be organized regularly by the 

Government, in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the African Development 

Bank with the support of its Dakar Office.  

  



 

16 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule: 

 

Activities  Date/ Period   Responsible Entity 

Preparation May-August 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of the ESMF September 2016  AfDB 

Evaluation 1st half October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of priority PDs and CBDs 4th quarter 2016/1st half 2017  PMU 

Appointment of PMU 26 October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

PDCV-Riz negotiation 21 November 2016  Govt./AfDB 

Board of Directors 14 December 2016  AfDB 

Signing of the financing agreement January 2017  AfDB/Govt. 

Effectiveness of the first disbursement February-March 2017  Govt./AfDB 

Launching of PDCV-Riz end of 1st quarter 2017  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Signing of agreements with partners 1st half of 2017  PMU/Partners/ST 

Preparation of remaining PDs and CBDs 2017 to 1st half 2018  PMU/MAEP 

Works implementation and service delivery 2017 to 2019  Contractors/Firms/PMU 

Implementation of operational activities 2017 to 2020  PMU/Govt./Sce. Providers  

Mid-term review 1st quarter 2019  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Project completion date 31 December 2020  PMU/GVT/AfDB 

Completion report 2nd quarter 2021  AfDB/Govt. 

 

4.3 Governance 

4.3.1 Indicators relating to political, economic and social governance remain mixed in Guinea-

Bissau, despite the progress made in recent years. As regards political governance, it is necessary to 

find lasting resolutions to possible conflicts and establish mechanisms for ensuring justice. Indeed, in 

2016, the country was ranked 44th out of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim African Governance Index 

(and particularly 43rd in the rule of law sub-indicator). In the area of economic governance, particularly 

in public financial management, the country’s performance has deteriorated as a result of the crisis and 

the capacity to mobilize domestic resources remains weak, as noted in the Bank’s analysis on the 

governance of projects approved in 2015 and in the CPIA scores for 2016 (Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment).   

4.3.2 As part of PDCV-Riz implementation, and in an effort to mitigate the risks inherent in the 

weaknesses and instability of the administration and improve the project quality-at-entry, it was decided 

to maintain the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Agricultural and Rural Sectors Rehabilitation 

Project (PRESAR), since this PMU was already conversant with Bank procedures, and to capitalize on 

existing implementation studies, particularly those relating BOAD and PESAR capitalization. 

Moreover, although progress has been achieved in aligning the procurement system on WAEMU 

guidelines, the bureaucracy characterizing the procurement system is still one of the main challenges in 

the implementation of development programmes. Regarding procurement, operational arrangements 

were adopted to address the weaknesses observed.   

4.4 Sustainability  

Rudimentary facilities often have a limited lifespan and require major rehabilitation from time to time, 

which may exceed the capacity of beneficiaries, including women, who are heavily involved in rice 

farming. In this respect, the project will pay special attention to the quality and sustainability of the 

facilities that will be put in place. Structuring works will be carried out based on detailed technical 

studies and will involve specialized enterprises or skilled jobbers. That will concern works on large-

scale retention, anti-salt or protection dykes, major drainage ditches and irrigation canals, spillways, 

certain levelling works, etc. Labour-intensive techniques will be reserved only for certain secondary 

developments that can be reasonably carried out by the people, such as routine maintenance of facilities 

that been built already. On the other hand, the facilities enhance the people's adaptive capacity and 

resilience to recurrent climate risks, and reduce the economic vulnerability of beneficiaries. The high 

motivation of the beneficiaries observed during field missions is a factor that guarantees their 



 

17 

participation in all maintenance activities and works, and consequently the sustainability of the facilities. 

Other factors that will contribute to the sustainability of the project include secure tenure rights over the 

land where the project is located, support for the organization of beneficiaries and adoption of 

management tools to ensure the proper maintenance and the settlement of the recurrent costs of 

infrastructure (irrigation schemes, markets, stores, farm-to-market roads, etc.), and enhancement of the 

organization of producers. In addition, activities under the component for the promotion of rural 

entrepreneurship, processing and market access are sources that will generate value added and create 

wealth, which are factors of ownership of project achievements by the direct beneficiaries.   

4.5 Risk Management  

Political instability, coupled with a difficult economic situation, poses a real risk to the implementation 

of this project, and other portfolio operations. The weak capacity of the technical services involved, lack 

of familiarity with the procedures and the cumbersome procurement process, weak ownership of project 

achievements by beneficiaries and risks of conflicts between farmers and transhumant stockbreeders 

could adversely impact adherence to the project implementation schedule and the achievement of 

outcomes. However, these risks will be minimized by the fact that: (i) the development of the 

infrastructure needed to improve socio-economic and environmental resilience will lay the groundwork 

for inclusive growth and improved stability; (ii) the project team (formerly the PRESAR team) is already 

familiar with Bank procedures; (iii) the involvement of technical services and beneficiaries in the 

preparation of PDCV-Riz and the selection of sites, land tenure security measures, and the structuring 

and training of management and maintenance committees involving women, will lead to better 

performance and ownership. Through its second component, PDCV-Riz will scale up the support 

provided to communities in order to guarantee the sustainability and durability of investments, on an 

economically and socially viable basis.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PDCV-Riz operations that will lead to better management and knowledge development may be 

summarized as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in the area of local community resilience 

and adaptability to the recurrent impacts of climate change, through hydro-agricultural works and better 

control of water resources; (ii) dissemination of new production and processing technologies: 

development of expertise in drip irrigation techniques by setting up a demonstration site at the Bissora 

ADPP location, dissemination of solar dryers and onion storage sheds, and promotion of mechanization; 

(iii) establishment of demonstration units and dissemination of best practice: integrated soil fertility 

management (ISFM), sustainable land management (SLM), integrated water resource management 

(IWRM) and integrated pest and production management (IPPM) will help to protect and preserve 

resources, and mitigate the vulnerability of soil resources; (iv) organization of production and 

transformation technology review workshops and exchange visits as tools for encouraging interaction 

between researchers, consultants and producers in an effort to adapt technologies to the local context; 

(v) conduct of awareness and information campaigns through various communication channels 

(community radios, media programmes, websites, films, etc.); and (vi) promotion of innovative youth 

and women's employability actions in conjunction with ADPP, and activities to enhance the resilience 

of vulnerable groups to food and nutrition insecurity.   

V Legal Framework  

 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a Protocol Agreement and a Loan Agreement signed between 

the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. 

 

 



 

18 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

5.2.1 The legal framework of the project will be an ADF Loan Agreement and an ADF Grant 

Protocol between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. The agreements thus signed, to the 

satisfaction of the two parties in both form and substance, will include the terms and conditions of use. 

The effectiveness of the ADF Loan Agreement will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the 

conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan and Guarantee 

Agreements of the Bank (ratification of the Loan Agreement and legal opinion). The ADF Grant 

Protocol will be effective from the date of its signature.  

5.2.2 In addition to the effectiveness of the two financing agreements, the first disbursement of the 

ADF loan and grant will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower/Donee, to the satisfaction of the 

Fund, of the following single condition: 

(i) Provide evidence of opening of an account, in the project's name, with a commercial 
bank acceptable to the Fund to receive part of the ADF loan resources, and including full 

bank references of the account. 

5.2.3 Regarding other terms and conditions, the Borrower/Donee will further transmit, to the 

satisfaction of the Fund, at the latest six months after the first disbursement: 

(i) The agreements signed with APRODEL and ADPP (both NGOs), which must have been 
previously submitted to the Bank for approval. 

(ii) The project's administrative, accounting and financial management procedures manual. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The project will be implemented within the 

framework of the Bank's intervention strategy in Guinea-Bissau, as defined in the CSP 2015-2019. 

VI Recommendation 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to award an 

ADF grant of UA 0.493 million and extend an ADF loan of UA 3.722 million to the Republic of Guinea-

Bissau, for the purpose and according to the terms and conditions set out in this report. 

 



























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

MULTINATIONAL (SOMALIA /SUDAN) 

RURAL LIVELIHOODS’ ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN 

THE HORN OF AFRICA II (RLACC II) 

 

 

 

 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 
Grant Information 

Client’s Information 

GRANT RECIPIENT Republic of Sudan and Federal Republic of Somalia 

EXECUTING AGENGIES 

Sudan Project:  Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment 

Somalia Project: Intergovernmental Authority on Development 

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (USD) Amount (UA) Percentage Instrument 

GEF Focal Area: 

Climate Change 

Adaptation 

17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

Sudan 7,082,407 4,997,006 41% GEF Grant 

Somalia 9,985,185 7,045,067 59% GEF Grant 

Total Cost 17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

 

Important Financial Information 

Grant Currency USD 

Type of Interest N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee N/A 

Service Charge N.A 

Tenor N/A 

Grace Period N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 17%, NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 millions 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 millions 

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

CEO Approval by the GEF 
Somalia: December, 2016 

Sudan: March 2017 

Project Approval by ADB November, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion January 2021 

Last Disbursement April 2021 

Closing date June 2021 

  



 

iii 
 

Program summary 

Overview. The Rural Livelihood’s Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of Africa – Phase II 

(RLACC II) project is a multinational program that covers Somalia and Sudan. The program activities 

are country-driven and will be implemented through two Projects respectively in Sudan and Somalia. 

- The Sudan component targets the States of White Nile, Gedaref and Kassala, for a total cost of 

USD 7,082,407; 

- The Somalia component targets Somaliland (Awal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and 

Salawley-Cheikh Hared), Puntland (Bari and Nugaal region), and South Central Somalia 

(Galguduud and Hiraan States), for a total of USD 9,985,185. 

Project Outcomes. The project is expected to improve the resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to climate change in the two countries  through: (i) introducing adaptation strategies to 

reduce the negative impacts of climate change and strengthen the capacity of pastoral/agro-pastoral 

households to cope with climatic hazards, (ii) enhancing the capacity of communities to not only absorb 

shocks, but to also effectively adapt their livelihoods to harsher climatic conditions, (iii) helping pastoral 

and agro-pastoral households manage drought risks, (iv) supporting community-led initiatives to protect, 

conserve and restore natural resources in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner, (v) strengthening 

the participation of pastoral communities in planning and implementing activities pertaining to their 

development. 

Although the RLACC II program targets specific villages or regions, an important criterion for the 

selection of targeted sites was their position in the target countries’ migration flows. Due to the seasonal 

migratory nature of pastoralists, the project’s benefits will not be limited to the project sites and their 

surroundings.  

Needs Assessment. Vulnerabilities and risks for the HoA have been assessed with the AR-5 (IPCC) and 

through Bank commissioned regional studies (Sustainable livestock Development in the HoA, 

Assessment and Management of Transboundary Water Resources in the IGAD, etc.). Various needs 

have also been identified through meeting and workshops with government officials and various 

stakeholders. 

Based on these assessments, the AfDB set in place a regional program called “Drought Resilience and 

Sustainable Livelihood Program” (DRSLP) which is currently being implemented to address drought 

and livelihood issues in the rural areas of the HoA. The proposed RLACC (II) program will be 

implemented to compliment the DRSLP.  

Bank’s Added Value. The Bank has significant experience in implementing multinational and regional 

operations, and is already implementing a set of programs covering various countries of greater Horn of 

Africa (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Djibouti, South-Sudan and Sudan) and addressing issues 

with significant trans-boundary implications, notably, the DRSLP which is being implemented in 

successional phases 1, 2, 3, and 4). Furthermore, the Bank is experienced in implementing GEF projects 

in general and GEF climate change adaptation operations in particular. 

Lessons learnt from the Bank’s involvement in these countries were incorporated in the design of the 

current program. The Bank also brings into the programming a fragility lens approach, which makes the 

design, implementation and review of projects more sensitive to the drivers of fragility with the goal of 

building resilience in countries and communities.  



 

iv 
 

Knowledge Management. Knowledge management approach for the project focuses on learning from 

other relevant projects / programs and initiatives, and planning for the project to assess, document and 

share these experiences and expertise with relevant stakeholders. Different knowledge management 

activities will thus be implemented through the RLACC II projects  

The program will also work in close collaboration, and share its best practices and lessons learned, with 

all co-financing projects, as well as other GEF financed initiatives and other projects implemented by 

the Bank and in the region. 

At the regional level, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) will be in charge of 

sharing knowledge product elaborated by the RLACC II and RLACC I at the regional level to foster 

knowledge sharing and utilization. PIUs, which carry out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s 

activities, will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information at the countries levels 

through the IGAD platform. At the regional level, this should result in dynamic and structured flows of 

information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC programs in the HoA. 

  



 

v 
 

Results-based logical framework 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

Im
p

a
c
t 

Contribute to the 

reduction of drought 
induced food 

insecurity through the 
implementation of 

adaptive measures to 

climate change in of 
the  targeted rural 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral communities  

Number of food 

insecure households 
and malnutrition 

rates 

Around 9 

million people 
are food 

insecure and 
the 

malnutrition 

rate is over 
25 % in both 

countries 

Reduce by at 

least 20% the 
number of food 

insecure 
households by 

at least 5% 

malnutrition 
rates. 

National survey 

and  reports 

 

 

Assumption: 
Governments 
continuous 

commitment to 

managing drought 

and building 

resilience 

 

O
u

tc
o

m
e
s 

1.1. Climate change-

related adaptation 

measures are 
integrated into 

development plans of 

targeted local 
communities 

 

Number of 
development plan 

that has at least one 

climate-change 
adaptation measures 

integrated and an 

indicative budget 
for its 

implementation by 

the end of the 
project.  

 

 

1.1.3. None of 
the 

development 

plans at the 
country level 

include at least 

one explicit 
adaptation 

measure and an 

indicative 
budget for its 

implementation 

 

1.1.3. At least 3 
pilot 

development 

plans in each 
country include 

at least one 

adaptation 
measure and an 

indicative 

provision for its 
implementation 

 

 

Government and 

community  

planning 
documents 

 

Risk: Lack or 
insufficient 

ownership of the 

project activities by 
the communities 

 

Mitigation: Early 
and sustained 

sensitization on the 

need for 
communities to 

engage in building 

resilience. 
 

 

 
Risk: Insufficient 

human and 
institutional 

capacities  

 
Mitigation: The 

programme will 

have capacity 
building activities 

in both countries 

 
 

 

Risk: A series of 
years without major 

climate events 

could weaken the 
interest of decision-

makers to address 

climate-sensitive 
initiative and 

investments 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
national and local 

decision-makers to 

the impact of CC 
and measures to 

increase the 

resilience at the 
local level with a 

long-term vision. 

 
 

2.1. Adaptation 

practices are 
developed and 

implemented to 

respond to specific 
climate-change 

induced stress in the 

livestock sector in 
ASALs ecosystems.  

 

Number of 

people/households 

adopting newly 
introduced 

adaptation practices 

that build their 
resilience in the 

face of  CC like 

strengthen women’s 
access to resources 

for sustainable food 

production, 
renewable energy, 

and clean water 

sources 

integration of 

livestock 
agriculture is 

the major 

adaptation 
practice  

 

≥ 4,000 

households 
(≥50% are 

women led) 

project survey, 

Assessment 
Report 

 

2.2. Vulnerabilities to 

climate change 
hazards are reduced 

for targeted pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 
communities 

 

Sources of income 

through 

diversification with 
number and 

percentage of jobs 

(person-days) 
generated by the 

project for women 

and men 

One major 

source of 
income 

 

At least 50% of 

people 

diversified their 
incomes with at 

least two major 

sources of 
income 

≥ 4,000 

households 

Field visit reports 
and project report 

3.1. Project 
coordination, 

Knowledge 

management and 
M&E are well 

implemented and 
coordinated  

Degree of execution 
of the project M&E 

Plan by the 

project’s end 

N/A 

The M&E plan 

is fully 

developed and 
executed in a 

timely manner 

M&E documents, 

PIRs, APRs, 
AWPs 

 O
u

tp
u

ts
 

1.1.1. Sensitization, 

awareness and 

information on climate 
change increased 

among local 

stakeholders 
 

1.1.1. % of men and 

women in project 

sites declaring to 
know what CC is 

and how it affects 

them in project sites. 
 

1.1.1. Lack of 

awareness on 

climate change 
adaptation 

techniques in 

the rural sector 
 

1.1.1. ≥ 60% of 

the people in 

project zones 
(≥40% are 

women)  

declare to know 
what climate 

1.1.1. project 

surveys 

 
 

 

 
 



 

vi 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. National sub-

national, and local 
government officials 

are trained on climate 

change resilience and 
their operational 

capacities are 

strengthened 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. Workshops are 
organized at national, 

state and local levels 

to draw lessons from 
project activities and 

mainstream them into 

development policies 
and strategic 

framework that 

increase adaptive 
capacity.  

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2 Number of 

decision makers and 
planners (men and 

women) trained on 

the integration of 
climate change 

adaptation tools and 

methods (water 
harvesting 

technologies, water 

resources 
management, 

farming methods 

and drought 
resistant varieties, 

alternative income 

generating 
activities) in their 

plans by the end of 

the project 
 

1.1.2. Availability 

of tools and 
methods for the 

integration of CC  

into local 
development plans 

by the end of the 

project, and the 
number of people 

using them 

(disaggregated by 
gender) 

 

1.1.3. Number of 
workshops, study 

tours and meetings 

held where lesson 
from the project 

were discussed by 

the end of the 
project (with 30% 

of women 

benefiting) 
 

1.1.3. Number of 

community-based 
agreements and 

adaptation plans 

that have input from 
both women and 

men, engaging in 
national debate and 

analysis of 

environmental 
impacts, and 

climate change 

policy, regulatory 
frameworks, and 

programs, 

 

 
 

 
 

0 person trained 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. Tools and 

methods are not 
available 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 

change is and 

how it affects 
them in project 

sites  
 

At least 2,440 

people trained 
(≥40% women) 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. ≥ 3 tools 

or methods, 
used by ≥ 1,500 

people (≥40% 

are women) in 
the two 

councils. 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3.  ≥ 8 
workshops, 

study tours and 

meetings 
organized to 

discuss project 

lessons in the 
project areas 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. At least 5 
community-

based 

agreements and 
adaptation 

plans by project 
site, with a 

women 

participation of 
about 40 % 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. training 

reports, project 
reports 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
Project 

implementation 

progress reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. 
Development 

framework, 

policies, plans and 
programs.  

 

 
Risk: Livestock-

related investments 
cost may become 

high given the low 

population density 
and the pastoral 

seasonal mobility 

 
Mitigation: The 

siting of 

infrastructure will 
be planned along 

the corridors so that 

it also caters for the 
needs of the 

transhumant 

pastoralists. 
 

 

 
Risk: Poor 

coordination and 

cooperation among 
key national 

institutions dealing 

with pastoralist 
issues 

 

Mitigation: 
Training and 

coordination of 

stakeholders on this 
issue 

 

 
 

 

Risk: inadequate 
acknowledgement 

of the role of civil 

society and CBOs 
by national and 

local governments. 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
officials on the 

importance of non-

governmental 
organizations 

during the project 

implementation and 
ultimately in the 

resilience-building 
process. 

 

 
 

 

Risk: conflicts 

between pastoralists 

and sedentary 



 

vii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

disaggregated by 

gender 
farmers as well as 

between different 
pastoral groups 

 
Mitigation: 

promotion of 

dialogue and 
conflict resolution 

mechanisms at 

various levels to 
broaden perspective 

and visions. 

2.1.1. Innovative 

adaptive techniques 

are implemented in 
order to ensure that 

pastoral infrastructure 

is climate resilient 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Specific 

adaptive activities and 

measures are adopted 
to ensure that pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities are 
climate-resilient 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Diversification 

of income-generating 

adaptive activities in 

order to lessen 
targeted pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities’ 

vulnerabilities. 

 
2.2.2. Development 

and strengthening of 

the supply chain for 
new income-

generating activities in 

target pastoral and 
agro-pastoral 

communities  

2.1.1. % of 

pastoralists 

benefiting from 
climate change 

compatible 

irrigation, water 

harvesting methods 

and agricultural 

practices 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
2.1.2. % of people 

who have adopted 

community-based 
adaptive activities 

in the context of 

climate-change 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
 

 

2.2.1. % of increase 

in household 

incomes as a result 

of project 
implemented 

adaptation measures 
disaggregated by 

gender 

 
2.2.2. Change in 

wellbeing of 

participating 
households in 

project activities 

(access to water, 
access to market, 

access to improved 

agro-pastoral 
technologies,…) 

  

2.2.2. Number of 
women with access 

to land and credit 

opportunities, smart 
seeds and crops as 

well as  

equipment 

2.1.1. N/A 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Lack of 

community-

based adaptive 
activities 

tackling 

climate change 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. N/A 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. N/A  

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2.N/A 

2.1.1. At least 

50% of target 

areas supplied 
in drinkable 

water and 

irrigation 

agriculture (at 

least 30% 

benefiting are 
women) 

 

 
2.1.2. 50% of 

the pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities 

adopting 

community-
based adaptive 

activities (at 

least 30% are 
women)   

 

2.2.1. 30% 

increase 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. ≥ 4,000 

households 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2. At least 
40 % of 

beneficiaries 

are women  

2.1.1. Survey 

Reports, Project 

Reports 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Project 

Reports and 

Meetings 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Project 

progress reports 

and supervision 

missions reports  
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. Field Visit 

Reports and 

Project Reports 

3.1.1. Knowledge 
products generated at 

national and regional 
level are attained 

 

3.1.2. Timely efficient 
and cost-effective 

project 

implementation and 
M&E systems set up 

and implemented  

3.1.1. Number of 
knowledge products 

developed by the 
project 

 

3.1.2. 
Implementation 

progress of project 

activities and the 
M&E system  

 

 
 

3.1.1. N/A 
 

 
 

 

3.1.2. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

3.1.1. ≥ 5 
knowledge 

products are 
developed 

 

3.1.2. 4 annual 
PIRs and 12 

quarterly 

progress 
reports, 1 Mid-

Term Review, 

1 Completion 
report 

3.1.1. knowledge 
products 

 
 

 

3.1.2. Project 
progress reports 

and M&E 

documents  

  



 

viii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

3.1.2 The generated 

data from the 
RLACC II M&E 

system is fed into 
the overall Drought 

resilience M&E 

framework for the 
HoA 

3.1.2 N/A At least one 

annual update 
of the Drought 

resilience M&E 
system is sent 

by the RLACC 

II.  

 

Components Costs (USD) 

1. Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience of 

their livelihoods to climate change in target areas  
  1,859,515 

2. Improving the sustainability of pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihoods  11,269,034 

3. Project management knowledge and M&E activities    1,801,058 

 Contingencies   2,137,986 

 Total (GEF grant) 17,067,592 
  



 

ix 
 

RLACC II Program Time Frame 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

INITIAL ACTIVITIES                      

Appraisal                      

Loan and Grant negociation and approval                     

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                     

Publication of the General Procurement Notice                     

Recruitment of project staff                     

Project Launching                     

Participatory confirmation and prioritisation of activities with communities                       

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs                     

Signature of agreements with partner entities                     

IMPROVIG ADAPTIVE CAPACITY AND THE RESILIENCE OF LIVELIHOODS TO CC                     

 Training of staff and stakeholders in the project’s various thematic areas                     

Workshops organized for mainstreaming of CC in policies and strategic frameworks at sub-national, national levels                     

IMPROVE THE SUSTAINABILITY OF PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL LIVELIHOODS                     

Meetings related to the adoption of adaptive activities and mesures to ensure targeted communities’ climate resilience                     

Infrastructure rehabilitation and construction                     

Diversification of communities’ economic activities and improvement of their access to markets                     

Introduction of SLM & other activities (pilot farms, distribution of drought-tolerant seeds, etc.) in agriculture & forestry 

sectors 

    
            

    

KNOWLEDGE AND M&E ACTIVITIES                     

Listing of adopters and information during filed visit                     

Field Visit Report                     

Mid-Term Report                     

Project Completion Report                     



 

1 
 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1 Programme linkages with countries and Horn of Africa (HoA) strategies and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The program is consistent with the principles of key regional initiative, policies and projects adopted 

by the governments of the participating countries, namely: (i) The Inter-Governmental Authority on 

Development (IGAD) Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI)”; (ii) Regional 

Programming Paper (RPP, 2013) “To End Drought emergencies in The Horn of Africa” (2012); (iii) the new 

Sendai Framework for DRM (2015–2030), which contains the collective commitment of governments and the 

United Nations to work towards reducing societal vulnerability to disasters generally and stop drought in 

particular. The program also fits in the Bank’s new Regional Integration Strategy and Policy Paper (2014-

2023), the Bank’s Ten year Strategy (2013-22), the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building 

Resilience in Africa (2014-19), and the recent High 5s vision of the Bank. At the national level, the RLACC 

program is in line with the participating countries strategies and priorities. Additional details on the strategic 

fit of RLACC in each country are given in the individual countries’ PARs. 

 

1.1.2 The program is fully aligned with National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) for Sudan and 

Somalia respectively approved in 2007 and 2013. In Sudan, the NAPA emphasizes the rural dimension of 

poverty in Sudan and focuses on three sectors: agriculture, water resources, and public health. By focusing on 

a wide range of interdependent technologies and methods such as the introduction of solar energy for 

communal services, e.g. for water pumping purposes, new irrigation methods for agriculture, rangeland 

rehabilitation and the introduction of veterinary services, the program fully reflects the priorities laid out in 

Sudan’s 2007 NAPA and strategic frameworks included in the revised Sudan National Adaptation Plan (2014).  

 

1.1.3 In Somalia, the NAPA has identified the urgent and immediate activities to address potential negative 

impacts of climate variability and climate change on people and their livelihoods within the context of recurrent 

famine crises and the national priorities over peace-building and economic recovery. Thus, the NAPA 

identifies the following sectors as vulnerable to climate change: water resources, agriculture and food security, 

animal husbandry, grazing and range-lands, health, marine and coastal resources, biodiversity and natural 

disasters. In that framework, the activities in Somalia within this program will focus on supporting pastoralist 

livelihoods and will therefore have a specific emphasis on livestock management, water and land resources 

management. 

 

1.1.4 In addition, both countries Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC) to the 21st Conference 

of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), published in 

November 2015, acknowledges that climatic as well as non-climatic factors such as ecosystems degradation, 

complex disasters and conflicts, limited access to capital, market infrastructure and technology, unsustainable 

management of natural resources, and socio-economic factors such as poverty, lack of income diversity, 

unequal distribution of income, urbanization, population growth, have all weakened people’s ability to adapt 

to changes in climate. These factors are well taken into account by the proposed activities under this program 

in order to build resilience to climate change in Somalia and Sudan.  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 
 

1.2.1 Incidences of climate change (CC) in the Horn of Africa (HoA), as assessed in the AR-5 published by 

the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2014) are: rising temperatures, rainfall 

variability, drought, desertification, deforestation and land degradation, floods and other extreme weather 

events (extreme precipitations, stronger El Niño, etc.)  Additionally, pastoral livelihoods in the ASALs of the 

HoA have been negatively affected by political marginalization, social exclusion, lack of good governance at 

all institutional levels, imbalanced power relations between the state and civil society, and gender inequality. 

These phenomena are the cradle for increasing vulnerability of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral communities 

in the region that rely the most on the environment for their livelihood. The resulting environmental migration 

is in turn causing, among others, competition for natural resources, ethnic tensions, and distrust between the 

original area of migration and the receiving areas. As both Somalia’s and Sudan’s resources are scarce, both 



 

2 
 

countries are prone to such kinds of conflicts. Consequently, taking into account the weight of the pastoralist 

activities and populations, increasing their resilience to climate change represents a vital issue for the HoA 

countries’ stability, economic recovery and future prospects.  

 

1.2.2 The proposed GEF funded project’s focus on climate change adaptation in the rural sector in Somalia 

and Sudan fills a vital missing gap in the pastoralist and agro-pastoralist sub-sectors in both countries which is 

not fully covered by DRSSLP and other partners and is urgently needed to support economic diversification 

in the context of climate change. Multiple feedback loops between severe drought occurrence and vulnerable 

livelihoods due to water scarcity and grasslands farming have led to competition over natural resources access 

between drought displaced households and transhumant pastoralists.  

 

1.2.3 As one of the most important multilateral institutions acting in Africa, the AfDB has an extensive 

experience in supporting and financing community based initiatives and projects in the continent. Investing in 

areas like agriculture, natural resources management and improving livelihoods are crucial for reducing 

poverty and vulnerability to climate change. The Strengthening of Climate Resilience in the Kafue Sub-Basin, 

in Zambia, or the Carla Climate Adaptation for Rural Livelihoods and Agriculture in Malawi are two of the 

many examples of projects financed by the Bank and designed to respond to the climate change effects, reduce 

poverty and enhance food security in some of the most vulnerable communities in the continent. The success 

of these projects shows the Bank’s competency and commitment to implementing climate change adaptation 

measures in the region, including the respective INDCs from the Paris agreement. Therefore, the Bank will 

continue playing a lead role in supporting the governments of both countries in achieving their objectives and 

implementing important measures to fight climate change effects and reduce poverty in Sudan and Somalia. 

 

1.2.4 The Multinational (Sudan and Somalia) rural livelihoods’ adaptation to climate change in the Horn of 

Africa – Phase II (RLACC II) is in alignment with the Bank’s priorities and strategies, which includes bringing 

growth that is not only environmentally sustainable, but also empowering. Indeed, the Bank’s Climate Change 

Action Plan to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa is one 

of the actions aligned with the project.  

 

1.2.5  The Project is fully aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core areas of 

infrastructure and also to one area of special emphasis namely agriculture. The project also contributes to the 

High-5 priorities (2016-2025), namely the Feed Africa and Improve the Lives of Africans priorities. It will 

introduce climate-resilient water harvesting technologies, promote conservative agriculture practices, provide 

capacity building and training on sustainable resources management, and reduce food insecurity risk by 

diversifying the pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihood base of target communities. Moreover, the Project will 

improve rural people participation along the livestock value chain starting from production and processing to 

marketing. The project will thus promote both immediate and longer-term climate-resilient initiatives into 

pastoral livelihoods in arid and semi-arid areas (ASALs) of Sudan and Somalia while ensuring inclusiveness 

of rural men, women and youth as direct beneficiaries. The RLACC I and II activities complement those of 

the recently approved ‘Short Term Regional Emergency Response Project’ (STRERP). 

 

1.2.6 Given its focus on climate change adaptation, the project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate 

Change Action Plan 2 (CCAP2) and in particular with its pillar 1 “Boosting Adaptation and Climate-resilient 

Development in Africa”. As highlighted in the CCAP2, this project by focusing on resilient infrastructures and 

climate adaptation measures, demonstrates the Bank’s effort to leverage its internal resources to strengthen the 

adaptive capacities of countries by supporting the diversification of local economies. Indeed, building on the 

AfDB funded DSRLP, the GEF funding is mobilized by the Bank to build resilience in both countries in the 

agricultural and pastoral sub-sectors. 

  

1.2.7 Finally, the project addresses the programs identified under the Bank’s Somalia Country Brief (CB) 

(2017-2020) and well aligned with its objective to “Build longer term resilience in Somalia, through targeted 

support to the development of relevant infrastructure, institutional capacity, and skills”. Consequently, by 

enhancing pastoralist livelihoods, the project fits well with the CB pillar 1 which seeks to rebuild key 

infrastructure to enhance resilience and diversify livelihoods. The CB highlighted the importance of the 

agricultural sector in Somalia and in particular the livestock sector which contributes to more than 40% of 

national GDP. By tackling the issues related to climate change adaptation in this sector, this project will help 

build resilience with the adoption of adaptive measures combined with resilient infrastructures. 



 

3 
 

 

Baseline Project 
 

1.2.8 The baseline project for the proposed project is the Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihood 

Program (DRSLP), a multi-phased program running over 15 to 20 years. It targets the root causes of drought 

crises in the countries of the HoA, and its first phase was implemented in Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Kenya. 

Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase (DRSLP II). The baseline project was approved by 

the Bank’s Board of Directors in November 2014; and the project started in August 2015. Meanwhile, Sudan 

is covered through the third phase (DRSLP III) in June 2015. Following the same concept and using FEG 

Grant resources, RLACC I was approved in December 2016 covering Djibouti and Kenya to the tone of USD 

5.484 million for Djibouti and USD 2.784 million for Kenya. 

  

1.2.9 DRSLP focuses its intervention on building the necessary infrastructure for mobilizing and managing 

surface and ground water in the context of pastoral and agro-pastoral production systems. This consists of 

rangeland development and rehabilitation works, land development for crop production, and small water 

mobilization and supply infrastructure for crop and livestock production. In addition, the capacity building 

element of the DRSLP will focus its intervention on providing local communities and authorities with 

investments in infrastructure development and capacity strengthening.  

 

1.2.10 On the long run, the DRSLP is a response to the devastating climate change evidenced drought, 

environmental degradation, and poverty in the HoA’s vulnerable communities. However, the baseline alone 

does not sufficiently tackle certain issues related to climate change resilience and the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods. For instance, stakeholders are not fully involved in planning and decision-

making processes. Existing and planned activities under DRSLP II (in Somalia and Sudan) and DRSLP III (in 

Sudan) do not lead to the full integration of CC considerations in community development plans and sectoral 

policies, and climate hazards still need strengthened mitigation. Consequently, the RLACC II project aims at 

completing the activities of the baseline program on these key issues, and is in line with the ongoing RLACC 

I project in Djibouti and Kenya. 

 

1.2.11 Over decades, most interventions to address climate change issues (and especially drought) in the HoA 

have been of emergency humanitarian relief nature. Like the DRSLP (Baseline project), the RLACC II project 

seeks to be innovative as it proposes solutions to tackle this issue in a medium and long-term perspective, 

through an integrated approach that aims at improving water resource mobilization, rangeland management, 

livelihoods diversification, infrastructure for market access and building human and institutional capacity 

within a framework that is sensitive to conflict resolution and management.  

 

1.3 Aid coordination 
 

1.3.1 Regional and International organizations (Swiss Development Cooperation Agency, African Water 

Facility, etc.) are engaged in addressing climate change and livelihoods challenges in the region. However, it 

is noteworthy to mention that, in general, most Development Partners’ (DPs) interventions in CC are mainly 

short-term responses and humanitarian relief-focused.  

 

1.3.2 The Bank discussed with several Partners and donors to garner support for the program. In particular, 

the Bank is supporting the countries of the HoA to access GEF funds from the Least Developed Countries' 

Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) in order to finance the RLACC activities to 

complement the baseline program (DRSLP). During the appraisal mission, consultations were made with many 

relevant DPs including FAO, USAID, IFAD, UNDP and EU to ensure close coordination and harmonization 

of activities towards common goals and objectives of the RLACC. Generally speaking, the consultations 

helped avoiding overlaps and redundancies among the different interventions while funding by the different 

partners was done on an individual basis. 

 

 

 

 



 

4 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Program development goal: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 

communities 

 

2.1 Project components 

 

The activities listed in the table below are indicative. More specific activities for each country 

are contained in their respective PARs. Furthermore the activities in each countries will be confirmed 

and prioritized with the target communities in participatory workshops.  

 
  Table 1: Project components 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

Improving pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive 

capacity and the 

resilience of their 

livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

1,859,515 Trainings in (i) water harvesting technologies, (ii) water resources 

management, (iii) farming methods and drought resistant varieties, 

(iv) management and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, and 

(v) climate resilient rangeland management options.  

 

Women are an important focus of the project, and numerous 

activities will improve their participation and decision-making 

skills in various sectors that will be crucial for the development of 

the communities and its adaptation to climate change 

Improve the 

sustainability of 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 

11,269,034 Water infrastructure: water harvesting infrastructure (hafirs, 

boreholes), and supply network (irrigation, etc.) are constructed or 

rehabilitated, with a focus on community-based implementation 

and capacity building 

 

Rangeland rehabilitation: the project is in line and supports the 

baseline project in the targeted communities through (i) reseeding 

and re-plantation activities, and (ii) training 

 

Improvement of access to market for (i) livestock, and crops 

value chains and (ii) diversification of livelihoods  

 

Developing veterinary and health services, with a focus on cattle-

diseases related to climate change.  

 

Drought tolerant seeds: (i) provide trainings through 

establishment of nurseries to produce and distribute drought 

tolerant seeds for agriculture, but also for pastures and community 

forestry; (ii) training women in agricultural techniques tailored to 

local conditions (iii) establish Pilot Farms to demonstrate / train on 

the efficiency of drought tolerant seeds for agriculture; (iv) training 

on water management and adaptive agricultural techniques.  

 

Diversification of livelihoods: (i) the development of income-

generating activities (handcraft, processing of livestock products, 

the growing of fruit trees, honey and leaf-growing), (ii) give an 

important role to women through trainings and the activities 

organized with women associations, and (iii) is linked as stated 

above, with the improvement of access to market 

 

Soil conservation through: (i) land degradation and desertification 

control measures, and (ii) the various awareness-raising campaigns 

and workshops listed in component 1. 

Project management, 

Knowledge and M&E 

activities 

1,801,058 Annual and quarterly progress reports 

 

Gender sensitive knowledge indicators are expected in order to 

measure the activities related to women empowerment 

 



 

5 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

The project will also develop targeted villages’ climate change 

vulnerability profiles, and share these profiles with relevant 

stakeholders.  

Physical and price 

contingencies 

       2,137,986  

Total      17,067,592 

 

2.2 Project type 

 
RLACC – phase II is a multinational operation using the GEF-managed trust funds ‘Least Developing 

Countries Fund (LDCF)’. Both Sudan and Somalia are benefitting from LDCF resources through the GEF 

Focal Area 1 (Climate Change Adaptation) as grants. The GEF approved the Somalia project in December 13, 

20161 and the Sudan project in March, 2017)2.  As both Somalia and Sudan are under sanctions, the project 

interventions will be limited to technical assistance activities.  

 

2.3 Project cost and financing arrangements 

 
2.3.1 The total RLACC II cost is estimated at USD 17,067,592 (exclusive of tax and customs duty); entirely 

proposed for financing by the GEF from the Least Developed Country Fund (LDCF) to contribute to the 

implementation of the GEF climate change adaptation strategy (GEF focal area Climate Change Adaptation - 

CCA).  The grant amounts to USD 9,985,185 for Somalia and USD 7,082,407 for Sudan.  

 

Table 2: Project cost estimates by components 

 

Components 

  

  

  

US$ 
% 

Foreign Local Foreign Total 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

Sudan 265,088 323,997 589,085 55 

Somalia 482,763 787,667 1,270,430 62 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods 

Sudan 2,261,700 2,450,175 4,711,875 52 

Somalia 2,950,722 3,606,437 6,557,159 55 

Project management knowledge and 

M&E activities 

Sudan 230,059 359,837 589,896 61 

Somalia 229,142 238,494 467,636 51 

Project management costs 
Sudan 128,625 177,625 306,250 58 

Somalia 183,656 253,620 437,276 58 

Total base costs 
Sudan 2,885,472 3,311,634 6,197,106 53 

Somalia 3,846,282 4,886,218 8,732,500 56 

Physical contingencies 
Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 58 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 58 

Price contingencies 
Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project costs 
Sudan 3,256,095 3,826,312 7,082,407 54 

Somalia 4,368,511 5,616,674 9,985,185 56 

Total 7,624,606 9,442,986 17,067,592 55 

 

 

 

 
                                                      
1 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii 
2 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii-0 



 

6 
 

 

  Table 3: Project cost estimates by category of expenditure 

  

Expenditures 

USD 

Local Foreign Total 
% 

Foreign 

1. Works 

Sudan 1,040,267 1,140,588 2,180,855 52.3 

Somalia 1,320,638 1,750,613 3,071,251 57 

2. Goods  

Sudan 252,000 273,000 525,000 52 

Somalia 342,125 401,625 743,750 54 

3. Services  

Sudan 893,813 1,092,437 1,986,250 55 

Somalia 1,228,150 1,563,100 2,791,250 56 

4. Operating costs  

Sudan 690,795 814,205 1,505,000 54.1 

Somalia 924,920 1,201,330 2,126,250 56.5 

Total Base Cost         

Sudan 2,876,875 3,320,230 6,197,105 53.6 

Somalia 3,815,833 4,916,668 8,732,501 56.3 

Physical Contingencies  

Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 57.5 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 57.5 

Price Contingencies 

Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project cost  

Sudan 3,247,498 3,834,908 7,082,407 54.1 

Somalia 4,338,062 5,647,124 9,985,185 56.5 

Total 7,585,560 9,482,032 17,067,592 55.5 

  



 

7 
 

Table 4: Expenditure schedule by component 
        

Components  

Costs (US$) 

Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience 

of their livelihoods to climate change in target 

areas 

        

Sudan 190,564 381,129 508,172 190,565 

Somalia 88,363 176,726 235,634 88,362 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 
       

Sudan 983,574 1,967,148 2,622,863 983,574 

Somalia 706,781 1,413,563 1,884,750 706,781 

Project management knowledge and M&E 

activities 
       

Sudan 70,146 140,291 187,054 70,145 

Somalia 88,484 176,969 235,958 88,485 

Project management costs   
     

Sudan 65,591 131,183 174,910 65,591 

Somalia 45,937 91,875 122,500 45,938 

Total base costs         

Sudan 1,309,875 2,619,751 3,492,999 1,309,875 

Somalia 929,565 1,859,133 2,478,842 929,566 

Physical contingencies   
     

Sudan 57,579 162,461 232,382 57,579 

Somalia 123,803 200,303 255,840 123,803 

Price contingencies   
     

Sudan 82,340 164,681 219,574 82,340 

Somalia 56,295 112,591 150,120 56,295 

Total project costs   
     

Sudan 1,449,794 2,946,893 3,944,955 1,449,794 

Somalia 1,109,663 2,172,027 2,884,802 1,109,664 

Total 2,559,457 5,118,920 6,829,757 2,559,458 

 

2.4 Project’s target area and population 

 
2.4.1 The project will cover two countries of the HoA, namely Sudan and Somalia, targeting rural pastoral 

and agro-pastoral communities highly vulnerable to climate change and affected by factors such as domestic 

and regional migration (transhumance practices, displacements due to conflicts or food insecurity) – all of 

which are drivers and consequences of environmental fragility. 

 

2.4.2 In Sudan, the project will be implemented in the project will be implemented in three States, 

respectively the White Nile State, the Gedaref State and the Kassala State. Targeted areas in the States are 

respectively: (i) White Nile State, Dueim Locality, Al Baja Reserve Pasture Area, (ii) Gedaref State, 

Gadambalia Locality, (iii) Kassala State, Aroma Locality, Togaly villages and Um Safari village. 

 

2.4.3 In Somalia, the project will intervene in localities selected in South Central Somalia, Somaliland and 

Puntland States. The targeted localities are: (i) South Central Somalia: Hiiraan and Galguduud States, 



 

8 
 

Localities of Beledweyn and Guriceel, (ii) Somaliland: Awdal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and Salawley-

Cheikh Hared, (iii) Puntland: Bari and Nugaal regions,  

 

2.4.4 More details on the targeted area and communities are provided in the annexed specific countries’ 

reports. 

 

2.4.5 The RLACC II program is expected to increase targeted communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate change through capacity building and the introduction of adaptation 

technologies, improved access to natural resources (especially water), and diversification of livelihoods. 

 

2.5 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

 

2.5.1 The RLACC II program is intended to address the adaptation of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to Climate Change (CC) and to reduce their vulnerabilities to CC induced hazards. During the 

project formulation, discussions and surveys were conducted with key stakeholders and beneficiaries, 

revealing the numerous constraints communities have faced, and their very diverse nature. Most of them are 

directly linked with CC and its various effects. Overseeing these various effects, CC hazards constitutes the 

common challenge for the HoA, as its devastating impacts on agriculture, livestock production, reduced terms 

of trade, household incomes, economic stability and governance. The many conflicts of political nature or over 

natural resources characterizing the regions were also identified as a driver of fragility. Specific country 

participatory processes conducted during project identification are provided in the countries’ PARs. The 

engagement of Community Based Organizations, Civil Society and other forms of collective initiatives are big 

success factors the implementation of the project. Sensitization and training sessions will be extensively 

conducted to make sure that the beneficiaries and their organizations are very well aware of their essential role 

as recipients and as participants of/in the project activities. Sensitization will target crucial topics such as 

management of pasture and water resources in a conflict free environment. In Sudan, a validation workshop 

with the stakeholders was organized to discuss the content of the project and to secure buy-in. I Somalia, due 

to the political Situation in the country, consultations were done in Hargeisa (Somaliland) and remotely with 

Puntland and Mogadishu. In addition, draft project documentation was also shared with the Governments of 

the two countries for their final review and comments. More consultations with relevant stakeholders will be 

conducted to confirm and prioritize activities prior to the onset of implementation.   

 

2.6 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

 
2.6.1 The Bank’s long standing experience in the design and implementation of Climate Change (especially 

drought resilience and water infrastructure development) was capitalized and mainstreamed in the design of 

this project. The Bank experience lies on previous similar multinational project addressing specific climate 

change issues in the HoA, such as the DRSLP program, and collaboration with other institutions and regional 

initiatives (IGAD, COMESA, NEPAD, CAADP, etc.)  

 

2.6.2 The Bank’s strategy on ending fragility and building resilience stresses the importance of better design 

of projects in countries facing fragility, to build resilience, through more inclusive growth and development. 

To this end, the Bank now requires a fragility lens application in each project, which has been undertaken in 

annex 5 attached. 

 

2.6.3 While the experience of the Bank in the area of Drought Resilience is not a long one, the team was 

able to tap into whatever the available information in terms of implementation challenges and ways to address 

them. The RLACC II is building on the achievements, successes and lessons of former and current initiatives 

such as the DRSLP. The aim is to enhance the effectiveness of RLAC II by resorting to swifter and closer to 



 

9 
 

the ground operational units in comparison to IGAD implementation model with a Fund Management Unit 

hosted in IGAD Secretariat in the case of DRSLP.  The DRSLP has established mechanisms to enhance the 

availability of infrastructure for natural resources management (water and pastures) at the regional level (given 

the mobility of pastoralists across borders) and ensuring stability of the environment as well as the harmonious 

sharing of the resources in a sustainable manner. The current project was inspired by the first countries 

benefiting from the project such as Djibouti and Kenya. The key activities included developing water storage 

and other related infrastructures, development of market infrastructure and communication and information 

systems in pastoral rural areas; optimizing potential value chains and strengthen regional trade and; enhancing 

community participation in the management of water, pasture and livestock marketing. The project will also 

build on existing initiatives and policies to develop better collaboration and information exchange, rather than 

creating new costly systems. A brief description of the ongoing portfolio in Somalia and Sudan is given 

respectively in annexe 3 and annexe 4 at the end of this report.   

2.7 Key performance indicators 
 

2.7.1 The project aims at enhancing pastoralists, livelihoods through climate change resilient infrastructures. 

The progress toward achieving this objective will be measured through different key performance indicators 

at the impact, outcomes and output levels. At the impact level, the indicators used will be based on the increase 

of agricultural production in the target areas, resulting in the reduction of food insecurity, measured by national 

surveys and reports. 

 

2.7.2 For the outcome, the measure will be made through: (i) the development/use of methods, policies and 

frameworks mainstreaming Climate Change issues, (ii) number of communities adopting the adaptive 

measures (iii) the percentage of women participating in specific activities. In terms of outputs, the indicators 

will include: (i) number of people trained, (ii) the number of study tours and workshops, (iii) the number of 

knowledge products and the degree of execution of the project.  

 

2.7.3 While national data collection will be under the responsibility of the countries projects, a monitoring 

and evaluation expert at IGAD, working in close collaboration with the country level PIUs and other key 

partners, will be responsible for feeding the data provided to him into the existing Drought Resilience platform 

at the secretariat. The M&E specialist at IGAD will work with the country level M&E specialists to harmonize 

the data collection format. The information generated will be disseminated to other projects’ communities and 

potential users in the region.  

 

 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.  Economic and financial performance 

 
FIRR (base case) 17% NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 million 

EIRR (base case) 23% NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 million 

 

3.1.1 Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase of DRSLP II. The implementation of these 

projects will first enable a better carbon sequestration. The improving of water resource mobilization, through 

the building of boreholes, haffirs and other water infrastructures, and the introduction of new climate resilient 

practices, such as drought resilient seeds, will benefit communities in having better crop productivity, and thus, 

boost their economic growth. This process will enable a reduction of conflicts, especially about resources 

availability. Moreover, the introduction of sustainable land management with activities of reseeding and re-

plantation will also have an important impact on reducing natural resources scarcity and poverty, lessening 

soil erosion and increasing soil fertility. Providing veterinary services and training for communities about new 



 

10 
 

climate resilient practices will improve food security and benefit for the whole regions in reducing conflicts 

and migrations. 

 

3.1.2 The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of the project is calculated at 21%, the net present value 

(VPV) is estimated at USD 1.71 million. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated 

at 25% and the net present value (NPV) at 12% opportunity cost of capital is estimated at USD 2.19 million. 

 

3.1.3 The project will have both direct and indirect benefits. Improved livelihoods for the agro-pastoral 

communities will be the main direct benefit. The emphasis on a multi-level, integrated approach to pastoral 

development through support and funding for a range of initiatives will help pastoralist communities and 

households undertake livestock and non-livestock related income generating activities, accompanied by 

awareness raising, information and capacity building.  

 

3.1.4 A parallel dynamic of social inclusion and economic growth will help reintegrate the most vulnerable 

and marginalized population categories into the local economy and combat the social and economic 

marginalization in which many pastoral groups are trapped. For instance, the creation of new boreholes and 

water supply networks in villages will reduce periods of unemployment/inactivity due to lack of irrigation 

boosting economic growth at the village level and improving villagers’ livelihoods. Farmers’ income is 

expected to increase from better crop productivity as a result of sustainable irrigation schemes and the 

introduction of new adaptive practices and appropriate technological package into crop production. 

 

3.1.5 Additional programme benefits include an increased value of livestock through the setting up of 

veterinarian services, thus further improving food security, and reducing vulnerability to external shocks such 

as animal disease outbreaks. The efforts of the project to provide micro financing will benefit to pastoralists 

and agro-pastoralists to diversify their sources of livelihoods.   

 

3.1.6 National economies and regional integration will also benefit from the program. Effective cooperation 

in the management of water resources and improved rangeland management would reduce conflicts and 

promote social stability and strengthen regional integration. The development of market infrastructures and 

the improvement of the delivery of animal health related services, mainly the prevention and control of TADs 

will contribute to an increase of intra- and extra-regional safe trade in livestock products. 

 

3.1.7 The methodology used to estimate these project benefits is based on a costs benefits analysis. Indeed, 

assessing the costs and benefits of a program is of essential importance to meaningfully quantify its impacts. 

Following the GEF approach, a baseline model is required, in this case the DRSLP II and III project. The 

global environmental benefits and the incremental costs, and besides, the project impacts, are compared to the 

baseline project without the support of the GEF. This implies in concrete terms an analysis of the situation 

with and without the additional GEF funded project. This analysis was conducted for each country, Somalia 

and Sudan, in order to assess the economic and financial performances of the country projects. 

 
  



 

11 
 

3.2 Environmental and social aspects 

Environmental aspects 

 
3.2.1 The project focuses on building capacity on a country (ies) – wide adaptation intervention to climate 

change aimed at improving the resilience of communities and agro-pastoral communities, their livelihoods and 

their production systems. The project will have major positive impacts on the environment: (i) improved 

management of natural resources (water and land) at local, State, national and regional level, (ii) improved 

resilience of the ecosystems with the introduction of drought-resistant plants for shelterbelt around villages or 

for agriculture and (iii) rehabilitation of rangelands. In light of these benefits, the project is proposed for 

category 3. 

 

3.2.2 An environmental and social review has been made, based on the potential environmental and social 

effects of the project, and prior to the undertaking of any formal, activity-related and/or site-specific 

Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs). As the project will be funded by the GEF through the 

AfDB, all works must comply with the due environmental and social assessment process, when required either 

by regulation or AfDB, as well as with the recommendations of the upcoming ESIAs (in case further 

environmental and social studies are performed), including compliance with the appropriate avoidance, 

management and mitigation measures. The extent of activity- and site-specific ESIAs will be assessed by the 

AfDB and key national institutions/institutional partners when site location as well as activity parameters (size 

of infrastructures, characteristics of each resilient culture, etc.) are formalized. The review identifies minor 

risks to environment and social issues (referred to as “effects”) from activities in their general form and outlines 

strategies for managing those risks and minimizing undesirable environmental and social impacts. National 

institutions will be ultimately responsible for the supervision of the environmental and social matters, with the 

AfDB providing updates on the adequacy and respect of measures. The supervising entities and/or experts will 

ensure timely remedial actions are taken by the contractor where necessary. 

 

Climate change aspects 

 
3.2.3 As an adaptation programme, it will reduce pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ vulnerability to 

CC induced hazards through campaigns, workshops and trainings aiming at raising stakeholders’ awareness 

on this issue. In addition, the project’s support to the diversification of the sources of income will provide the 

beneficiary communities with the necessary cushion for the shocks stemming from the CC. The 

implementation of diverse infrastructures solutions and the adoption of new techniques should also have a 

positive impact, increasing communities’ resilience. Furthermore, since the Bank’s Climate Change Action 

Plan is to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa, the funding 

for this project is totally in accordance with climate adaptation finance. 

Social aspects 

 
3.2.4 The RLACC II program will have a major positive impact on social aspect at community, regional and 

national level. Indeed, the program will (i) reduce the scarcity of natural resources and its related pretension 

to conflicts; (ii) the diversification of livelihoods – mostly at women’s benefit – will contribute to increase 

households’ incomes and wealth, (iv) the improvement of the population health, (v) the improvement of market 

access will strengthen inter-communities linkages and reduce conflict or distrust issues.  

 

Gender aspects 

 
3.2.5 The proposed project has an important focus on women and gender equality. Indeed, many activities 

focus on women empowerment and capacity-building, from awareness raising activities, to the introduction of 

adaptive techniques and training. The implementation of adaptive techniques (output 2.1.1.) is not gender-



 

12 
 

specific, but the objective is clearly to improve the climate resilience for communities for specific economic 

sectors (mainly agriculture and livestock husbandry), as climate change has a significant impact on 

communities, mostly women and children. Also, adaptive technologies will contribute to reducing workload 

experienced by women and children, who are often the groups charged with water collection for households 

and livestock.  

 

3.2.6 In addition, the output 2.1.2 is designed to train communities and targeted groups to the use of 

techniques and technologies introduced with output 2.1.1. Women are clearly the main focus of this output, as 

most of its activities are targeting women. In order to achieve target number of women, it is advised that women 

organizations in pastoral communities are targeted. Finally, the outcome 2.2 seeks to diversify income-

generating activities, which is expected to have a strong impact on women empowerment. Indeed, the activities 

suggested should reduce rural women’s domestic workload through labour-saving technologies. By reducing 

women’s workload, the project will empower the women beneficiaries in achieving a more equitable balance 

in workload and in the sharing of economic and social benefits.   

 

3.2.7 Furthermore, additional indicators not mentioned in the logical framework, such as the number of 

management committees, access to education for girls, access to land and credit opportunities, access to smart 

seeds and crops and access to equipment could be added or at least considered. 

 

Involuntary resettlement 

 
3.2.8 The implementation of this project does not imply any involuntary resettlement or limiting access to 

natural resources.  

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 

4.1.1 For Somalia, all fiduciary responsibilities will be handled by IGAD’s Fund Management Unit (FMU) 

that is implementing the DRSLP II in coordination with the Bank. To this end, a tri-partite Protocol of 

agreement will be signed between the Bank, IGAD and the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to describe 

in detail the implementing arrangements. IGAD’s capacity has been strengthened through the establishment 

of the FMU to implement the DRSLP II in Somalia and Sudan. The FMU is composed of a Coordinator, an 

Accountant, a Procurement Expert, and an Administrative assistant. The FMU has gained experience and 

knowledge through the management of the on-going DRSLP II and the coordination of the several 

interventions in the country. However, in order to match the anticipated additional workload (given that FMU 

is handling the DRLSP II – Somalia and Sudan projects and the recently approved STRERP) and also improve 

the quality of reporting within the FMU, a dedicated Project Technical Team (PTT) will be recruited 

competitively from the region composed of a Team Leader with expertise in Climate Change Adaptation and 

project management and four Experts (an expert in Adaptation to Climate Change, an expert in M&E and  

Community Mobilization, an Accountant and a procurement specialist). The PTT will be responsible for the 

day to day supervision of project activities in Somalia and will report to the FMU. On the ground activities 

will be implemented through focal points in the line Ministries (Ministry of Environment and Ministry of 

Agriculture / Livestock in South Central Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland). The IGAD will be responsible 

for the recruitment process of RLACC II PTT. The choice of the FMU-IGAD as a partner in managing the 

RLACC II, came from the fact that the IGAD through the FMU is coordinating the DRSLP in Somalia and for 

which RLACC II is a supplementary funding and therefore overall coordination and synergy will be ensured 

with the involvement of the FMU. The RLACC II will make the provisions needed for the key operating 

expenses at the IGAD Secretariat. Considering the multinational dimension of RLACC II, the FMU-IGAD 

will assist the implementation units in the sense of mobilizing and disseminate the M&E data through the 

regional platform already set up by the IGAD to make it accessible to the RLACC I and II participating 

countries, the Horn of Africa region and the Drought Resilience Knowledge Community at large. In each State, 

National Project Steering Committee will provide strategic direction (policy guidance and review of project 

progress) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. It will also examine the various project 

activities, through inputs provided by the FMU/PTT. It is chaired by the Ministry of Environment, and consists 

of representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia and of the established autonomous States’ 



 

13 
 

Governments (including representatives from other ministries, etc.), the civil society and other relevant 

stakeholders. 

 

4.1.2 In Sudan, the Executing Agency is the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment. In order to guarantee a successful implementation of the project, a 

Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for RLCC II should be established with key experts (an Expert in 

Adaptation to Climate Change – National Coordinator, an Expert in M&E, an Expert in mobilization for 

Community-based Adaptation, a procurement specialist and an accountant). These experts will be nationals 

recruited competitively creating a light PIU to be housed in the Higher Council for Environment and Natural 

Resources (HCENR) - Ministry of Environment that will be responsible for the day-to-day implementation of 

the project activities, including fiduciary affairs. Three State Coordinators will need to be seconded by State 

Governments from ministries relevant to environment to facilitate implementation at State levels. For 

coordination purposes RLACC II PIU should work in harmony with the DRSLP coordination unit at federal 

and state levels. A National Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic direction 

(policy guidance and review of project progresses) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. 

The PSC will be chaired by the Ministry of Environment at federal level, and consists of representatives of 

ministries of Finance, Electricity and Water (represented by Drinking Water and Sanitation Unit), Animal 

Wealth, Agriculture and Forestry and representative of the three States government (White Nile, Gedaref and 

Kassala). The Project Coordinator will serve as the rapporteur for the PSC, which will examine the various 

project activities and represent the organ of key project decisions. As part of regional coordination 

responsibility in the drought resilience projects and initiatives, RLACC II PIU should grant the flow of M&E 

information to IGAD Secretariat (through the FMU) to enable coordination of the overall tracking of the agreed 

performance indicators in the region.  

 

4.2 Procurement arrangements 
 

All procurement of goods and works and acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank will 

be in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations dated October 2015 

as revised from time to time, using the relevant Bank Standard Bidding and Request for Proposals Documents. 

The summary procurement arrangements for the two countries is provided the table below. The detailed 

procurement arrangements for each country are given in their respective PARs. 

 

 

 

  



 

14 
 

 

Table 5: Procurement Arrangements (USD million) 

 

Item Description 

Amount (USD million) 

NCB Shortlist Other * NBF Total 

A. GOODS  

Vehicles   0.33  0.33 

Equipment   0.94  0.94 

Total Goods   1.27  1.27 

B. WORKS      

Pilot Farms 0.70    0.70 

Hafirs and boreholes 2.29  0.45 0.002407 2.74 

Veterinary and health services 1.21  0.25  1.46 

Nurseries for seeds 0.25  0.10  0.35 

Total Works 4.45  0.80 0.002407 5.25 

C. SERVICES  

Training   2,66  2,66 

Technical Assistance  0.42   0.42 

Studies  0,27 0,06  0,33 

Audit  0,42   0,42 

Surveys  0,23   0,23 

Consultancy (Individual)  0,36 0,13  0,49 

Consultancy (Firm)  0,11 0,10  0,21 

Total Services  1.81 2.95  4.76 

D. OPERATIONAL COSTS   2.13 1.51 3.64 

Contingencies 0.75 0.39 0.70 0.30 2.14 

Total  5.20 2.20 7.85 1.81 17.06 

      

 * Includes Shopping, recruitment of individual consultant and use of approved Government procedures 
 

4.3 Financial Management Arrangements and Disbursement 

 

4.3.1 The financial management (FM) operations of the Sudan component of the Project will be 

carried out under the overall direction of the Accounting Officer of the Ministry of Environment, the 

Executing Agency (EA). The financial transactions of the project will be initiated, processed, 

recorded and reported in accordance with the country’s Financial and Accounting Act (2007), and the 

Financial and Accounting Regulations (2011) as well as the Bank’s FM Guidelines. To facilitate FM 

in the project, a local professional Accountant with relevant qualifications and level of experience 

acceptable to the Bank including proficiency in English, will be competitively recruited by the EA 

and will be part of the PIU that will be established prior to grant effectiveness. 
 

4.3.2 In regard to the Somalia Component, the FM system (including budgeting, accounting, funds 

flow, internal controls, financial reporting and audit arrangements) that is being followed under 

DRLSP II will apply to the Project. The IGAD Secretariat, through the existing Fund Management 

Unit (FMU) will be responsible for the FM and will be carried out in accordance with the recently 

developed DRLSP FM Manual and the Bank’s FM Guidelines. The FM capacity within the FMU 

will benefit from the recruitment of a project dedicated accountant in the RLACC II PTT, with 

qualifications and experience acceptable to the Bank.  

 

4.3.3 The PIU (for the Sudan) and the FMU (for the Somalia component) will be responsible for 

accounting, reporting, funds flow, banking arrangements, internal controls and audit arrangements 

and reporting for the activities carried out at both the federal and state levels. The PIU and FMU will 

be required to produce quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) for the project, which will be 

submitted to the Bank no later than forty-five days after the end of each quarter. Annual Project 

specific financial statements (PFSs) will be prepared in accordance with the Generally Accepted 



 

15 
 

Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the Sudan and the IFRS (for the Somalia component) which will 

be submitted to the auditors within three (3) months following the closure of every financial year. 

The project audits for the Sudan component will be conducted by the National Audit Chamber (NAC), 

or a competitively recruited private audit firm to be appointed by NAC based on the Bank’s Standard 

Audit Terms of Reference. In the case of the Somalia component, the audits will be carried out by 

private audit firm to be appointed by IGAD, based on the Bank’s Standard Audit Terms of Reference. 

The audit reports, complete with a Management Letters, will be submitted to the Bank not later than 

six months after the end of the financial year.  The cost of the audits will be paid from the respective 

grants, if carried out by private audit firms. 

 

4.3.4 In regard to disbursements under the Somalia Grant, resources will be disbursed through the 

Intergovernmental Authority on Development Secretariat (IGAD).  To this end, IGAD will be 

responsible for preparing and submitting disbursement requests to the Bank for payment.  Transfer 

of funds the FGS and the participating States will follow the fund transfer system already in place 

under the DRLSP II and IGAD will retain the fiduciary responsibility for such transfer.  On the other 

hand, the disbursements under the Grant to the Republic of Sudan will be under the responsibility of 

the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR), the Executing Agency. The 

project will use mainly the direct payment and the Special Account methods for disbursements. The 

Bank’s Disbursement Letter for each Grant shall be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures 

and practices. With regard to the SA method of disbursement, Government of Sudan and IGAD (as 

the Implementing Agency for Somalia) will each open a Project Special Account at the Central Bank 

(for the Sudan) or a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank (for IGAD) to receive funds. The 

opening of the Project Special Accounts will be a condition for the first disbursement of the Grants 

to the respective Recipients. 

 

4.4 Governance 

 
4.4.1 Somalia and Sudan, and at a wider level the HoA, have been affected by a chronic cycle of poverty, 

instability and conflict over natural resources. Challenges commonly faced by all the countries of the region 

are weak governance, conflict prevention, nomadic pastoralists, food security and resource sharing.  

 

4.4.2 IGAD has become a central part of the political and security architecture of the HoA. It focuses 

particularly on regional governance and integration, through the promotion of responsible leadership at local, 

national and regional levels, and the introduction of anti-corruption measures; also on the efficient management 

of the natural resources, food security, border control and non-proliferation of small arms. The project 

integrates specific measures to mitigate governance risk to ensure that resources are used judiciously and for 

the purposes for which they are intended. In this regard, the project will provide assistance in procurement and 

financial management to the various executing agencies and Implementing Units. The project will coordinate 

its efforts with Bank and non-Bank ongoing interventions in the region dealing with capacity building of public 

institutions, CBOs, NGOs and IGAD, as well as recipient communities on which the project implementation 

depends. Indeed, the recipient communities’ appropriation of the project are essential to its implementation 

and its dynamic in time. It is also considered that the project will evolve throughout time by being in contact 

with communities. Their solicitation, mobilization and engagement is therefore essential right from the start 

of the project. 

 

4.5 Sustainability 

 
4.5.1 During the project preparatory stages, the choice of rangeland rehabilitation, veterinary, and water 

infrastructures and capacity building were the results of a consensus over technical discussions held during the 

project identification, preparation and appraisal stages. The project activities are community-driven and 

government facilitated. The beneficiaries, men and women, have been consulted all along the design process 



 

16 
 

of the project. Their continued involvement at implementation and monitoring of project progress and 

achievements will increase the sense of ownership and responsibility, and will lead to the sustainability of the 

investments. Cost sharing and cost recovery mechanisms will be taught to the target communities and used 

whenever possible to further promote investment sustainability. Communities will also be responsible for the 

management and maintenance of the constructed/rehabilitated infrastructure. To this end, communities’ 

sensitization and mobilization campaigns will be conducted from the onset of the project implementation.

  

4.5.2 The investments made by the Program in the area of trade, value addition of existing activities and 

diversification of income will promote the linkage between production and the market and facilitates access to 

production inputs and related services while improving the livelihoods of men and women headed households. 

This will be a major contribution to enhancing the interest and commitment of the different actors and 

stakeholders of the project. 

 

4.5.3 The LDCF program will be complementary to the DRSLP by mainstreaming climate change 

adaptation into its capacity-building component. In order to achieve this, the LDCF program will mobilize 

communities and strengthen their capacity to ensure sustainable implementation and management of 

infrastructure. This complementarity between the DRSLP and the LDCF programs where the former will focus 

on primary infrastructure and the latter on its sustainable operation and management with a focus on integrating 

climate change will ensure the sustainability of the overall intervention. 

 

4.5.4  Lastly, as the project’s implementation is based on numerous preparatory stages and lessons learned 

from other programs or projects done in both countries, the project deliverables should outlive the initial phase 

due to the engaged mobilization efforts at grass root level (communities) and the sustained commitment of the 

trained policy makers to project objectives and approaches. Given, the limited opportunities for work in the 

country, it is expected that the trained personnel and staff in the government will remain even after the project 

is completed. This provides an additional comfort to the sustainability concerns.  

 

4.6 Risk Management 

 
Table 6: Project Risks and Mitigation Measures 

 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Sectoral development policies and programs 

promote the settlement of migratory pastoralist, 

affecting negatively pastoralist adaptation 

strategies 

Training and policy development will have an 

integrated approach, highlighting the interaction of 

multiple dimensions, and emphasizing the migratory 

issue. Diversification of livelihoods of pastoralist and 

agro-pastoralists communities must be promoted as a 

coping measure.  

The cost of livestock-related infrastructure 

investment may become very high in relation to 

the very low sedentary livestock inventory due to 

high seasonal mobility of pastoral groups. 

The siting of infrastructure will be planned along the 

corridors so that it also caters for the needs of the 

transhumant pastoralists.  

 

Investments will have long-term positive impacts on 

sedentary and transhumant pastoralists. Both groups 

will be sensitized to share the maintenance load of 

infrastructure as they also share their benefits.  

 

The design of the infrastructure will be made simple so 

that the maintenance cost will be kept at a reasonable 

level.  

Poor coordination and cooperation among key 

national institutions dealing with pastoralists and 

agro-pastoralists issues 

Training and coordination of stakeholders on this issue 

in order to foster coordination and cooperation  



 

17 
 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Conflict between pastoralists and sedentary 

farmers as well as among different pastoral 

groups 

Promotion of dialogue and conflict resolution 

mechanisms with a community, regional or national-

level approach, in order to broaden perspective and 

visions. 

Inadequate acknowledgement of the role of the 

civil society and CBOs by national and local 

governments 

Training and sensitization of officials on the importance 

of civil society and CBOs during the resilience-building 

process. 

 

 

4.7. Knowledge building 

 
Working with the Executing Agencies and the Implementation Units, IGAD will be in charge of mobilizing 

and sharing knowledge product elaborated across countries to foster efficiency and improve implementation. 

The Project Implementation Unit, which carries out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s activities, 

will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information provided through the IGAD and providing 

the coordination agency with knowledge products. At the wider level, this should result in dynamic and 

structured flows of information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC program in the Horn 

of Africa. 

 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments  

 

The legal instruments governing this Project will be: (a) a Tripartite Protocol of Agreement between 

the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the 

Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator of the GEF; and a Protocol of Agreement 

between the Republic of The Sudan and the Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator 

of the GEF. 

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the Fund and the Bank’s Intervention  

 

5.2.1 Entry into Force: Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Grant: The respective 

Protocols of Agreement shall enter into force on the date of their signature.  

 

5.2.2 Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank and Fund to make the first disbursement of the 

Grants to the respective Recipients shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the 

respective Protocols of Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Undertakings: The Recipients of the Grants shall undertake to respectively open a Special 
Account denominated in foreign currency and a local currency account at a bank acceptable 

to the Fund and Bank to receive the respective Grants. 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 
This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 



 

18 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the implementation, of the proposed 

GEF supplementary grant financing of USD 7,082,407 to the Republic of Sudan and USD 9,985,185 to the 

Federal Republic of Somalia for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 
 

 

 





























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
MULTINATIONAL 

 

 

 

 

 

TECHNOLOGIES FOR AFRICAN AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION: 

FRAMEWORK PROGRAM IN SUPPORT OF “FEED AFRICA” 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Program Overview 

1.1 More than 160 million Africans (about one in four Africans) are food insecure and 

malnourished, making Africa the most food-insecure region in the world. More than 32 million African 

children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 million are severely underweight, and 14.3 

million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is 

allowed to continue.  Low agricultural productivity and value addition are at the heart of the 

malnutrition, employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector accounts for 

between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25% of Africa’s Gross 

Domestic Product (GDP). 

1.2  Asia was in a similar position in the 1960s but 20th century scientific advances in agriculture 

developed by a number of International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) in Latin America and 

Asia were applied, leading to the Asian “green revolution”. These centers became the Consultative 

Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and together with countries in Asia they 

catalyzed one of the greatest increases in food production and improved nutritional well-being such as 

the world has ever known. Today, the technologies exist to feed Africa, if widely deployed. They include 

high yielding crop varieties and livestock breeds, bio-fortified crops such as pro-vitamin A rich cassava, 

high iron and zinc rice, and high zinc sorghum, which if scaled up can help address the problems of 

malnutrition and stunting of African bodies and minds. Africa has more food production technologies 

available today than Asia had at the time of its green revolution. What is missing is taking these 

technologies to farmers at scale. Also missing has been a well-coordinated food production technology 

delivery platform to help address all of the related issues of extension (training), policy, market, 

institutional, R&D, and regulatory issues hindering the widespread use of technologies. 

1.3  The Bank seeks to focus the technically excellent but hitherto uncoordinated efforts of CGIAR 

and their work with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), in particular as 

represented by their continental umbrella, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) and 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs). The result will be a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

(RTDI), with emphasis on agro-ecological zones and their priority commodities that will reach 40-50% 

of all African farmers with the most relevant food production technologies by 2025. The overall goal of 

TAAT is to radically improve agriculture as a business across Africa by deploying agricultural 

productivity-increasing technologies within eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs): i) Self-sufficiency 

in Rice Production, ii) Cassava Intensification, iii) Food and Nutrition Security in the Sahel, iv) 

Transforming African Savannahs into Breadbaskets, v) Revitalizing Tree Plantations, vi) Expanding 

Horticulture, vii) Increasing Africa’s Wheat Production, and viii) Achieving Self-sufficiency in Inland 

Fish Production. Within these PIAs, nine (9) agricultural commodities are prioritized. TAAT is designed 

as a Framework Program that allows partners (the World Bank, AGRA, BMGF, IFAD, etc.) to 

contribute resources and to expand country coverage over time. The Bank’s PY1 funding will be UA 

29 MILLION (US$ 40 MILLION) in grants to finance the centrally managed activities (for ADF-only 

countries while partner resources will initially target ADB countries). Similar amounts will be sought 

for PY2 and PY3. Further, the Bank is expected to provide close to US$350 million through its normal 

country lending programs, beyond the central activities, towards areas that will support development of 

agricultural value chains, market and infrastructure and access to finance, all of which will bolster the 

success of agricultural transformations at the country level. 

1.4 And while TAAT is a key platform for driving the Feed Africa strategy of the Bank, the 

resources needed to achieve the objectives of Feed Africa are huge and well beyond what could be 

achieved alone. So the Bank is developing strategic alliances and partnerships to help mobilize resources 

to achieve the objectives. TAAT is planned as a multi-donor financing platform to help take proven 

agricultural technologies to scale across Africa. The fundamental guiding principles of TAAT are: 

technology matters; scale matters; the policy and regulatory environment matters; and partnerships 

matter. 



 

iv 

1.5 A successful green revolution in Africa must be inclusive and based on a recognition that 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked.  Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture. The agricultural sector in Africa is the largest employer of women; 62% of 

economically active women are working in the sector, while in countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and 

Burkina Faso, over 90% of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities. Yet 

depending on the country, the rural wage gap between men and women in Africa is estimated at between 

15-60%.  Research also indicates that women farmers are just as efficient as male farmers when granted 

equal access to inputs and skills.  TAATwill systematically incorporate consideration for gender 

equality and ensure women’s equal access to agricultural technologies..  For TAAT will prioritize the 

needs of women to level the playing field and increase agricultural productivity to achieve impact.  

1.6 TAAT is a strategic alliance with the goal of mobilizing $1 billion towards its goal of scaling 

up agricultural technologies. The Bank and the World Bank have been working actively together on 

conceptualizing TAAT for the past close to two years. The World Bank initially planned to put US$500 

million towards TAAT partnership in countries, an amount it announced would be increased to $700 

million during the multi donor discussion on the planned initiative during the World Food Prize events 

in Des Moines, Iowa in October 2017. The other members of the TAAT alliance will include the Bill 

and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in 

Africa (AGRA), all of whom have committed significant resources. Indeed, the Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation has already approved its financing support to the TAAT central coordinating platform 

housed at IITA, which will be described below. 

1.7 Other institutions have been actively participating in TAAT's conceptualization, including the 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development, Agence Française de Development, DFID, USAID and other bilateral institutions and 

the private sector. Several of these institutions expect to collaborate on TAAT and also to co-finance 

national level interventions through parallel financing. It is worth noting that at the World Food Prize 

events in Iowa, which brought together the world's leading agriculture experts, TAAT was seen as 

potentially the "most significant effort to pull resources together to deliver technologies at scale across 

agroecological zones to farmers in Africa".  

1.8 TAAT aligns with the twin objectives of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS), inclusive growth 

and transition to green growth, with agriculture as one of the three areas of special emphasis. It also 

resonates with four of the Bank’s five corporate priorities (Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate 

Africa and Improve the quality of lives of Africans), encapsulated in the High 5s. In addition, TAAT is 

strongly anchored on the Feed Africa agenda, endorsed by African leaders at the High-Level Conference 

held in Dakar in October 2015, which itself was anchored on the African Union’s Malabo Declaration, 

as well as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 and 2 of eradicating extreme poverty and ending 

hunger and malnutrition. Given the agro-ecological perspective of the PIAs, TAAT contributes to the 

Regional Integration Policy and strategy (2014-2023) and is aligned with the transition states strategy 

in applicable RMCs of the Bank. TAAT is also anchored around previous projects supported by the 

Bank, namely: i) the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa” 

(SARD-SC), which funded research on four of the six strategic crops of the African Union (Cassava, 

Maize, Rice and Wheat), following a value chain approach; ii) the project to deploy the New Rice for 

Africa (NERICA) in seven African countries – a project that won the U.S. Treasury award in 2014; iii) 

the project on the Promotion of Science and Technology for Agricultural Development in Africa 

(PSTAD) implemented in 34 RMCs; and iv) various research-for-development projects (in Cameroon, 

Tanzania, and other countries) that contributed some of the proven agricultural development 

technologies selected for deployment in TAAT. 

1.9 Knowledge gained from implementation of prior agricultural research operations and other 

regional projects, particularly on the need to build country capacity for project implementation and 

delivery, has been taken into consideration in the design of TAAT. Similarly, the knowledge generated 



 

v 

from TAAT will be used to design, manage, and implement similar Bank-financed projects in the future. 

Through M&E, knowledge related data will be collected throughout implementation. Data will be 

analyzed and the results used to improve project implementation in real time. 

1.10 All African countries are eligible to participate in TAAT based upon a commitment to enact 

policies that facilitate the uptake of food production technologies, strengthen National Agriculture 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), and participate in activities agreed upon with the CGIAR 

consortiums and Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) under TAAT. They will be supported through 

centrally managed technology deployment compacts or country programs in which the Bank 

collaborates with partners (e.g., WB, AGRA, BMGF, and IFAD) to incorporate TAAT components into 

agricultural value chain development programs. The TAAT program consists of four major components 

namely: i) the creation of an enabling environment for deployment and adoption of food production 

technology by famers, in particular vibrant seed systems or artificial insemination programs, technology 

release and registration policies that are regionally harmonized, and regional programs to combat pest 

and disease threats; ii) a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—a consortium of CGIAR 

centers, NARES, and SROs. These form the TAAT platform, which is able to provide and deploy 

needed food production technologies and any additional adaptive research required; iii) deployment of 

appropriate food production technologies, through crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs; and iv) project 

management. 

1.11 Operationally, TAAT will function as follows: The Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI) made up of CGIAR centers and other technology providers, will develop a menu 

of proven food production technologies in nine priority commodities. These include seed systems or 

artificial insemination programs for best bet crop varieties/livestock breeds for large scale deployment; 

protocols for disease control on a regional basis; farmer education in improved crop/animal production 

methods; aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will work with the CGIAR centers to 

prepare proposals, based on the menu of food production technologies, for outreach campaigns;  the 

proposals will be submitted to the decision-making body of the RTDI, the Clearinghouse (details in 

Appendix 1).  Once proposals are approved, funds will be released for execution but the Clearing house 

will continue to provide oversight during execution. TAAT is not a research program but takes food 

production technologies that exist—the result of decades of research efforts—to millions of farmers via 

crop/livestock outreach campaigns and the creation of an enabling environment working with the 

researchers themselves. 

1.12 The food production technologies to be deployed under TAAT have the features of Regional 

Public Goods (RPGs) namely: (i) non-rivalry, (ii) non-exclusivity, (iii) broad public interest and benefit, 

(iv) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and continental and regional objectives; (v) 

catalytic and upstream role, and (vi) higher developmental impact through cooperation. Food production 

technologies being deployed will be available to all stakeholders in the target agro-ecological zones or 

commodity belts for free. No country will be excluded. Key related lessons learned will include the 

stronger working relationships between the CGIAR centers and NARES, and the experience in working 

across multiple countries with similar agro-ecological zones, among others. 

1.13 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede speedy transfer of technologies across borders..  

1.14 By going to scale on the Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs), TAAT’s key benefits include (i) 

increased agricultural productivity and diversification, leading to improved food and nutrition security, 

(ii) job creation through expanded commercialization and industrialization, (iii) improved 

socioeconomic status of farmers including women and youth due to higher incomes, (iv) reduced 

vulnerabilities to market price fluctuations due to reliable supply leading to better organized markets, 



 

vi 

(v) improved soil, land and water management practices due to Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), 

and (vi) increased resilience to climate variability and stress through the deployment of Climate Smart 

Agriculture (CSA) technologies and innovations. TAAT will make a significant contribution to Feed 

Africa’s key agricultural development objectives, which are 1) eliminating extreme poverty, 2) ending 

hunger and malnutrition, and 3) achieving food self-sufficiency and turning Africa into a net food 

exporter. 

1.15 Projections based upon overall project design and assumptions developed for the larger Feed 

Africa strategy, as well as World Bank and AGRA programs, suggest that TAAT, by scaling up food 

production technologies, will result in 120 million tons of additional raw food production per year, will 

assist about 40 million beneficiaries (11.7 million households), and lead to increased food production 

valued at $1.7 to $2.8 billion resulting from an $850 million investment by the end of the program.. 

Investments in TAAT will be greatly compounded by larger loans/grants awarded to RMCs through 

Feed Africa.  

1.16 Management hereby seeks Board approval for the first year resources (PY1) from the Regional 

Public Good (RPG) window and will return in subsequent years (PY2 and PY3) with further requests and 
also for specific country programs.



 

vii 
 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Country and program name: Multinational – Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

 

Purpose: To "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are women, in low-income RMCs to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, 
assure food security and raise rural incomes, and provide regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across similar agro-ecological zones 

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline (2017) Target (2020) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced food and nutrition 

security, reduced poverty and 

improved livelihoods 

1. Population are more food secure 
(of which women will be 50%) 

2. Prevalence of stunting among 
children under 5 (disaggregated 

by gender) 

1. 20% of 
Africans are 

food insecure  

2. 31.2% for 
African region 

(ranges 31.7% 

to 42.6%  

1. 40% reduction  
2. 30% reduction 

1. Annual 
country food 

security status 

report. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Increased income (inclusively) 

 

 

Increased agriculture 

commodity productivity 

 Household income 
 

 

 Crop productivity 

 Livestock productivity 

 US$1,650 
 

  

 As in Appendix 
2 

 50% increase 
 

 

 30% - 50% increase  

1. Annual 

National Bureau 

of Statistics 

Reports. 

2. Annual Report 

of Ministry of 

Agriculture  

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc.) 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted  advocacy 

Risk: Lack of commitments of stakeholders in 

implementation 

Mitigation: Active engagement of all 

stakeholders, with clear roles 

Increased employment 

(inclusively) 
 No. of jobs created (of which 

women & youth)  disaggregated 

by food commodity 

 0  450,000 (50% 
women) 

 

Increased food production 

 

Increased food and nutrition 

security 

 

Direct TAAT beneficiaries 

 

 

Value addition of TAAT 

 Tons of food (additional) 
disaggregated by food commodity 

 Household dietary diversity 
 

 

 No. of beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by age and sex) 

 

 Value of additional production 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 0 
 

 

 US$3.29 billion 

 17 Million MT 
 

 

 3 new food/hh 
 

 10.34 million hhs 
(2027) (50% women 

& 25% youth) 

 US$4.99 billion 

 

 Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)     

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1.1: Policies for 

deployment and adoption of food 

production technology policies 

harmonized across  a region 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring 

Reports. 

2. Annual CG 

Center Reports. 

3. Annual NARES 

Reports 

4. Qtrly Market 

Reports 

Risk: Lack of commitment & logistical support 

to enable training. 

Mitigation: Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Policy inconsistency on the part of 

governments & long process in changing 

policies 

Mitigation: Dialogue using fact-based 

rationale for losses due to policies status quo 

Output 1.2: Capacity of national  

seed systems built  
 No. of weak systems strengthened  0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.3: Improved crop 

varieties and livestock breeds 

released in one country widely r 

 No. of improved crop varieties & 
livestock breeds widely applied in 

agro-ecological zones 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 



 

viii 
 

available for adoption in other 

countries within a region 

Risk: Lack of commitment by the youth 

involved in technology promotion 

Mitigation: Proper orientation on mindset 

change 

Risk: Lack of cooperation by government 

agencies 

Mitigation: Dialogue for buy-in 

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc. 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted advocacy 

Risk:  Lack of commitment & logistical 

support to enable training 

Mitigation:  Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Lack of availability of off-taker markets 

Mitigation: Facilitate linkages between 

producer groups and off-takers through 

commodity marketing agreements. 

Output 1.4: Constraints to 

technology adoption addressed 
 No. of technology adoption 

constraints removed 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 

Output 1.5: policies for release 

and registration of food 

production technologies 

harmonized 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.6: Technology 

promotional activities carried out 
 No. of promotional activities with a 

focus on technologies for safe and 

nutritious foods 

 0  3000  
 

  

Output 1.7: Activities carried out 

to promote the consumption of 

safe and nutritious foods 

 No. of promotional activities  0  40 

Output 1.8: Input & output 

markets accessed 
 No. of communities with better 

access to input & output markets 

 0  2,350  

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) 

Output 2.1: Menu of Best-bet 

food production technologies 

generated 

 No of best-bet technologies scaled 
out. 

 0  21 (3/commodity)   

Output 2.2: Campaigns for 

transnational control of pests & 

diseases designed/implemented 

 No. of campaigns implemented   0  14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 

Output 2.3: Crop/Livestock 

technology delivery compacts 

convened 

 No. of delivery platforms convened  0  14 (2/commodity)  

 

Output 2.4: Young class of 

‘Agripreneurs’ supported 

 

Output 2.5: M&E of the platform 

carried out 

 

 No. of Agripreneurs supported 
 

 No. of M&Es of the platform 
carried out 

 

 0 
 

 

 0 

 

 5000 
 

 

 7 (1/platform) 

  

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT) 

Output 3.1: Trans-national 

control of pest/diseases facilitated 

Output 3.2: Appropriate 

technologies identified and 

deployed 

Output 3.3: crop and livestock 

outreach campaigns 

 

Output 3.4: Wide-scale farmer 

 No. of trans-national pest & 
diseases facilitated 

 

 No. of technologies identified and 
deployed 

 

 No. of successful crop/livestock 
outreach campaigns 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 

 

 0 

 7 (1/commodity) 
 

 

 14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

  



 

ix 
 

extension and innovative models 

designed and implemented  
 No. of wide-scale farmer 

extension models implemented 

 

 

 0 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

Component 4: Project Management 

Output 4.1: Functional TAAT 

Program Management 
 No. of fiduciary activities handled 

effectively and efficiently under the 

TAAT program 

 0  20 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring. 

Risk: Lack of cooperation among Compacts 

Mitigation: Effective team building from the 

onset. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS INPUTS 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)           UA 12.28 Million 

1.1: Harmonize and streamline technology release systems and registration as well as seed system policies across countries 

and regions (to ensure spillover effects) 

1:2: Capacity development of weak seed systems 

1:3: Ensure that improved crop varieties and livestock breeds for specific agro-ecological zones are widely applied and 

used 

1:4: Identify and remove constraints to agricultural technology adoption in Africa through appropriate policy audits 

TOTAL PROJECT COST: UA 40.00 MILLION 

 

ADF Grant:                             UA 29.00 million          (72.50%) 

AGRA:                                     UA 7.25 million            (18.10%) 

BMGF:                                     UA 0.85 million             (2.10%) 

Government of RMCs          UA 2.90 million             (7.30%) 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                                                       UA 9.82 Million 

2.1: Identification & selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs 

2:2: Design & develop appropriate campaigns for transnational control of pests and diseases and its implementation 

2:3: Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each of nine priority commodities 

2.4  Engage the CGIARs and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the 

nine priority commodities 

2:5: Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, training and financing in 

coordination with ENABLE Youth 

2.6: Carry out M&E of the platform 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)Program   UA 16.01 Million 

3.1: Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases through awareness raising campaigns (that pest and diseases 

do not respect political boundaries) and development of appropriate protocols  

3:2: Deployment of appropriate technologies through crop/livestock outreach campaigns in RMCs 
3.3 Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension and innovative models to organize and aggregate farmers 

 Component 4: Project Management (PM)                UA 1.89 Million 

 4.1: Management of TAAT fiduciary issues (Procurement, Disbursement, Financial Management)  



 

x 
 

Program timeframe 

Table 1: TAAT Program Timeframe  
Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                 

Internal Processing of Appraisal                 

Loan Negotiations                 

Board approval                 

Grant protocol signature                 

Recruitment of Program Staff (Clearinghouse, etc.)/Nomination of Program Steering Committee members                 

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness & first disbursement                 

Program launching/training of program teams in FM & Procurement                 

Preparation and validation of procedures manuals                 

Preparation & signing of MoUs with various implementing partners                 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)                 

Design and monitoring of supporting policies                 

Technology survey and assessment                 

Assessment of Seed Systems and livestock breeds dissemination systems                 

Proposals on crop/livestock campaigns of proven agricultural technologies                 

National technology deployment and promotion                 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                 

Farmers and input dealers registration                 

Design and implementation of trans-national campaigns for pests & disease control                 

Crop/Livestock technology delivery compact activities                 

Support to development of young class of ‘Agripreneurs’ & Promotion of technologies thru demonstration activities                 

Develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the nine priority commodities                 

Trainers training of others on the use of technologies & GAPs                 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)                 

Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases (through awareness raising, etc.)                 

Development of strategies for deployment of proven technologies                 

Design and implement wide-scale farmer and innovative extension models                 

Component 4: Program Management (PM)                 

Preparation, approval and floating of bidding docs & contract awards for goods, works & services                 

Contracts execution for goods, works and services                 

Quarterly reports submission                 

Annual reports submission                 

Program Work plans and Budgets                 

Steering committee meetings                 

Bank’s supervision missions                 

Audit                 

Mid-term review                 

Program Completion Report                 



 

1 

1. INTRODUCTION 

1.1 Africa’s Agricultural Sector is Underperforming 

1.1.1 The African continent has enormous potential for agricultural production. Yet more than 160 

million Africans are food insecure and malnourished. This is about one in four Africans, making Africa 

the most food-insecure region in the world. Every day over 100 million children in Africa go to bed 

hungry with devastating long-term consequences on their physical and mental development, hobbling 

their productivity as adults. Indeed, this has led to 58 million stunted African children—short in height 

for their age—representing an increase of 23% since 1990, despite worldwide declines of 37% over the 

same period. More than 32 million African children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 

million are severely underweight, and 14.3 million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Simply 

put, more than a third of African children under five are either moderately or severely underweight. 

Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is allowed to continue. 

1.1.2 Related to health and nutrition concerns, low agricultural productivity and value addition are 

very much at the heart of employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector 

accounts for between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25%, of 

Africa’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Consequently, many people work in agriculture for their 

livelihoods and yet produce and earn very little for it. Furthermore, less than 30% of harvests are 

processed into value added products compared to 98% in developed countries. Only $40 of value is 

added to one ton of processed products in Africa compared to $180 in rich countries. These are missed 

opportunities to create wealth and employment, especially for women who predominate in the 

population of African farmers today (70–80% of African farmers are women). This places women and 

their families in precarious situations, exacerbating the health and nutrition challenges already 

described. To escape this negative feedback loop, increasing agricultural productivity and value addition 

is key. The interventions described here address productivity issues while other measures being rolled 

out within the Bank’s Feed Africa strategy work on improving value addition.   

1.1.3  Why is productivity so low in Africa? For a variety of reasons including poor soils and limited 

access by smallholder farmers to improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, fertilizer, soil 

correctives, and appropriate crop production packages. African staple crop yields have barely grown in 

the last 25 years, and remain the lowest of any region in the world. The productivity of five staple 

crops—rice, wheat, maize, potato, and cassava—is just over half of the international average. Annual 

growth of cereal yields was only 1.3% from 1990 to 2014, compared with 4.1% in Brazil during the 

same period. Strikingly, between 2001 and 2008, agricultural GDP in Africa grew at just 3.4% while 

overall GDP grew nearly twice as fast, at 6% annually.   

1.1.4  In sum, the underperformance of the African agriculture sector leads to low incomes and 

expensive and often poor quality food, which has a direct bearing on hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and 

human capital and which hinders economic opportunities in the farm and non-farm sectors alike.   

1.2 Asia’s Green Revolution was the result of Technological and Institutional  Innovations 

1.2.1 Asia’s experience illustrates how rapidly things can turn around with the right actions at a 

critical time. In the mid-1960s in Asia, rising populations, an underperforming agricultural sector, and 

consecutive droughts led to significant food shortages, widespread hunger, and malnutrition. However, 

through spectacular scientific advances in wheat and rice breeding and agronomy, the food crisis was 

rolled back and India became food secure within four years, by 1970; Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines 

and Bangladesh followed soon after. The Asian agricultural phenomenon is estimated to have saved a 

billion lives and is now known as the ‘Green Revolution’. 

 



 

2 

1.2.2  The Asian experience was inspired by earlier successes in Latin America. The 20th century 

scientific advances in agriculture that were so successfully applied in Asia had been developed by the 

Mexican Agricultural Cooperation Program for wheat, established by the Rockefeller Foundation in 

Mexico City in the 1950s, and by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) for rice, created by 

the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations in Los Banos, Philippines, in the 1960s. This was south-south 

learning at its best. 

1.2.3  And indeed this south-south learning was deliberately supported by global development 

partners at the time. The World Bank, from the late sixties to the early eighties, provided institutional 

innovations to deploy and adapt the wheat and rice agricultural technologies to millions of hectares of 

farmlands in Asia. The World Bank also facilitated the establishment of public institutions at global, 

regional and country levels combined with policy advice and support to Asian countries, to implement 

a far-sighted strategy of reaching resource-limited farmers with the best of modern agricultural 

technology. One of these is the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a 

global network of agricultural R&D institutions, established in 1972. The CGIAR centers were set up 

to be international centers of excellence in agricultural innovation, where cutting edge crop and 

livestock technologies were developed by the world’s best scientists and tested and adapted to individual 

country conditions, in collaboration with the National Agricultural Research and Extensions Systems 

(NARES). NARES are made up of national agricultural research institutes, universities, public and 

private extension (training) agencies, farmer organizations, etc., representing the national voices and 

approaches to agricultural technology development and deployment. It is safe to say that the Asian 

Green Revolution would not have happened without heavy investments by the World Bank, the 

Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, and Asian governments in agricultural research and development, 

credit, input distribution, extension, and rural infrastructure. On average, Asian governments doubled 

their own spending on agriculture between 1972 and 1985. 

1.2.4  The Rockefeller and Ford Foundations expanded International Agricultural Research Centers 

(IARCs) to Africa in the late 1960s—with the first center being the International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA), established in Ibadan, Nigeria in 1967 to tackle technological barriers to raising 

food production. In the 1980s, two other centers were established in Kenya: the International Livestock 

Research Institute (ILRI) and the International Center Agroforestry Research (ICRAF, presently 

referred to as “World Agroforestry Center”); as well as a fourth center, the Africa Rice Center in Cote 

d’Ivoire. Of the 15 centers, four are based on the African continent. Centers in Asia and Latin America 

also opened research stations in Africa in the 1980s, including the Wheat and Maize Research Center 

in Mexico (CIMMYT) and the Tropical Crops Center (CIAT), demonstrating the increasing interest of 

international donors to bring the research and the technology for a green revolution to Africa.  

1.3 Why technologies have not moved to scale before in Africa 

1.3.1  But Africa missed the first green revolution for several reasons. Technologies have not moved 

to scale before in Africa due to: i) weak agricultural extension systems, ii) poor linkages between 

research and extension, iii) long technology verification and release systems, iv) a focus on national 

boundaries instead of across agro-ecological zones, v) insufficient attention to private sector value 

chains, vi) poor market linkages, vii) weak policy and regulatory environments, and viii) the absence  

of a regionally coordinated effort to deliver technologies across similar Agro-ecological zones 

(technologies without borders). 

1.3.2  Africa’s internal borders pose a serious challenge to the spread of technology on the continent. 

New agricultural technologies spread slowly across Africa’s agro-ecological zones because they are 

partitioned into multiple countries with differing governments, languages, phytosanitary controls and 

seed-certification processes. At the same time, pests and diseases do not respect arbitrarily drawn 

political borders and easily spread across them. This creates a deadly mismatch between prevailing 

dangers and the ability to roll out technologies to stop them in their tracks. The Fall Armyworm is a 

good example of such a pest that travels quickly and wreaks destruction on entire crops in its path. The 



 

3 

Armyworm was spotted for the first time in northern Nigeria in 2016 and has already managed to spread 

to at least 40 African countries (see Appendix 3 for a description of the Fall Army Worm Problem and 

mitigation plan led by the Bank). Tragically this is a crisis with known scientific solutions in the US 

and Brazil to stop the pests in their path, but without mechanisms to rapidly deliver them to African 

fields. And this is but one example. 

1.3.3  Low public sector investment in agriculture, poor seed systems, weak public extension, and 

lack of a harmonized regional legal framework for registration of crop varieties, and animal breeders’ 

rights (intellectual property), have meant that even existing improved varieties and breeds do not get 

into the hands of most farmers within a country or across a region. The share of acreage planted using 

improved crop varieties is only 30% in Africa compared with more than 50% in Latin America and 

more than 80% in Asia. Improved livestock breeds are even less prevalent.  

1.3.4  Investment by governments in the agriculture sector has also been a key driver of Green 

Revolutions in other regions. Mindful of this, African governments came together in 2003 to agree on 

the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), which, among other things, 

called for African countries to spend 10% of their budgets on agriculture. Yet, to date, only a handful 

of countries have managed to meet this target, hindering the resources available to support the transfer 

of new agricultural technologies into and within Africa. 

1.4 Feed Africa: AfDB’s Initiative to Drive Africa’s Green Revolution 

Feed Africa is the Bank’s bold initiative to end hunger, malnutrition, extreme poverty, and food 

imports—currently estimated at US$35 billion and projected to rise to US$110 billion by 2025, if 

nothing is done. This is a massive challenge as well as a massive opportunity. Feed Africa takes a 

commodity value chain approach to developing agriculture in Africa. A guiding principle of the Feed 

Africa Initiative is treating agriculture as a business, rather than as a way of life, and ensuring the 

inclusivity of women and young people. The goal is to produce thriving small-, medium-, and large-

scale agribusinesses in every segment of commodity value chains on the continent. Therefore, for Feed 

Africa to succeed, it must do two things. First, it must significantly raise agricultural productivity. 

Second, it must move African production much higher on the value chain, with agribusinesses 

producing and selling processed goods, not simply basic commodities, while providing markets for 

African farmers. The TAAT initiative aims to achieve the first goal, while a number of other initiatives, 

notably the development of agropoles and well-functioning markets, focus on the second. TAAT is 

therefore the bedrock of Feed Africa.  

1.5 Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

1.5.1  Similar to Asia, enhancing Africa’s productivity requires significantly increased investment 

from African governments, businesses and development institutions to deploy  proven 21st century food 

production technologies to tens of millions of African farmers where they will have the most impact. 

These food production technologies already exist and include new high yield crop and livestock 

varieties,  micro-nutrient dense crops – for example, pro-vitamin A rich orange-fleshed sweet potato 

and high iron beans, drought tolerant maize varieties, integrated pest and disease management (IPDM), 

and simple storage and post-harvest technologies to reduce crop losses.   

1.5.2  The potential of these food production  technologies to provide food and nutrition security has 

been demonstrated and needs to be taken to scale.  For example, DroughtTEGO® is a trademark for a 

high yielding drought-tolerant maize variety developed by the Water Efficient Maize for Africa 

(WEMA) Project to mitigate against drought stress. Experts predict that with global changes Sub Sharan 

Africa will be disproportionately affected by drought and suffer a 30% decrease in yields.  Kenyan 

farmers who grew the WEMA varieties during the drought of 2016 obtained 3.6MT/Ha of maize 

compared to 1.5MT/Ha in fields of farmers who grew other commercial hybrids. In addition, it has been 

demonstrated that 125g of orange fleshed sweet potatoes (OFSP) can provide the daily provitamin A 



 

4 

needs of a preschooler. Vitamin A Deficiency (VAD) is a significant health concern in Africa 

contributing to high rates of blindness, disease and premature death in children and pregnant women.  

An estimated 43 million children under 5 years are Vitamin A deficient and  between 50,000 and 

125,000 of those vitamin A-deficient children go blind every year, half of them dying within 12 months 

of losing their sight.   

1.5.3  A major target of TAAT is the control of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW), a recent pest problem 

on the continent that currently puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 

billion in the 2017/2018 season.  This assessment is from research funded by the Department for 

International Development (DFID) at the Center for Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI) 

that assessed current and potential damage of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW).    Based on the 

aforementioned research findings, DFID requested the leadership of the African Development Bank to 

contain the serious problem of Fall Army Worm (FAW). Following, the Bank hosted a meeting of 

experts at the recent World Food Prize symposium in Des Moines, Iowa; in attendance were Center for 

Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI), USAID, the International Center for Improvement of 

Wheat and Maize (CIMMYT, the Spanish acronym), the International Center for Insect Physiology and 

Ecology (ICIPE), and the private sector.   The meeting recommended a regional approach,  awareness 

raising campaigns, scouting and early detection, 1Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM), and 

search for resistance in preferred varieties.  TAAT will tackle Fall Army Worm (FAW) based on these 

recommendations working with CABI, ICIPIE, CIMMYT, National Agriculture Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) of RMCs, regional and Sub-Regional Organizations, and R&D Centers.  

1.5.4  Simple storage and post-harvest technologies being to reduce crop losses and help farmers 

manage the increased harvest under TAAT include: hermetic grain storage (Purdue Improved Crops 

Storage system) that prevent pest and mycotoxins infection of stored grains.  Other post-harvest 

technologies include affordable and efficient grain drying, and low cost extruders for production of 

simple processed food by small and medium scale agribusinesses.    

1.5.5  Crop campaigns to reach farmers with agricultural technologies of inputs and extension have 

occurred in Africa with significant success in the past.  Over a four-year period, 2011-2015, Nigeria, 

working closely with Africa Rice, the rice CGIAR center in Africa, combined innovative (ICT-based) 

ways to deploy improved rice production technology of seeds and fertilizer, a value chain approach, and 

supportive public policies to reach 6 million rice farmers. Average yields in the country doubled from 

2MT/Ha to over 4MT/Ha and national paddy rice production rose by an additional 7 million MT. 

1.5.6  Similarly, in Malawi, delivery of subsidized seeds of improved maize varieties and fertilizer to 

millions of farmers in 2004 made the country self-sufficient in maize production and a net exporter of 

maize in a single season. Ethiopia’s national extension system also deployed new crop technologies to 

over 4.4 million smallholder farmers from 2010 to 2015 on nearly 2.2 million hectares of land. Since 

then, Ethiopia’s agriculture sector has enjoyed an average growth rate of over 7% per year, which has 

contributed in no small way to the double digit annual growth rate of the economy overall. 

1.5.7  The approach to scaling technologies has been based on national boundaries, instead of agro-

ecological zones across multiple countries. The releases of crop varieties often go through four years of 

testing in national contexts, which has to be replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological 

zone in which the same technology can make a difference. Thus, a technology that is good fit for a given 

agro-ecological zone of ten countries could take 40 years to reach farmers if deployment from country 

to country spreads one after the other. What is needed is a new approach that will cut back on these 

unnecessary regulatory bottlenecks and fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-

ecological zones in one go. This is what TAAT will do. This will help open up the regional seed industry 

and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

                                                           
1 1  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) optiones  include resistant germplasm, pesticides, biopesticides, botanicals, pheromones, 

biocontrol via natural enemies, etc. 



 

5 

1.5.8. TAAT will engage  Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) - of CGIAR centers 

and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) 

and the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), the umbrella body of NARES in Africa. 

Based on the menu of proven food production technologies, RMCs, as represented by NARES, will 

work with the CGIAR centers to prepare proposals for food technology outreach campaigns across 

similar agro-ecological zones that cut across multiple countries to the decision making body of the 

RTDI, the Clearinghouse (see details in Appendix 1). There are eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) 

of TAAT that are agro-ecology based and cover 18 priority commodities (see Appendix 2).  But for this 

phase, nine food production technologies have been prioritized because of potential impact to increase 

food security, combat malnutrition, reduce food imports, and improve livelihoods.  They include: Water 

Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), high yielding rice varieties adapted to Africa (the NERICA 

varieties), high-yielding and high-starch cassava varieties, high yielding sorghum and millet for the 

Sahel, orange fleshed sweet potatoes, high iron beans, small livestock (goat and sheep), aquaculture, 

and new wheat varieties.  Control of pests and diseases, for example the Fall Army Worm (FAW), is a 

cross cutting intervention across all nine technologies.  

1.5.9  While TAAT is not a research program to develop new technologies—for the most part the 

needed technologies already exist and in some cases are already in use—but rather a crop and livestock 

outreach campaign to disseminate best-bet crop varieties/livestock breeds and practices to the farmers, 

it requires a close partnership with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

and International R&D Centers to provide solutions that tend to arise as research is deployed over a 

wide range of similar but diverse agro-ecologies with unique micro-ecosystems. 

1.6 TAAT will carry out positive gender discrimination in favor of women 

1.6.1 A successful green revolution must be inclusive and based on a recognition that Africa’s 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked. Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture with the World Bank cautioning that “failure to recognise the different roles of 

men and women in agriculture is costly, resulting in misguided projects and programmes, forgone 

agricultural output and incomes, and food and nutrition insecurity”.  Indeed incorporating consideration 

for gender issues systematically in agricultural research, development, and extension systems will 

contribute significantly to meeting the food needs of Africa’s growing population and ensure that 

productivity gains in food systems translate to improved welfare of the poor. 

1.6.2 Women are important to Africa’s agriculture and agriculture is important to African women’s 

lives. The agricultural sector is the largest employer of African women, with 62% of economically 

active women working in the sector.  In countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and Burkina Faso, over 90% 

of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities.  Despite being heavily engaged in 

agriculture, African women earn less than men from the sector with the rural wage gap between men 

and women estimated at between 15-60%. In the case of Ivorian cocoa and Ethiopian coffee, for 

example, women provide 68% and 75% of the labour, respectively, but earn only earn 21% and 34% of 

the income generated. 

1.6.3 Research indicates that, when granted equal access to inputs and skills, women farmers are just 

as efficient as male farmers. Hence the privileging of male farmers, for example in Ivorian rice projects, 

is based on erroneous assumptions not supported by data. As such, gender responsiveness in agricultural 

research and development is not about ‘fixing the women farmers’, but rather addressing the 

institutional structures and technological impediments that hamper their productivity. Ultimately, the 

empowerment of women farmers requires institutional transformation, with research institutions 

becoming more gender responsive and paying close attention and genuinely responding to the needs of 

women farmers 



 

6 

1.6.4 In partnership with African Women in Agricultural Research and Development (AWARD), 

the Bank will systematically incorporate consideration for gender equality and ensure women’s equal 

access to agricultural technologies. In this regard, AWARD will support TAAT by: (i) Convening and 

coordinating a network of technical gender experts that would be available to members of the TAAT 

consortium to address issues of gender in the selected value chains which will maximize the impact of 

TAAT by providing consolidated gender expertise and opportunity for shared learning; (ii) Identifying 

and prequalifying bankable and scalable agricultural research and development innovations that address 

the gender gap in African agriculture and build relationships with private sector and other uptakers of 

gender responsive agricultural technologies.  Expected outcomes will be demonstrated change in in 

gender awareness, attitudes and/or behaviours of TAAT partners, a measurable increase in TAAT 

partner institutions with gender responsive agricultural innovation policies and strategies, and TAAT 

outputs that are gender responsive across value chains. 

1.7 Expected Impact of TAAT 

1.7.1. TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity and increase food production over the 

next 8-10 years (Table 2). TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food 

production valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  

Table 2: Impact on Productivity, Production, and Livelihood of TAAT 

Commodity Productivity 

baseline  (2016) (MT/Ha) 

Productivity 2025 

(MT/Ha) (mean) 
Production (MT) 

Maize  2 4 30 million 

Lowland Rice 2 4 15 million 

Wheat 1.5 3 25 million 

Sorghum 1 2 10 million 

Millet 1 2 5 million 

Cassava 12 20 20 million 

Small livestock (live 

weight at 12 months) 

25 Kg 50 Kg 10 million 

Fish (live weight at 6 

months) 

3 Kg 5 Kg 5 million 

 

1.7.2  TAAT will benefit, through improved food security and income, an estimated 11.7 million 

households (representing on average 40 million people) over ten years, reducing by as many as a third 

the total number of hungry people on the continent. The increased food production is also expected to 

have an effect on food prices, reducing the amount of food households spend on food, and further 

increasing access to more food. It is estimated that TAAT, including its Bank-financed Country 

programs, combined with the affiliated programs of the World Bank and AGRA, will contribute to 

lifting about 40 million people out of poverty. 

1.7.3  TAAT will help to create huge regional spill-over effects and Regional Public Goods (RPGs). 

Of particular importance are RPGs that target imminent “regional public threats” of destructive pests 

and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political borders and easily spread across them.  A 

good example is the recent invasion into Africa of the Fall Armyworm described above, which currently 

puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 billion in the 2017/2018 season.   

1.8 TAAT is a Regional Program Producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs) 

1.8.1  TAAT resources are targeted at facilitating effective functioning of the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI), made up of International Agriculture Research Centers of the 

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), National Agricultural Research 

and Extension Systems (NARES), African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF), Sub-Regional 

Organizations, all  non-governmental organizations, that will ensure that proven agricultural 

development technologies are rapidly deployed to RMCs. 



 

7 

1.8.2  TAAT aims at producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs), including: i) harmonized regional 

and Transnational border protocols for introduction and release of improved varieties/breed and other 

agricultural technologies, ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with 

liberalization of foundation seed production (to include private sector seed companies), iii) combatting 

“regional public threats” of destructive pests and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political 

borders and easily spread across them.   

1.8.3  The requested grant from the RPG window of ADF 14 will support CGIAR and low-income 

RMCs to drive delivery of food productions technologies into hands of at least 60% of all farmers after 

eight to ten years. Twenty two of these RMCs, namely: Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo 

DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 

Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia have written to the Bank to 

express interest in participating. Six of them (Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, 

and Sudan) are in fragile situations as defined by the eligibility for the Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

support under ADF-14. However, it should be noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public Goods 

(RPGs) of public interest; no RMC can be excluded from it or from their spillover benefits, given their 

public goods characteristics (see section 4.2 and Appendix 4). TAAT is therefore not exclusive to low-

income ADF RMCs. Non-ADF countries interested in TAAT such as Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia 

(ADB countries that have written to express interest in TAAT) are welcome to participate via  the ADB 

funding window of the Bank or other eligible partner funds (e.g., funds from BMGF and World Bank). 

Participation will simply depend on the ability of RMCs to meet requirements for technology 

deployment. For the 25 countries (22 ADF and 3 ADB) that have expressed interest in participating in 

TAAT, the country programs in the pipeline that are aligned to inserting a TAAT component are listed 

in Appendix 5. TAAT is therefore open to all RMCs, via their NARES, to make their best technologies 

accessible to farmers within countries working in close collaboration with regional and continental 

organizations. The new crop varieties and livestock breeds, cross-boundary crop and livestock diseases 

control (e.g., Fall Armyworm), crop management practices, knowledge and other products from the 

CGIAR’s research work are indeed RPGs made widely available to individuals and organizations 

working for sustainable agricultural development around the world. TAAT will be held to high 

standards of deployment and must meet clear key performance indicators or funding will be 

discontinued to erring institutions. 

1.9 TAAT will benefit from the lessons learned from previous Bank interventions  

1.9.1  The Bank’s earlier experience with the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of 

Strategic Crops in Africa” (SARD-SC) program – which funded research on four of the six strategic 

crops of the African Union (Cassava, Maize, Rice and Wheat) – provides crucial lessons that TAAT 

will build upon.  They include: i) experience on how to work regionally with international centers of 

excellence (the CGIAR) to rapidly introduce and test technologies across a region for optimal yields 

and eventual deployment to farmers; ii) The SARD-SC program revealed the importance of going to 

scale to ramp up food production and reduce imports.  TheSARD-SC program led to a doubling of 

yields for wheat, rice, maize, cassava on experimental fields and in on-farm trials; if average wheat 

yields increases from 1.5 to 3MT/Ha and higher tons per hectare could be replicated across 9.8 million 

hectares grown in Africa, the continent could be on the path to self-sufficiency in wheat production; iii) 

SARD-SC also demonstrated the advantages of working across multiple countries with similar 

agriculture-ecological zones, simultaneously introducing, testing and releasing new crop varieties in 

several countries at the same time. Other lessons are have been learned from the development of the 

NERICA (New Rice for Africa) rice varieties by AfricaRice in the 1990s (Appendix 6). 

1.10 The Value-Added of TAAT 

1.10.1  The value-added of TAAT is that it can leverage crop and livestock technologies that have 

been developed and validated in one or a few countries across entire agro-ecological zones covering 

many countries. For example, maize yields can be doubled across East and Southern Africa via an 



 

8 

introduction, registration, and deployment of already available drought tolerant Water Efficient Maize 

for Africa (WEMA) varieties. And perhaps the best demonstration of the value added of TAAT is in 

tackling pests and diseases such as Fall Armyworm accross an entire region.   

1.10.2 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede the speedy transfer of technologies across borders. 

2 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of TAAT 

The development objective of TAAT is to "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, majority 

women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, assure food security 

and raise rural incomes, and deliver regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across 

similar agro-ecological zones". Overall TAAT has three main objectives:  

i) Creating an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers via policies for 
deployment and adoption of food production technologies that are regionally 

harmonized, food and nutrition conscious, and environmentally sustainable; 

ii) Facilitate effective delivery of technologies to farmers by working with existing Regional 
Technology Delivery Infrastructure in a compact with RMCs, represented by NARES, 

private sector actors, and an independent technology Clearinghouse; 

iii) Raising agricultural production and productivity through the identification and 
deployment of appropriate technologies, including nutrient dense crop varieties, and 

vigorous crop outreach campaigns, extension, and market linkage campaigns, in RMCs. 

2.2 Strategy of TAAT 

2.2.1  Feed Africa takes a value chain approach to raising crop/livestock productivity in Africa. 

Figure 1 shows where TAAT will intervene in the commodity value chains. A commodity value chain 

is described as a series of goods and services required for a commodity to be produced and then to move 

from the place of its primary production to the ultimate end-user (Figure 1). 

 



 

9 

Figure 1: Positioning of TAAT within agricultural commodity value chains  

 

2.2.2  Agricultural growth that has occurred in Africa reveals that productivity enhancement and 

market access development are prevalent factors. Productivity unaccompanied by strong growth in 

markets leads to a glut from over-production, while markets without increased productivity gives rise 

to food imports due to insufficient supply. Feed Africa will work to reinforce these productivity aspects 

of the value chain and agriculture markets through its various initiatives such as TAAT, Agropoles, 

post-harvest losses and agro processing. The role of TAAT in particular is to improve outcomes at the 

beginning of this chain by increasing productivity, as well as resilience to weather and disease-related 

risks, providing a much more solid basis from which to build strong production systems and markets 

that make African agribusinesses successful. TAAT will work in concert with the other initiatives to 

foster the deployment of commercially viable technologies with improved access to input and output 

markets, and other enablers such as innovative finance and soft/hard infrastructure.  

2.2.3 It is important for TAAT to generate ‘quick wins’ to create credibility and attract both 

additional public and private sector financing. An initial set of priority agricultural commodities are: 

i) Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), 

ii) Import-quality rice for the west African lowlands, 

iii) Cassava for industrial use, 

iv) Small livestock (goats and sheep), 

v) Sorghum/millet for the Sahel, 

vi) Aquaculture 

vii) High yielding wheat varieties 

viii) Orange fleshed Vitamin A rich sweet potato varieties 

ix) High iron beans varieties for Africa 



 

10 

Management of pests and disease is a cross cutting theme across all the nine technologies 

2.2.4 Clear metrics of target productivity, production, beneficiaries, agro-ecologies, and countries have 

been pre-determined for these nine priority food production technologies (See Appendix 7) 

2.3 TAAT Activities 

2.3.1  The TAAT program consists of four major components namely: 

i) Component #1: Creation of an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers 
via a seed system, technology release and registration policies that are regionally 

harmonized 

ii) Component #2: A Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT 
platform—that is able to provide and deploy needed food production technologies and any 
additional adaptive research required 

iii) Component #3: Deployment of appropriate food production technologies, through 
crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs 

iv) Component #4: Project Management. 

2.3.2  Harmonization of technology release and registration, and seed system, policies 

 across regions 

The approach to scaling technologies based on national boundaries needs to be replaced by an approach 

that involves agro-ecological zones that spread across multiple countries. Policies and protocols for 

release and registration of crop varieties and animal breeds needs to be streamlined so that 

varieties/breeds released in one country can be utilized in other countries of the same region, same with 

seed system protocols that can replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological zone. TAAT, 

working with Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) and CGIAR center responsible for policy work, 

IFPRI (and its key partners such as the Africa Technology Policy Studies ATPS Network), will review 

national and regional policies on variety release, registration, and the seed system with an aim of 

harmonizing them to fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. This 

will help open up the regional seed industry and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

2.3.3. The Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT platform 

RTDI is a consortium of CGIAR centers, FARA, Africa Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) and 

SROs working on regional approaches to deployment of new crop and livestock technologies, and 

combatting pest and disease threats through a fair and transparent method in prioritizing technologies 

and allocating resources. The RTDI will develop a menu of food production technologies and work with 

RMCs, as represented by NARES and the private sector, to develop a proposal to take these technologies 

to scale.  Figure 2 schematically describes the RTDI processes. The RTDI is made up of four units, 

namely: 

1. A Project Steering Committee (PSC): the highest decision-making body composed of 
representatives of participating RMCs, the private sector, CGIAR centers. The 

committee provides oversight to Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  

2. Clearinghouse: the body of the consortium that decides on which technologies should 
be used. The Clearinghouse will be independent of the Project Management Unit (PMU);  

3. Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC): is at the core of TAAT and it is 
an agreement among the entire ecosystem of actors needed to deliver improved 



 

11 

technologies at scale for a specific crop or livestock value chain, for each of the priority 

commodities. They will be hosted the CGIAR center or institution with the particular 

mandate for each specific crop; 

4. A Project Management Unit: oversees day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary 
and administrative activities;  

2.3.4  Identification and deployment of appropriate technologies, through crop/livestock 

campaigns in RMCs 

TAAT will engage CGIAR and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production 

technologies, namely: seed system or artificial insemination guidelines (technical manuals) for large 

scale deployment of improved varieties/breeds, disease control, improved crop/animal production 

methods, aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will prepare a proposed food technology 

outreach campaign covering one or more of the menu items, with support from the respective CTDC 

for submission to the Clearinghouse of the RTDI. The proposals will clearly state the target 

beneficiaries, location, development impact, and timelines within the RMCs. The Clearinghouse will 

review the proposals according to a set of agreed criteria and recommendations for funding. Oversight 

will also be provided for implementation by the Clearing house. 

 

Figure 2: Process of origination, review, decision making, and funding in the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure 

2.4 Expected Output and Outcomes 

2.4.1 Expected Outputs 

TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity of target commodity up to 100% over the next 

8-10 years (Table 2). Other outputs include reduction of Vitamin A deficiency in children under five 

and pregnant women by 30% and reduction in post-harvest losses by 50% in target locations of TAAT 

over the next 8-10 years. 



 

12 

2.4.2 Provision of Regional Public Goods (RPG)  

Regional public goods will be provided via a number of vehicles including: 

i) Harmonization of regional and transnational border protocols for introduction and 
release of improved varieties/breed and other agricultural technologies 

ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with production of 
foundation seeds (inclusion of private sector seed companies) 

iii) Disease control – monitoring and IPDM methods 

iv) Extensive adaptation trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient dense 
varieties 

2.4.3 Crop Outreach Campaigns to reach millions of African Farmers 

i) Toolkits for the different priority commodities provided to the RMCs 

ii) Feedback on performance of technologies via the RTDIs 

iii) A doubling of acreage under improved crops and breeds, from the current 30% to 60%, 
by 2025 

iv) Availability of cheap and nutritious food 

2.4.4 Expected Outcomes 

TAAT will benefit via increased food security and income, raising farmer’s household incomes by an 

average of US$600 per annum, reaching an estimated 11.7 million households, representing on average 

40 million people, over ten years, and reducing by as much as a third the total number of hungry people 

on the continent. TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food production 

valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  The increased food production will also have an effect 

on food prices, reducing the amount households spend on food, and further increasing access to more 

food, in a positive feedback loop. TAAT is expected to add 3.15 million direct farm jobs over eight 

years. 

2.5 Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.5.1 Program Cost  

TAAT is divided into centrally managed activities, designed to produce regional public goods, and 

funded by grants from the Bank and partners, and country program activities to be financed through 

sovereign loans from the Bank and partners. The UA 29 million from the ADF XIV Regional Public 

Goods (RPGs) window will solely finance regional public goods described in the TAAT Program 

Framework Document. BMGF has already approved $1.14 million and AGRA is processing a $10 

million grant for centrally managed activities of TAAT. The country programs will be financed via 

AfDB sovereign loans to RMCs, as well as World Bank loans to RMCs to the tune of USD 700 million. 

The Bank’s financing of the central programs will be for nine priority commodities using 

resources from ADF XIV RPG window. This first set of commodities will be implemented over three 

(3) years (2018 to 2020). Only activities of the first nine commodities have been described in more 

detail in the present report, with the costing information below.  

 



 

13 

2.5.2  The total cost of first phase of TAAT is estimated at UA 40.00 million (USD 56.532 

million) net of taxes and based on 2016 prices comprising UA 15.27 million or 38% in local costs 

and UA 24.73 million or 62% in foreign costs. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 3% and 5%, respectively. The physical contingencies are 

estimated from 0% (emolument) to 5% (works) based on common practices. The price contingencies 

were estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local inflation rates of about 2% per annum 

and foreign inflation rates. 

2.5.3  The summary of the first phase of nine commodities costs by component and by category 

of expenditure are presented respectively in Tables 3-4. 

Table 3: Summary of Program Cost by Components 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 

1. CREATION OF ENABLING 

ENVIRON. FOR TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

6 049.38 9 800.52 15 849.90 4 280.32 6 934.49 11 214.82 62 30 

 

2. REGIONAL TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

4 900.26 8 043.82 12 944.09 3 467.25 5 691.52 9 158.77 62 25 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 
7 528.70 13 604.50 21 133.20 5 327.04 9 626.05 14 953.09 64 40 

 4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 1 771.93 777.78 2 549.70 1 253.75 550.33 1 804.08 31 5 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250.27 32 226.62 52 476.89 14 328.36 22 802.39 37 130.75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954.01 1 608.79 2 562.79 675.02 1 138.32 1 813.34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379.90 1 112.42 1 492.32 268.80 787.11 1 055.91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584.17 34 947.83 56 532.00 15 272.18 24 727.82 40 000.00 62  
 

Table 4: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

EXPENDITURES CATEGORIES 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 I. Investment Costs 18 834,77 32 027,12 50 861,89 13 326,80 22 661,23 35 988,03 63 97 

 A. GOODS 25,25 84,75 110,00 17,87 59,97 77,83 77 - 

  Vehicles 9,00 36,00 45,00 6,37 25,47 31,84 80 - 

  Equipment & Inputs 16,25 48,75 65,00 11,50 34,49 45,99 75 - 

 B. SERVICES 17 211,32 30 634,75 47 846,07 12 178,11 21 676,04 33 854,15 64 91 

  Training 5 138,97 6 280,96 11 419,93 3 636,15 4 444,18 8 080,33 55 22 

  Studies 1 861,58 5 584,74 7 446,32 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 75 14 

  Contractual Services 9 905,52 18 395,97 28 301,49 7 008,79 13 016,32 20 025,11 65 54 

  Audit 305,25 373,08 678,33 215,98 263,98 479,96 55 1 

 C. MISCELLANEOUS 1 598,20 1 307,62 2 905,82 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 45 6 

II. Recurrent Costs 1 415,50 199,50 1 615,00 1 001,56 141,16 1 142,72 12 3 

 A. PERSONEL 1 155,00 - 1 155,00 817,24 - 817,24 - 2 

 

B.DAILY SUBS. ALLOWANCES 

(DSA) 120,00 - 120,00 84,91 - 84,91 - - 

 

C. OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE 100,00 150,00 250,00 70,76 106,13 176,89 60 - 

  Vehicles 60,00 90,00 150,00 42,45 63,68 106,13 60 - 

  Equipment 40,00 60,00 100,00 28,30 42,45 70,76 60 - 

 

D. GENERAL OPERATING 

CHARGES 40,50 49,50 90,00 28,66 35,02 63,68 55 - 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250,27 32 226,62 52 476,89 14 328,36 22 802,39 37 130,75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954,01 1 608,79 2 562,79 675,02 1 138,32 1 813,34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379,90 1 112,42 1 492,32 268,80 787,11 1 055,91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 62  
 

2.6 Program financing arrangements  

2.6.1  Of the total first phase Project cost of UA 40 million (USD 56.532 million), Bank Financing 

will be UA 29 million or USD 40 million (72.5%)  (See Tables 5 and 6). This will finance 100% of 

Goods; 100% of services for the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC); 100% funding 



 

14 

for Enable Youth in TAAT (ENABLE-TAAT) and 100% operating costs. Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation (BMGF) will provide UA 0.83 million ((USD 1.138 million) or 2.1 %) to assist the 

establishment of the Clearing house. The funding from BMGF will cover recruitment of key staff and 

other operating expenses. The Clearinghouse will play a major role in the TAAT implementation. The 

Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) will provide UA 7.25 million (or USD 10 million) 

to finance 100% services (across Components 1, 2, and 3). The participating RMCs will contribute 

UA2.90 million (7.3%) in local currency, 100% in-kind, by provision of farm land for extension training 

facilities, demonstration activities, and other critical RPGs-promoting activities. Project beneficiaries 

include a variety of stakeholders: agripreneurs, farmer based organizations and cooperatives, 

commodity processors, private sector operators, registered SMEs, seeds producers, agro-input dealers, 

service providers, millers, aggregator and market operators, and young graduates.   

2.6.2  While table 5 below indicates the financing arrangements by local and foreign currency 

distribution, table 6 indicates financing by year. Grants’ allocations by source and expenditure 

categories is presented in Appendix 8a and by components in Appendix 8b 

Table 5: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

FINANCING 

SOURCES 

Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

% Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

 ADF Grant 12 894,72 28 090,97 40 985,70 9 123,84 19 876,16 29 000,00 72,5 

 AGRA 4 058,45 6 187,97 10 246,43 2 871,61 4 378,39 7 250,00 18,1 

 BMGF 532,43 668,88 1 201,30 376,73 473,27 850,00 2,1 

 Government 4 098,57 0,00 4 098,57 2 900,00 0,00 2 900,00 7,3 

Total Financing 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 100,0 

NB: Government contribution is 7.3% and in-kind (national staff salaries, part of the operating cost, rental value of the office space offered, laboratory 

infrastructure and experimental land and the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and custom duty exemption of different project procurement). It is less than 

10% required because six (6) of the target 22 low-income RMCs are countries are in fragile situations and conflict-affected (see related Annex in Vol. II 
of the Report, Technical Annex).. 

Table 6: Financing arrangements by Year 

FINANCING SOURCES 
Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

  ADF Grant 25 862,19 10 008,30 5 115,21 40 985,70 18 299,15 7 081,51 3 619,34 29 000,00 

  AGRA 5 059,20 3 435,51 1 751,71 10 246,43 3 579,71 2 430,84 1 239,45 7 250,00 

  BMGF - 593,01 608,29 1 201,30 - 419,59 430,41 850,00 

  Government 2 727,48 676,36 694,73 4 098,57 1 929,87 478,57 491,57 2 900,00 

Total Financing 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 

 

2.6.3 During the implementation period for each component, expenditures will be carried out 

according to the schedule in Table 7. The nine priority commodity value chain activities will be 

implemented during the first two years through a comprehensive deployment of new technologies in 

RMCs. Year 3 will be dedicated to the consolidation of the results through mainstreaming of the value 

chain development activities on a commercial basis 

  



 

15 

Table 7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD and UA Million)  

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

 

1. CREATION OF AN 

ENABLING 

ENVIRONMENT FOR 

TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

4 498,30 6 346,72 6 515,11 17 360,14 3 182,83 4 490,71 4 609,86 12 283,41 

 

2. REGIONAL 

TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

10 679,31 2 313,01 889,80 13 882,13 7 556,30 1 636,60 629,59 9 822,49 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF 

APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 

17 430,36 5 194,06 - 22 624,42 12 333,09 3 675,13 - 16 008,22 

 

4. PROGRAM 

MANAGEMENT 
1 040,90 859,38 765,03 2 665,31 736,51 608,07 541,31 1 885,88 

Total PROJECT COSTS 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 
 

2.7 Key Performance Indicators 

The TAAT first phase commodities performance indicators are outlined in the Results Based Logical 

Framework at three levels: Impact, Outcome and Output. 

 The impact indicators relate to more food secure population and dealing with the 
prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years. 

 The outcome indicators are household income, agricultural productivity, job creation, 
tons of additional food commodity, household dietary diversity, value of additional foods 

produced, and number of beneficiaries. 

 The output indicators include: technology policies harmonized across regions/countries, 
weak systems strengthened, improved crop varieties and livestock breeds widely applied, 

technology adoption constraints removed, promotional activities with a focus on 

technologies for safe and nutritious foods, and communities with better access to inputs 

and output markets. Others are best-bet technologies scaled out, campaigns implemented, 

delivery platforms convened, agripreneurs supported, M&Es of platforms carried out, 

trans-national pests and diseases facilitated, technologies identified and deployed, menus 

of proven food production technologies developed, and wide-scale farm extension 

models implemented.  

 See the RBLF for complete list. 

3 FEASIBILITY OF TAAT 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 It is anticipated that the Bank’s intervention will result in positive economic and financial 

impacts in RMCs from the nine priority technologies, especially given the public goods nature of the 

interventions. Economic and financial analyses were carried out using the economic surplus approach 

for the nine selected commodities. Improvements taken into account were streamlined and harmonized 

release of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, strengthening of seed systems, use of improved 

varieties of crops across the applicable agro-ecological zones, design and implementation of appropriate 

campaigns for trans-national control of pest and diseases, good agricultural practices (GAPs), capacity 

building and outreach, policy support and advisory services, as well as demonstration and promotional 

activities. The benefits were measured based on increase in food supply as a result of improved access 

to proven technologies and other farm inputs. The annual flows of gross economic benefits from 



 

16 

increased crop and livestock productivity, production and value chains were estimated and aggregated. 

The aggregate benefits and costs (per commodity value chain) were then discounted to derive the 

estimated present value (in 2017 values) of total net benefits from the intervention. The benefits and 

costs were later aggregated across the nine priority commodities to calculate the aggregate financial and 

economic impacts.  

3.1.2 The consolidated Net Present Value (NPV) of the Financial Net Benefits was US$ 431.5 

million with an internal rate of return (FIRR) of 27%. Using World Prices (to correct for domestic 

distortions, taxes, and subsidies), the NPV of net economic benefits was calculated at US$ 280 million 

with an internal rate of return of 23%.  The result is quite robust and includes changes in productivity 

(crop and livestock), levels of adoption of proven agricultural technologies, and discount rates. For 

instance, a scenario of adoption by 10% of farmers, 10% productivity increase, and 10% discount rate 

across the nine priority commodities still gave an aggregate NPV of US$ 296 million with an internal 

rate of return of 18%. This supports the potential economic impact of the TAAT approach.  

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts and Gender 

3.2.1 TAAT has been classified as Category 2 operation, indicating that the program activities are 

expected to have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) for the mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of the 

program was posted on the Bank’s website on 4 July 2017. It provides the processes and methodologies 

to be implemented by the Clearinghouse/PMU to screen and manage potential environmental and social 

impacts and risks likely to result from the proposed agriculture technologies and demonstration 

activities. Because TAAT will be executed at RMCs, the ESMF draws on applicable national and 

regional regulatory frameworks as well as international good practice guiding environmental and social 

management.  

3.2.2  Women’s large overrepresentation in agricultural tasks in Africa, combined with the existence 

of a gender gap in agricultural productivity and the need to boost Africa’s agricultural output calls for 

increased attention to raising female agricultural productivity. The technologies it invests in must 

respond to the needs and priorities of women as well as men in order to level the playing field and 

increase agricultural productivity. Implementing partners must emphasize the deployment of gender-

responsive technologies. There is a strong case within TAAT for carrying out positive gender 

discrimination, since women form the majority of farmers as well as food processors in Africa. Studies 

have shown that women are as efficient as men, given access to same technologies. A World Bank 

publication (2008) clearly documents gender based differences in African agriculture and in terms of 

technology, land, extension, finance, time, mobility and education and training. 

3.2.3  TAAT will ensure the gender responsiveness of the technologies. Evidence shows that 

introducing new agricultural technologies can exacerbate already existing gender disparities and make 

life tougher for smallholder farmers, especially women and girls. However, with proper attention, 

agricultural technologies have the potential to bridge the gender gap and lead to inclusive, agriculture-

driven prosperity for all Africans. The African Women in Agricultural Research and Development 

(AWARD) will be one of the partners for the TAAT program to not only build the capacity of key Bank 

staff and TAAT implementers to be more gender responsive, it will help mitigate potential negative 

gender impacts while upscaling those technologies that bridge Africa’s gender gap in agriculture. The 

TAAT program recognizes that gender equality in agribusinesses is a priority. The mechanisms to 

ensure social inclusion and gender equality in this project include appropriate outreach strategy and 

gender sensitive training on good agricultural practises, as well as adequate provisions for both genders 

to access affordable and quality agricultural technologies and input and output markets. In addition, this 

project will prioritize the adoption of gender friendly technologies and support policies in the target 

countries. 

 



 

17 

4 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Structure and Activities of the RTDI (TAAT Platform) 

The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) consists of the Project 

Steering Committee (PSC), the Clearing House, the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), and the Project Management Unit (PMU).  These component are described in more details 

below. 

4.1.2  Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

The Project Steering Committee is the highest decision-making body composed of representatives of 

AfDB, African Ministers of Agriculture of participating RMCs, the various CG Centers, the Private 

sector, NARES and regional farmer organizations. The committee provides oversight functions to 

Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  All annual work programs will be cleared by the 

PSC prior to funding.  Membership of the Program Steering Committee (PSC) will be approved by the 

Bank.  

4.1.3 Clearinghouse 

The Clearinghouse is the main decision making body of the RDTI when it comes to selecting which 

technologies to disseminate and scale up. It will be substantially autonomous; its work plan and budget 

will be approved by the Program Steering Committee (PSC). The objective of the Clearinghouse is to 

decide which proven agricultural technologies proposed by each Crop/Livestock compact group can be 

rolled out and taken to scale. The activities of the Clearinghouse are indicated in Appendix 1. 

The activities of the Clearinghouse include:  

i) Evaluating requests from the compacts for technologies to be rolled out and scaled up. 
This will be akin to a peer review mechanism of the proposed technologies; 

ii) Validating the design and plan with stakeholders for a buy-in and commitment; 

iii) Identifying the optimal mix of partners that will accompany the implementation, 
backstopping and monitoring of the proposed plan;  

iv) In collaboration with the RMCs, conduct monitoring and assessment of milestones and 
Performance Indicators;  

v) In collaboration with the Bank, advising Governments and private actors on investment 
opportunities and financing mechanisms for going to scale. 

4.1.3.1. Although the Clearinghouse will be based at the IITA sub-station in Cotonou it will be fully 

independent of the IITA management. It is not a part of the PMU and will operate as an independent 

unit with its own competitively recruited Director, supported by technical and support staff.  The key 

skills assets required in the Clearinghouse include: i) technology transfer specialist; ii) an outreach 

expert; iii) a communication expert;  iv) a gender development specialist, and v) M&E Specialist in 

addition to other general services staff.  

4.1.4 Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery Compacts 

At the heart of TAAT’s technology deployment effort is the Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery 

Compact (CTDC).  CTDC is an agreement between the CGIAR center with mandate for the commodity 



 

18 

value chain, NARES, the RMCs and the entire ecosystem of value chain actors—from input supplier, 

processors, aggregators, equipment manufacturers, extension agencies, etc.  The CTDC drives the 

implementation of TAAT activities for each of the nine priority commodities. RMCs who indicate 

interest in accessing and deploying at scale technologies for the commodity in question, can become a 

part of the compact. Request from the CTDCs for deployment of a list of technologies and resources 

required will be submitted to the RTDI, specifically the Program Steering Committee (PSC), who will 

work in tandem with the clearing house to review and approve the appropriate technologies. Figure 4 

shows the structure of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compacts (CTDC). 

4.1.5  The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) can be observed in 

figure 4 and 5. 

The activities of the RTDI or TAAT platform include: 

i) Identification and selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs involved in 
crop/livestock compacts; the RMCs will be front and center of the compacts to ensure 

ownership and sustainability with attention to specific value chains); 

ii) Improvement of seed systems. Specific tasks are: evaluation of existing seed systems 
to identify strengths and weaknesses, identification of policy and capacity development 

needs to address the weaknesses and take advantage of the strengths, implementation of 

the identified policy and capacity development needs to strengthen the seed systems; 

iii) Harmonization of regional variety release systems to ensure regional spillover effects 
of technologies. Specific tasks are: identification of constraints to variety release and 

access to improved varieties of crops in Africa and why varieties suitable for specific 

agro-ecologies cannot be applied to the wider ecological reach because of country 

boundaries, identification of policy and capacity-building options to address this issue, 

implementation of the identified policy and capacity building options on the ground, 

monitoring the effects); 

iv) Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases.  Specific tasks are: 
awareness raising that pest and diseases do not respect political boundaries with clear 

examples, design and development of appropriate campaigns for trans-national control 

of pest and diseases, implementation of the agreed on campaigns for trans-national 

control of pest and diseases; 

v) Support RMCs with policy audits and reviews to remove constraints to technology 
adoption and use; 

vi) Engage the Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on harmonization of agricultural 
technology release and synchronization of foundation seed protocols, disease control, 

monitoring and Integrated Pest Disease Management (IPDM) methods2, and adaptation 

trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient rich varieties; 

vii) Design and execute a comprehensive communication strategy to effectively 
communicate the goals, activities, and benefits of the Agricultural Transformation 

Agenda; 

 

                                                           
2  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) is combining different methods of pest and disease control ranging from varietal resistance and 

tolerance, chemical control (pesticides, fungicides, bactericides, etc.), biocontrol (using natural enemies of the pests), cultural practices (crop rotation, 
mixed cropping, planting dates,, etc.), and  



 

19 

viii) Fiduciary responsibility for the centralized activities of TAAT. 

Figure 3:  Schematic of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 4:  Schematic representation of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

20 

4.1.6  Two of such Compacts, CIPRISSA (for Rice) and TASI (for the African Savannahs) have 

already been set up by the Bank to coordinate activities for scaling up technologies to achieve self-

sufficiency in rice production and for transformation of the African Savannah into bread baskets. The 

CTDC will also engage Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Development Partners, namely 

the World Bank, JICA, IFAD, BMGF, Rockefeller Foundation, African Agriculture Fund (AAF), 

Agriculture Fast-Track Fund, Fund for African Private Sector Assistance (FAPA), Making Finance 

Work for Africa Partnership (MFW4A), Africa Climate Change Fund, Clim-Dev Fund, and Climate 

Investment Funds (CIF), and many others to secure co-financing for TAAT.   

4.1.6.1 The activities of the CTDC include: 

i) Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each 
of nine priority commodities (e.g., rice, wheat, aquaculture, water efficient maize for 

Africa, cassava, sorghum/millet, livestock, orange fleshed sweet potato, and high iron 

beans).  Specific tasks are to consult, discuss, and prepare an agreement (the compact) of 

technologies, activities, and focus of the platform. The compact will discuss and agree 

on the technologies to be delivered, packaging, targets and timeline to cost-effectively 

deliver the technologies in a timely fashion; 

ii) Agree with NARES and Extension agencies on approaches to deploy technologies 
Specific tasks are to meet with key stakeholders (NARES, Extension agencies, NGOs, 

private sector, etc.) in RMCs to discuss best approaches to deploy technologies; prioritize 

the approaches in terms of effectiveness; deploy the preferred approaches with the 

country’s agencies leading; monitor progress, learn lessons and make immediate use of 

the lessons in improving delivery; 

iii) Define the target areas.  Specific tasks are to consult with the RMCs about which 
geographic areas to focus on during the different phases of technology deployment; 

discuss and agree with the RMCs on material and human resources required to cover the 

target area and how to sources these; implement the technology; 

iv) Mobilize all actors across the value chain. Specific tasks are to identify and register all 
the key actors across each target commodity’s value chain; call a meeting of the different 

actors across each target commodity value chain to ascertain constraints and how best to 

solve these; assign roles on technology delivery to different actors across the value chain; 

ensure that different actors across the value chain perform the assigned functions; 

monitor, learn lessons and make immediate use of the lessons in improving technology 

delivery; 

v) Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension models and innovative models to 
organize and aggregate farmers; 

vi) Work with FARA and others to build capacity in the NARES and public sector for 
program design, execution, and monitoring, and in the private sector for value chain 

organization and governance; 

vii) Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, 
training and financing in coordination with ENABLE youth; 

viii) Promote climate-smart practices among farmers through funding and demonstration 
of the value of sustainable agriculture approaches;  

ix) Set targets and KPIs; monitor the achievement of the KPIs; distil lessons for 
improvements in future; .  Specific tasks are to discuss and identify key target areas; 



 

21 

formulate the targets that are achievable; mobilize those needed to achieve the targets; 

identify appropriate key performance indicators (KPIs) for different targets set 

x) M&E of the platform, using the outcome to improve the performance of the platform. 
Specific tasks are to design appropriate M&E data collection and analysis for the 

platform; discuss and ensure the leadership of RMCs in the M&E; implement the M&E. 

4.1.7. Project Management Unit (PMU) 

The Project Management Unit will: i) oversee day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary and 

administrative activities; ii) organize the transfer of project resources to the institutions leading the 

commodity value chains; iii) coordinate the compilation and review of reports from value chains and 

enablers for submission to the Bank; and iv) elaborate/implement administrative and financial 

management guidelines/template to be used across. 

4.1.8  The decision to pursue TAAT through a consortium of CGIAR Centers, the National 

Agricultural Research Systems (NARES), and their Umbrella body, FARA, donors, and development 

centers was decided at the High Level Conference on Feed Africa held in Dakar, Senegal, October 21-

23, 2015. At that meeting, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), being the oldest 

CGIAR center in Africa and the center with the most geographical spread – 20 sub-stations across the 

continent, was selected to coordinate the TAAT platform or the Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI).  IITA is therefore the Executing Agency (EA). IITA will set up a small Program 

Management Unit (PMU), headed by a competitively recruited Project Coordinator, to undertake 

fiduciary functions (procurement, disbursement, financial administration, reporting, audits, etc.). 

Specific MoUs and implementation agreements will be signed with each of the lead institutions of the 

target commodities and the other key Implementing Agencies (IAs). 

4.1.9  The day-to-day management of the CTDCs is left to the various Lead Centers. Each Lead 

Center, or expert CGIAR center, shall prepare an annual work plan and budget that will be submitted 

for the review and approval by the Clearinghouse based on clearly defined deliverables. African 

Agriculture Technology Foundation (AATF), IITA, and CIMMYT will lead the Water Efficient Maize 

Production; AfricaRice and IWMI shall lead the activities within the Rice Self-sufficiency; IITA leads 

Cassava Intensification; ICRISAT lead in Sahel Food Security; ILRI will lead on livestock; World Fish 

will lead on fish initiative; ICARDA and CIMMYT are responsible for Wheat Self-sufficiency. 

4.1.10  Policy support: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) will support the various 

institutions on policy issues that enhance successful program implementation and the attainment of the 

expected widespread and transformational impact. IFPRI will also work with other institutions that 

contribute to agricultural development policy work, including ‘The African Seed Access Index 

(TASAI)’, and African Technology Policy Study Network Program (ATPS). It will undertake its 

activities in consultation with each IA, reporting to clearinghouse. 

4.1.11. Capacity development: Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) shall undertake 

capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and within the Priority Intervention Areas 

(PIAs) and their value chains. They shall also sign a MoU with Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI), with indications of their expected role and terms of delivery as well as expected 

budget for the various activities. FARA will ensure that the thematic content of capacity development 

activities and modules are designed and administered in consultation with appropriate and qualified 

entities, including relevant and participating CGIAR Centers. FARA will also undertake its activities in 

consultation with each program initiative team and report to the Clearinghouse. An Activity Plan for 

each initiative will provide detailed work plans. 

 



 

22 

4.1.12  The National Agricultural Research and Extension Services (NARES) will be the primary 

delivery agent for the deployment of the selected technologies, in close consultation with the 

Government Ministries of Agriculture to ensure country buy-in. This will be supported by private sector 

entities and relevant donor/partner programs in the respective countries. These delivery channels include 

the AGRA supported input dealer network, the World Bank supported West African Agricultural 

Productivity Program (WAAPP) and similar programs in other regions. Support from CGIAR Centers 

Value Chain Leaders will be transactional, value for money and demonstrable benefits, supporting 

national institutions to roll out validated and branded technologies. 

4.1.13  Mechanisms for timely startup include the early appointment of the Head of the Clearinghouse 

and Program Coordination team, and execution of implementing MoUs between IITA (the EA) and the 

implementing partners. This team will oversee the project inception workshop to elucidate all the plans 

for a smooth program take-off.  

4.1.14  In the target RMCs, numerous donors are supporting overall agricultural development. Donor 

coordination occurs in different ways including through Thematic Working Groups, Sector Wide 

Approaches (SWAps), and Integrated Sector Approaches. For TAAT, the key donors that have indicated 

commitment so far include AfDB, World Bank, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rockefeller 

Foundation, and AGRA. These donors have been coordinating efforts through joint design workshops 

aimed at steering the development of TAAT for success and the achievement of the intended impact on 

the ground, and at ensuring that ongoing experiences are taken into account, and not duplicated (e.g., 

World Bank’s WAAPP, EAAPP, and APSA; AGRA’s work on input dealership; and BMGF’s work on 

technology development; etc.). Several of such meetings were attended by representatives of other 

prospective donors such as USAID. This coordination is also critical for effective monitoring of the 

program, and will continue during program implementation.   

4.1.15 Specific roles of each CGIAR center can be found in Table 8. 

4.2 Regional Public Goods (RPG) and Access to RPG Window of ADF 14:  

4.2.1  TAAT meets all features (Stages I and II) of RPGs, namely: (i) non-rival benefits (i.e., one 

country’s consumption does not subtract from the amount available to other countries), (ii) non-

excludable (no country in the region can be excluded from benefiting, except at a prohibitive cost), (iii) 

broad public interest and benefit (as demonstrated by letters of expression of interest from 22 low-

income ADF RMCs and three ADB RMCs and involvement of numerous NARES, FARA, SROs, and 

RECs in the formulation of TAAT); (iv) regional dimension or multi-country involvement (22 low-

income RMCs are targeted; Three ADB countries have expressed interest; TAAT adopts a regional, 

agro-ecological and commodity belt focus; TAAT will renew the drive to transform Agriculture in 

Africa by scaling up regional cooperation in combatting crop and livestock diseases, and accelerating 

delivery and development impact); (v) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and 

continental and regional objectives (TAAT is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy and four of 

the five high priority goals - the “High 5s”- namely; Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate Africa, 

and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa; TAAT is one of the flagship initiatives identified 

in the Bank’s recently approved Feed Africa: Strategy for agriculture transformation in Africa: 2016–

2025); (vi) catalytic and upstream role (TAAT’s interventions will remove bottlenecks and 

disincentives that have forestalled uptake of agricultural technologies in Africa and upstream segments 

of commodity value chains, making it catalytic and upstream; Given that the commodities of focus in 

TAAT are strategic to the Bank’s RMCs, as underscored by CAADP, TAAT will clearly play a catalytic 

role to engender strong support for these commodities, and (vii) higher developmental impact in 

cooperating (given that crop and livestock diseases travel freely across national boundaries, making it 

impossible for individual countries to achieve anything better than in cooperation). The different 

products from the CGIAR’s research work (earlier indicated) are indeed RPGs made widely available 

to individuals and organizations working for sustainable agricultural development in the world. It is for 

these reasons of public interest, non-rivalry in partaking in the benefits from TAAT, multi-country 



 

23 

involvement, and non-excludability that TAAT was selected among programs seeking support under 

the RPGs window as part of the 2017 RO prioritization exercise of the ADF-14 (see 2017 Regional 

Operations Prioritization and Selection Report, Ref. MJ/ADC/07/17/02 dated 28 July, 2017). Details 

are presented in Appendix 4.  

Table 8: The roles of CGIAR and other R&D Centers, and key stakeholders in TAAT 

CGIAR Center/Collaborator Role in TAAT 

International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA) 

Global yam and cowpea R&D center; African center for maize and cassava.  Will lead the work on 

cassava industrialization working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) and collaborate with African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) on Water 

Efficient Maize of Africa (WEMA).  Coordinating Agency for TAAT. 

International Food Policy Research 

Institute (IFPRI) 

Global food policy R&D center.  Will leads work on Policy Support Services, working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and Alliance for Green 

Revolution in Africa (AGRA) 

Africa Rice African rice R&D center.  Will lead work on rice working with National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) and International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)  

International Center for Tropical 

Agriculture (CIAT, its Spanish acronym) 

Global beans, cassava, and tropical forages R&D center.  Will lead the high iron beans effort 

working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

International Center for Agricultural 

Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) 

Regional R&D center for dry areas. Will lead work on wheat working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Livestock Research Institute 

(ILRI) 

Global livestock R&D center.  Will lead work on small ruminants working with National 

Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

WorldFish Global fish R&D center.  Will lead work on aquaculture working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) 

African center for the acquisition and licensing of agricultural technology from around the world.  

Will lead the Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) effort working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) 

and International Center for Wheat and Maize Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Center for Insect 

Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) 

African R&D center for pest control.  Will work with the Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), 

Global R&D center for agriculture and biosciences.  Will work with the International Center for 

Insect Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish 

acronym) 

Global R&D center for wheat and maize.  Will collaborate with African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) on Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA)   

International Potato Center (CIP, its 

Spanish acronym) 

Global potato R&D center; will lead the work on orange fleshed sweet potato working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

International Rice Research Institute 

(IRRI) 

Global rice R&D center; will work with AfricaRice and the NARES on rice production and post-

harvest technologies. 

International Water Management Institute 

(IWMI) 

Global water management R&D center. Will work on irrigation with AfricaRice on rice and with 

International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) on wheat 

Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa 

(AGRA) 

AGRA will provide parallel financing, lead downstream delivery of TAAT technologies, help 

strengthen policy dialogue with national governments and the private sector to shape and ensure a 

shared commitment to improving delivery systems, working with IFPRI. AGRA will also be 

involved in Capacity Development and Outreach work led by FARA. 

Regional Member Countries (RMCs) RMCs via National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will work with the 

lead CGIAR centers, Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on agricultural commodity value chains 

carrying out policy reforms, crop outreach campaigns, regional disease and pest control initiative. 

RMCs will also organize producers into farmer organizations and link to existing market and 

financial support programs. RMCs will also leverage country investment programs to execute 

TAAT. 

National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will be involved in deploying the 

selected technologies at country level, among other things.  

Forum for Agricultural Research in 

Africa (FARA) 

FARA shall undertake capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and in the PIAs and 

their constituent value chains. 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) Sub-Regional Umbrella bodies of NARS; will lead regional policy effort 

African Women in Agricultural Research 

and Development (AWARD) 

AWARD will collaborate to ensure that women are given priority attention in all cases. 

World Bank Major partner in financing TAAT at Country level. Expected financing at level of USD 700 million 

 

  



 

24 

4.3 Cost-sharing exemption 

4.3.1  The centrally managed activities planned to be funded with RPG resources in Phase I of TAAT 

do not have revenue generating capacity.  They are designed to target 22 low-income RMCs and set the 

stage for upcoming phases, which will require cost-sharing by participating countries, and country 

programs (funded through loans), both of which will benefit and deepen the application of science and 

technology to sustainable agricultural development in Africa. In addition, given TAAT’s regional, agro-

ecological and commodity belt focus, six of the targeted 22 low-income RMCs (Chad, Congo DRC, 

Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are loan ineligible and in fragile states. TAAT therefore 

meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and qualifies for financing through grant resources 

outside the PBA allocation (i.e. exclusively from the RO envelope). In line with this policy, OpsCom 

has cleared the cost-sharing exemption for the initial phase of the program, and recommends that cost-

sharing should be explored in subsequent phases after the project is launched. Management considers 

that TAAT meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and therefore seeks Board approval for 

financing of TAAT through grant resources outside the PBA allocation. Details on TAAT’s eligibility 

for the grant funding and cost-sharing exemption are presented in Appendix 9.  

4.4 Linking centrally managed programs to country programs 

4.4.1 TAAT has two planks: the centrally managed operations and the subsequent country programs. 

The benefits that the former will deliver are catalytic and upstream to the main country investment 

programs which will further be financed by the Bank and its partners (the WB, IFAD, AGRA, BMGF, 

etc.). Without TAAT and the support of the Bank, investments by the World Bank and development 

partners may not achieve as great a development impact. A good example is in the control of regional 

pest and disease threats to increased productivity. 

4.5 Private Sector Participation 

4.5.1 TAAT is developing a unique approach to working with the private sector via the Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compacts.  Over 40 private sector organizations ready to partner with TAAT were 

identified during the course of project development. These businesses operate in the areas of input 

manufacture and distribution, commercial seed and propagule production, bio-fertilizers, irrigation 

equipment and supplies, greenhouse construction and food processing. TAAT will create business 

opportunities for the private sector by building seed systems in the rural areas, including agro-dealer 

networks, thereby expanding demand for seeds and services (crop insurance). The Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compact will ensure that the private sector is at the table as opportunities are 

being discussed. 

4.6 Procurement Arrangements 

4.6.1 Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank 

for the program, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for 

Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Donor partners (WB, AGRA, BMGF, etc.) may use their own procurement rules 

over the resources which they contribute and implement in a parallel arrangement. The Bank 

procurement rules will apply to Bank financed activities. Specifically, procurement and financial 

management would be carried out as described in Appendix 10 and Appendix 11.   

4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4.7.1 As part of the M&E System to be carried out by the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), advanced monitoring tools aligned with the Bank's Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

indicators will be used to ensure day-to-day effective performance measurement. This includes but is 

not limited to options available at IITA and across its CGIAR Centers including participatory field-level 



 

25 

assessments, remote sensing, GIS, Big Data operations that compile and analyze program and national 

statistics, and advanced statistical diagnoses. Monitoring functions will be accompanied by detailed 

training in the use of these tools; as such, reporting will stem from participatory monitoring methods 

and structured data collection instruments. The functions of Knowledge Management are central to the 

M&E Framework and will be designed as a continuous, dynamic, action-reflection-action process. An 

independent external review will be carried out for TAAT at the end of year 2 (2019). 

4.7.2  An inception report will be prepared by the implementing partners, including baseline status, 

detailed work plans and budgets, as well as communication and technology deployment plans. All 

implementing partners will provide quarterly updates and regular situation reports; a mid-term progress 

report by each IA; a midterm progress report by the Clearinghouse; annual audit reports by independent 

external auditors; regular supervision reports would be carried out jointly by AFDB Country Offices 

and the Clearinghouse for national level interventions. All reports would be shared among the partners 

in the TAAT Framework. 

4.8 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The sustainability of TAAT will be achieved through: i) stronger links between research and 

extension; ii) stronger linkages of farmers to markets; iii) focus on agricultural value chains to ensure 

that the demand and supply sides are integrated; iv) supportive policy and regulatory environments; and 

v) expected higher commitment of governments to agriculture in the focal countries.  

4.9 Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

4.9.1 Potential risks and measures to mitigate are shown in Table 9. 

Table 9:  Risks and Mitigation 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures 

Lack of enabling environment (policy, market, etc.). Provide fact-based & targeted advocacy. 

Weak value chain linkages especially to off-takers and processors Build capacity of outgrowers around established commercial 

companies and processors 

Lack of commitments of stakeholders in implementation  Active engagement of all stakeholders, with clear roles 

Lack of commitment & logistical support to enable training  Sensitization & identification of strategic training partners. 

Policy inconsistency (on part of governments) & long process in 

changing policies. 

Dialogue using fact-based rationale for losses due to policies 

status quo 

Lack of commitment by the youth involved in technology promotion 

and demonstration. 

Proper orientation on mindset change through participatory 

approaches and incubation centers. 

Lack of cooperation by government agencies Dialogue for buy-in. 

Weak NARES capacity and resource base Be focused on important specific interventions. Capacity of 

NARES strengthened. 

Retaining earlier promising technologies that become obsolete along 

the way 

The Clearinghouse will institute a mechanism for identifying 

and decommissioning obsolete technologies  
 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1 Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance the centralized activities of the TAAT Framework Program is 

an ADF grant (from the Regional Public Goods window) for the eight CGIAR centers who will be 

involved in management of core TAAT activities. A Protocol of Agreement shall be entered into 

between by IITA on behalf of the CGIAR Centers and the Fund.  Conditions for Fund intervention and 

disbursement can be found in Appendix 12. 

5.2 Undertakings 

5.2.1 The Recipient (IITA) shall undertake to: i) Execute an Implementation Agreement with each 

of the implementing agencies; ii) Submit legal opinion(s), issued to the Fund by legal counsel acceptable 

to the Fund, in respect of each of the Implementation Agreement(s) submitted to the Fund, confirming 



 

26 

that the Implementation Agreements(s) between IITA and the relevant implementing agency has been 

duly authorized, ratified and executed on behalf of IITA and the relevant implementing agency, and 

constitutes a legal, valid and binding agreement on both parties; and iii) Not apply for withdrawal of the 

relevant portion of the proceeds of the Grant in respect of any implementing agency that has not 

executed an Implementation Agreement with the Recipient.  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This program complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

6 RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Boards of Directors are hereby requested to: 

(i) Approve TAAT as a Framework Program to be implemented in three (3) phases; 

(ii) Approve a Grant of Twenty Nine Million Units of Account (UA 29,000,000) from the 
regional public goods envelope of ADF-14, to IITA, for the purpose of implementation 

of centrally managed activities (for ADF-only countries while partner resources will 

support ADB countries) of the first phase and deployment of the first set of nine priority 

food production technologies, subject to the terms and conditions stipulated in this report; 

(iii) Approve an exemption from cost-sharing for phase 1; 

(iv) Take note that Management will submit to the Board(s); (a) on an annual basis, a status 
report on the implementation of the TAAT Framework Program; (b) separate specific 
proposals for the financing of the second and third phases subject to satisfactory 

implementation of the first phase, for consideration and decision in accordance with 

applicable Bank Group policies; and c) the requests for country program funding as these 

originate from specific RMCs. 









































 

  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 
 

NAMIBIA 

 

 AGRICULTURAL MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT 

PROJECT (NAMSIP)  

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 
 
 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:    Republic of Namibia 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) 

 

IMPLEMENTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 

 

Financing plan 
    

Source Amount (ZAR) %age Instrument 

AfDB Group   1.00 billion   70.5% ADB Loan  

Government   0.36 billion   25.5% N/A 

Beneficiaries   0.06 billion     4.0% N/A 

Total Cost   1.42 billion 100.0%  

 

Important Financial Information 

   

Loan Currency South African Rands (ZAR). 

Loan Type  Fully Flexible Loan. 

Tenor 13 years (inclusive of Grace Period). 

Grace period 3 years. 

Average Loan Maturity* 8.13 (function of the amortization profile). 

Repayments 28 consecutive quarterly payments after grace period 

Interest Rate 

Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium. 

This Interest Rate will be floored to zero. 

Base Rate 

Floating Base Rate (3-month JIBAR reset each 1st 

February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November). 

A free option to fix the Base Rate is available. 

Funding Cost Margin 

The Bank funding cost margin as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 

1st February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November. 

Lending Margin 80 basis points (0.8%). 

Maturity Premium Zero (0) % if Average Loan Maturity <= 12.75 years 

Front-end fees 
0.25% of the loan amount payable at signature of the 

loan agreement or latest 30 days from signature. 

Commitment fees 

0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees 

start accruing 60 days after signature of the loan 

agreement and are payable on Payment dates. 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate** 

In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base 

Rate, the Borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating 

or refix it on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate** 

The Borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the 

Base Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount 

Transaction fees are payable. 



 

iii 

 

Option to convert loan 

currency** 

The Borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to 

another approved lending currency of the Bank 

Transaction fees are payable. 

  

FIRR, NPV (base case) 26.00%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.13 billion  

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23.74%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.03 billion  

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval (OpsCom) 23rd March, 2017 

Board Approval 4th December, 2017 

Effectiveness February 2018 

Completion 31st December 2022 

Last Disbursement 30th June 2023 

Last Repayment December 2030 



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

1.1  Project Overview: The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement 
Project’s (NAMSIP) development goal is to improve household food security and reduce 

poverty. The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce 

annual importation of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance 

household incomes, which will improve the lives of the rural people. The Project will be 

implemented nationwide by the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) over a 

period of 5 years. NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 

Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed 

Systems Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, 

(i) Capacity Building, and (ii) Project Management. Gender, environmental and social issues 

have been considered in Project activities. The total Project cost is ZAR 1.42 billion which will 

be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%), (ii) Government contribution of 

ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%), and (iii) beneficiaries contribution of ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%).  

 

1.2  The Project will directly benefit 294,500 crop producers/farmers (157,558 female and 
136,942 male), and also 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). 

In addition, 33 extension and veterinary staff will be trained in agricultural mechanisation 

inorder to ably transfer knowledge and skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 

111 farmer cooperatives. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, women and youth in 

agricultural production and processing. The Project will also indirectly benefit about 800,000 

people along the cereal and livestock value chains. The FIRR is estimated at 26.00% and NPV 

of ZAR 1.13 billion, at 12% opportunity cost of capital. The EIRR is 23.74% and NPV of ZAR 

1.03 billion, at 12 % opportunity cost of capital. To promote inclusive growth, NAMSIP will 

facilitate equitable allocation of resources to participating rural men, women and youths, and 

also implement its activities in a sustainable manner. 

 

1.3  Needs Assessment: Agriculture is the biggest employer in Namibia but contributed 
3.4% share to GDP (2016) and has low wage rates. Consequently, transforming agriculture 

constitutes the biggest pathway for creating quality jobs and reducing inequality in Namibia. 

The Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-2021/2022), Harambee Prosperity 

Plan (HPP: 2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization identify 

agriculture as a priority area which has the potential to contribute to economic progression, 

social transformation and environmental sustainability. The HPP has set up an ambitious target 

with regard to hunger poverty under Pillar 3 (Social Progression) that “no Namibian should 

die of hunger during and after Harambee period”. The Government’s policy is to increase 

agricultural production by expanding the development of irrigation schemes and also 

promoting dryland crop production through agricultural mechanisation and seed systems 

improvement in order to boost cereal crops and livestock production which can be used as 

launch pads for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) driven industrialization. NAMSIP has 

been designed based on the Government’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and 

Integrated Agricultural Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). HACCIADEP was 

developed to stimulate high quality production and market access for crops and livestock 

products especially from small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors. 

NAMSIP’s focus on agricultural mechanization, livestock and seed improvement directly 

responds to NDP5 and HPP which aim at structural transformation through increase in 

agricultural productivity and value addition as game changers. One of the key challenges 

affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely access farm 

machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest handling and 

marketing. Agricultural mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in 

a timely manner, especially in dry land farming system, and also help in increasing productivity 



 

v 

 

and reducing cost of cultivation. Introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, 

since most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilise manual labour 

and draught animal power. The modernization of agriculture, through mechanization, will 

contribute to overall increase in cereal crops production. This will result in 40% reduction of 

the country’s imports of grain/cereal crops needs which is estimated at 60% per annum 

(MAWF/FAO 2016 data). 

 

1.4  Bank’s Added Value: The proposed NAMSIP is responding to development challenges 
in agriculture sector and is in line with the Government’s development agenda. In view of the 

prevailing liquidity constraints in the domestic market, the long term tenure of the Bank’s 

lending in South African Rand (ZAR) will have softer impact on public debt than borrowing 

from international capital market. Through NAMSIP, the Bank will leverage its unique position 

as a reliable and trusted partner of choice to sustain and help implement development projects 

in Namibia. The NAMSIP design has been guided by the Bank’s past and on-going agriculture 

projects which focussed on improving crop and livestock value chains. Lessons learnt from the 

Bank’s involvement in agriculture sector include the need to involve beneficiaries, in a 

participatory manner, during project design and implementation in order to enhance ownership 

and ensure sustainability. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) is anchored 

on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is 

aligned to the second pillar of the CSP through enhancement of crop and livestock development 

with involvement of the private sector, especially in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment. The Project is aligned to the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy 

(TYS: 2013-2022) core operational areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis 

namely agriculture and gender in that it will improve availability and access of agricultural 

mechanisation and certified seeds to enhance productivity, develop irrigation and civil 

infrastructure, enhance household income, food security and nutrition, create jobs and promote 

gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line with Pillar II of the Gender 

Strategy (2014-2018). The Project is also in line with the TYS on inclusive growth by focussing 

on the smallholder farmers. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority-High-5 areas, 

namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP 

design has adopted a value chain approach to address various challenges in a manner that 

increases crop and livestock productivity in order to create an enabling agribusiness 

environment. 

 

1.5  Knowledge Management: NAMSIP will contribute to the generation of knowledge 
throughout the implementation period which will be useful during design and implementation 

of future similar projects especially on how to (i) improve crop and livestock development, (ii) 

use smallholder farmers cooperatives to produce good quality certified seeds to improve 

productivity, (iii) raise household incomes of smallholder farmers, and (iv) broaden 

employment and job opportunities along cereal crops and livestock value chains. The focus on 

livestock disease control and management will also generate knowledge for future 

interventions to enhance livestock production which is in line with the development of 

knowledge-based economy. The generated knowledge will be documented through routine 

monitoring and shared with key stakeholders during Project implementation. The Project-

related online information shall be available, to the public, through the existing 

Government/MAWF website which will be updated regularly by the Project.  



 

vi 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK (PROJECT MATRIX) 

 
Country and Project Name:    Namibia – Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

Purpose of the Project:            To contribute to food security, poverty reduction and economic growth. 
 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

IMPACT 

 

1. Contribute to improved food 

security. 

 

1. Percentage (%) decrease of food 

insecure people. 

2017 

1.   (25) 

 

By 2025 

1.   (12) 

 

Household Income 

and Expenditure 

Survey (NHIES). 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural 

production for cereal crops. 

 

 

 

2.2 Improved rural 

employment. 

 

2.1.1 Nutrient-dense crop production 

(‘000 tonnes) increased. 
 

2.1.2 Annual import (%) of country’s 

grains/cereal crops. 
 

2.2 No of jobs created. 
 

2017 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (1.04); and 

(ii) Pearl Millet (4.23).   
 

2.1.2 (60%) 

 
 

2.2. (0) 

By 2023 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (47.0); and (ii) 

Pearl Millet (162.0). 
 

2.1.2 (20%) 

 

2.2. 111,240 (for men, women 

and youths)  

 

NSA report. 

Market survey 

reports. 

Project reports. 

Assumptions: 

 Favourable 
macroeconomic 

conditions. 

 

OUTPUTS 

 

3. Agricultural Mechanisation 

3.1 Provide assorted farm 
machinery and equipment to farmer 

cooperatives.  

 

3.2 Supply and install 

drip/sprinkler irrigation systems for 

crop production. 
 

 

3.3 Support to animal health and 
traceability equipment.  

 

 

4. Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement 

 

4.1 Establish 3 irrigation systems 

(standard pre-designed drip or 

sprinkler), 200 ha each, for 
foundation seed production. 

 
4.2 Facilitate production and 

distribution of certified seed. 

 
 

 

3.1.1 Set of tractors with accessories. 

3.1.2 Set of walking tractors with 
accessories. 

 

3.2 Set of standard (ready for installation) 

40 kW-powered drip/sprinkler irrigation 

systems (each covering max 10ha). 

 
 

 

3.3.1 No. of animal health equipment. 
3.3.2 No. of traceability equipment. 

 

 
 

 

 
4.1 Total area (ha) under drip/sprinkler 

irrigation. 

 
4.2.1 Quantity of certified seed produced 

(tonnes). 
4.2.2 No. of farmers involved in seed 

multiplication. 

4.2.3 No of farmers involved in certified 
seed marketing. 

(2017) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (0); (ii) 60-

70 KW (0); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (0). 

3.1.2 (0) 

 

3.2  (0) 

 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold 
chain/drug kits (0); (ii) 

automatic drug injection guns 

(0); (iii) deworming applicators 
(0); and (iv) castration 

burdizzos (0). 

3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 
(0); (ii) hoof trimmers (0); (iii) 

ear tag applicator (0); and (iv) 

branding iron (0). 
 

4.1  (0) 

 
4.2.1  (i) maize (0); (ii) 

Sorghum (0); (iii) pearl millet 
(0); and (iv) cowpeas (0) 

4.2.2 (i) total (0); (ii) men (0); 

and (iii) female (0). 
4.2.3  (0) 

(2022) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (150); (ii) 60-

70 KW (100); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (300). 

3.1.2 (700) 

 

3.2  (169) 
 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold chain/drug 

kits (3,500); (ii) automatic drug 

injection guns (3,500); (iii) 
deworming applicators (3,500); 

and (iv) castration burdizzos 

(3,500). 
3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 

(3,500); (ii) hoof trimmers (3,500); 

(iii) ear tag applicator (3,500); and 
(iv) branding iron (700). 

 

4.1  (600) 
 

4.2.1  (i) maize (2,100); (ii) 
Sorghum (900); (iii) pearl millet 

(600); and (iv) cowpeas (600) 

4.2.2 (i) Total (294,500); (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558). 

4.2.3  (294,500) 
 

 

Project Progress 

Reports. 

 

Risk #1: Reduced 
sustainability of irrigation 

schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 
Mitigation #1: The Project, 

through cooperatives, will 

facilitate establishment of 
management entity. The 

certified seed processing 

plant will be managed by 
the cooperatives (Private 

Sector). 

 
Risk #2: Project 

implementation delays. 

Mitigation #2: Regular and 
close follow up by the 

PSC, HCT, and Bank 

supervision missions. 
 

Risk #3: Drastic weather 

variations/climatic 
conditions. 

Mitigation #3: Project 
activities will be 

implemented together with 

                                                 
1 Refer to Appendix 3, for the output indicators’ full list/description including target quantities per Region/geographical distribution. 
2 Unless stated, for the outcome and output indicators, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 



 

vii 

 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

 

4.3 Facilitate procurement of seed 

pre-cleaning machines. 
 

4.4 Facilitate construction of full-
house seed processing plant, with 

associated equipment. 
 

4.5 Procure machinery for seed 

production and processing 
(supplied to cooperatives).  

 

 

 

 

5. Capacity Building 

 

5.1 Support to agricultural training 

institutions. 
 

 

 
 

 

 
5.2 Support to farmer cooperatives 

including community mobilisation. 

 
5.3 Support Gender mainstreaming 

activities. 

 
5.4 Improve food security and 

nutrition. 

 

 

6. Project Management 

 

6.1 Project management improved. 

 

6.2 M&E system established. 

 

4.3 No. of seed pre-cleaning machines. 

 
4.4 No. of seed processing plants 

constructed. 

 
4.5.1 Sets of tractors with matching trailer, 

plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, 

weeding cultivator, fertilizer applicator, 
and herbicide boom sprayer. 

4.5.2 No of equipment and packaging 

material for seeds. 

4.5.3 No. of pearl millet (mahangu), 

cowpeas and maize prototype thresher 

plant supplied. 
 

5.1.1 No of MAWF agricultural training 

centers supported. 

5.1.2 No of farmers trained on the use of 
farm machinery & equipment. 

5.1.3 No of seed growers and seed 

inspectors trained. 

5.1.4 No of staff trained (Training of 

Trainers) 
 

5.2. No of cooperatives 

formed/strengthened supported. 
 

5.3. Percentage of various Gender-related 

activities supported. 
 

5.4.1 No of households trained in food 
security and nutrition. 

5.4.2 No of infants (6-24 months) 

undergoing feeding programme 
(Government support). 
 

6.1 No of key (i) PIU and (ii) PSC staff 

appointed. 
 

6.2.1 No of M&E system established (No). 

6.2.2 No of reports (i) baseline survey; (ii) 
QPR; (iii) MTR; and (iv) PCR. 

 

4.3  (0) 

 
4.4  (0) 

 

 
4.5.1 (i) 80-90 KWA (0), and 

(ii) 60-70 KWA (0). 

 
 

4.5.2 (0). 

 

4.5.3 (0). 

 

 
 

5.1.1  (0) 

 
5.1.2  (i) Total (0): (ii) male 

(0); and (iii) female (0) 

 
5.1.3  (0) 

5.1.4 (0) 

 
 

5.2  (51) 
 

 
 

5.3 (0) 
 

 

5.4.1 (0) 
 

5.4.2 (0) 

 
 

 

6.1. (i) 0; and (ii) 0 
 
 

6.2.1  (0) 
6.2.2  (i) 0; (ii) 0; (iii) 0; and 

(iv) 0 

 

4.3  (8) 

 
4.4  (5) 

 
 

4.5.1  (i) 80-90 KWA (5), and (ii) 

60-70 KWA (5) 
 

 

4.5.2  (4) 
 

4.5.3  (14) 

 
 
 

5.1.1  (3) 

 

5.1.2 (i) Total (294,500): (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558) 
 

5.1.3  (3,000) 

5.1.4  (34) 
 

 
 

5.2.  (111 cooperatives, with total 

membership of 10,681, including 

6,912 women) 
 

5.3 (100%) 
 

5.4.1 (i) 100 FHH and (ii) 2,000 
(MHH). 
 

5.4.2 (2,600) 

 
 

 

 
 

6.1.  (i) 4; and (ii) 5 
 

 

6.2.1  (1) 

6.2.2  (i) 1; (ii) 20; (iii) 1; and (iv) 
1 

conservation agriculture 

based on the cropping 

schedule so that little 
amount of rainfall can fully 

be utilised by the crops. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S
 Components Inputs 

 

Component 1 - Value Chain Improvement:  Sub-component 1.1 Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion); and Sub-component 1.2 

Certified Seed Systems Improvement (0.21 billion). Component 1 cost: ZAR 0.99 billion (69.8%). 

 

Component 2 - Institutional Support: Sub-component 2.1 Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion); and Sub-component 2.2 Project 

Management (ZAR 0.36 billion). Component 2 cost: ZAR 0.43 billion (30.2%). 

 

Project Cost: ZAR 1.42 billion. 

 

ADB Loan: ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%). 

Government: ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%).  

Beneficiaries: ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%). 
 



 

viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIME FRAME/GENERAL IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE3 

 

 
 

                                                 
3 This is a general Project implementation schedule. Consequently, the detailed annual work schedule will be developed before the beginning of each Project Year (PY). 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON PROPOSED LOAN FOR THE NAMIBIA AGRICULTURAL 

MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 

 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation of an ADB Loan proposal of ZAR 

1.00 billion from the Bank resources to finance the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed 

Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1.  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1. Namibia is a semi-arid country in south-western Africa with a total land area of 824,268 km2 
consisting of poorly vegetated semi desert-like areas, Namib Desert, Kalahari Desert, extensive 

savannah and woodlands, and subtropical forests. Namibia is one of the sunniest (300 days per year) 

and driest countries in the world. The climate is characterized by hot and dry conditions with mean 

temperature of 24°C in summer and 14°C in winter. About 92% of the land area is defined as hyper-

arid, arid or semi-arid. Rainfall patterns are characterized by their high temporal and spatial variability. 

Mean annual rainfall is about 285 mm, out of which 83% evaporates, 14% is used up by vegetation, 1% 

recharges groundwater and 2% becomes runoff. Low and variable rainfall and inherently poor soils are 

major obstacles to agriculture production. Five perennial rivers are found along the borders with 

neighbouring countries whilst other inland rivers are ephemeral. Despite this, Namibia is blessed with 

rich natural resources and also well-developed physical infrastructure. Namibia has enjoyed relative 

peace and political stability since independence in 1990 and has good track record of economic 

performance due to a stable political environment and prudent macroeconomic policies. With a median 

growth rate of 4.5% since independence, real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was USD 

11,408.10 in 20154. However, Namibia has one of the most unequal income distributions in Africa, with 

a 2016 Gini coefficient of 0.57. According to Namibia Statistics Agency’s (NSA) Labour Force Survey 

(2016), the overall unemployment rate is 34% due to prolonged drought that has affected the agricultural 

sector. The Labour Force Survey (2016) results demonstrate the importance of the agricultural sector in 

Namibia economy and in the livelihoods of people. Unemployment (34%), poverty (18% of the 

population is below poverty line, that is, less than USD 39 per month) and household food insecurity 

are major challenges. According to the Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-

2021/2022), poverty is a major factor limiting access to food due to reliance on market purchases for 

food. 

 

1.1.2. In 2016, mining accounted for about 11.3% of GDP (Annual National Accounts/ANA 2016), 
but employed only 2% of the labour force. On the other hand, agriculture which is the biggest employer, 

contributed only 3.4% share to GDP (ANA 2016). Although adverse weather is partly responsible for 

agriculture’s relatively small contribution to Namibia’s GDP, lack of modernisation in farming 

techniques and lack of infrastructure in business development have made the agriculture sector less 

efficient and profitable than it might otherwise be. Agriculture sector remains a strategic sector for many 

Namibians. The low employment elasticity of key growth drivers and the low wage in the agriculture 

sector partly explains the failure by the economy to translate high growth rates into more jobs and greater 

income equality. Consequently, transforming agriculture constitutes the biggest pathway for creating 

jobs and reducing inequality. The Project is in line with the NDP5, Harambee Prosperity Plan (HPP: 

2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization which identify agriculture as 

a priority area that has potential to contribute to economic progression, social transformation, 

environmental sustainability and good governance. NDP5 is an instrument for Namibia’s Vision 2030 

on prosperity, harmony, peace and political stability. The HPP has set up a target with regard to hunger 

                                                 
4 World Bank Country Income Classification (December, 2016) categorizes Namibia is as an Upper Middle Income Country.  



 

2 

 

poverty, under Pillar 3 (Social Progression), that “no Namibian should die of hunger during and after 

Harambee period”. The Namibia’s comparative socio-economic indicators are reflected in Appendix 1. 

 

1.1.3. The agriculture sector remains central to the lives of majority of Namibians since it, directly or 
indirectly, supports over 70% of the country's population. The sector can be divided into two distinct 

sub-sectors (i) capital intensive, relatively well developed and export oriented commercial sub-sector 

which covers about 44% of the total arable land, though it accommodates only 10% of the population, 

and (ii) subsistence-based, high-labour, low-technology communal sub-sector which covers 41% of the 

total arable area and accommodates about 60% of the population. Agricultural production, and 

subsequently household income, is low in the subsistence sector due to chronic drought/water shortages 

resulting in death of animals and also crop failures. Other problems include frequent occurrence of 

animal diseases, widespread soil erosion and land degradation, inadequate agricultural land, high cost 

of agricultural inputs, lack of access to finances, poor farmer organisation, low farm-labour force, 

inability of rural farmers to timely access quality certified seeds, and also farm machinery/equipment. 

In Namibia, the major food crops are pearl millet (mahangu), maize, sorghum, and wheat. According to 

MAWF, in 2016, the Government imported about 60% of Namibia’s cereal needs.  

 

1.1.4. The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) has been 
designed in line with MAWF’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and Integrated Agricultural 

Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). The HACCIADEP aims at stimulating high quality 

production and market access for crops and livestock products especially from small and medium scale 

farmers and agro-processors. The HACCIADEP has 10 schemes (total estimated cost of ZAR 13 billion) 

namely: (i) Flood water irrigation and infrastructure development scheme, (ii) Northern Communal 

Areas (NCA) Beef value chain development scheme, (iii) Small stock value chain development scheme 

for small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors in the Southern Region of 

Namibia, (iv) Agricultural mechanization scheme, (v) Cereal value chain development scheme, (vi) 

Horticulture value chain development scheme, (vii) Poultry value chain development scheme, (viii) 

Milk value chain development, (ix) Seed System development, and (x) Debushing and bush value chain 

development scheme. At the request of the Government, NAMSIP will contribute to the attainment of 

HACCIADEP’s 2 schemes, namely (i) agricultural mechanization scheme, and (ii) seed systems 

development scheme, which are key for sustainable crop and livestock value chain improvement. One 

of the key challenges affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely 

access farm machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest preservation and marketing. 

Mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in a timely manner and also help in 

increasing productivity and reducing cost of cultivation, especially in rainfed farming systems, where 

the rainy season is short. Above that, introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, since 

most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilize mainly manual labour and 

draught animal power. The support to the certified seeds system development will help to address the 

challenges on availability of high quality seeds, especially under the dry land crop production 

programme, which will lead to increased nutrient dense crop productivity. Certified seed quality is the 

most important determinant of agricultural production potential on which the efficacy of other 

agricultural inputs depends. Seed of appropriate high value characteristics are required to meet the 

demand of diverse agro-climatic conditions and cropping system. 

 

1.1.5. NAMSIP will enhance dryland crop production, irrigated crop production, State Owned 
Enterprises (SOEs), and Private Sector operations through effective utilisation of agricultural machinery 

and equipment for livestock production, and processing which can be used as launch pads for SME-

driven industrialization. The Project will contribute to the Namibia’s Growth at Home Strategy which 

focuses on supporting value addition for sustainable growth and securing local and international market 

access. NAMSIP will significantly contribute to Government’s plans to (i) achieve “zero deaths” (HPP 

outcome # 7) as a result of hunger, (ii) improve food security and nutrition, and (iii) promote import 



 

3 

 

substitution of staple foods by focusing on cereal-crops and livestock value chains. NAMSIP will also 

contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (i) SDG #1 (No Poverty) - 

growth in agriculture is effective at reducing poverty, (ii) SDG #2 (Zero Hunger) - efficient crop 

production improves food security and nutrition, and (iii) SDG #5 (Gender Equality) - provision of 

resources to women farmers enhance agricultural productivity.  

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 

 

1.2.1. In January/February 2017, the Government of Namibia and the Bank agreed on 2 interventions 
to meet both short term and long term financing needs comprising (i) a Programme Based Operation 

(PBO)/budget support (ZAR 6 billion, approved in May 2017) to support the Government’s bold reform 

programme and finance the fiscal deficit, and (ii) an investment programme (ZAR 4 billion) to fill the 

financing gaps created by fiscal consolidation measures in ‘ready to go’ HPP projects. The NAMSIP 

(ZAR 1 billion) is part of the ZAR 4 billion investment programme and complements the approved ZAR 

6 billion PBO by addressing agricultural mechanisation, certified seeds and infrastructure bottlenecks 

in the agriculture sector, as indicated in Appendix 2. The other 2 investment projects are under Transport 

Sector (ZAR 2 billion) and Education Sector (ZAR 1 billion), which are being processed concurrently.  

 

1.2.2. NAMSIP is aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core operational 
areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis namely agriculture and gender in that it will 

improve availability and access of agricultural mechanisation and certified seeds, enhance household 

income, food security and nutrition, and gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line 

with Pillar II of the Gender Strategy (2014-2018). The Project will ensure inclusiveness of rural farmers 

(men, women and youths) as direct beneficiaries. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority High-

5 areas, namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP design has 

adopted a value chain approach to simultaneously address challenges in a manner that increases 

agricultural productivity and facilitates an enabling agribusiness environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

Feed Africa Strategy’s Enabler #1–“Increase Productivity” through provision of agricultural 

mechanisation and improved certified seeds (pearl millet, maize, sorghum, and cowpeas) since these are 

the weakest links of the cereal crops value chain. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) 

is anchored on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

CSP’s second pillar through involvement of the private sector in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment.  

 

1.2.3. The Bank’s active portfolio in Namibia, as at July 2017, comprised 7 on-going projects with a 
total commitment of UA 577.3 million. The financial sector dominates the portfolio with 43.1%, 

followed by transport sector with 28.3%, social sector with 0.1%, and multi-sector with 28.5%. The 

Projects are mainly funded through the ADB public-sector window (99.83%) and MIC TAF Grant 

(0.17%). Multi-sector operations include a budget support operation, and MIC Grant technical 

assistance projects supporting Walvis Bay Corridor Group capacity building and studies, PPP 

institutional strengthening, statistical capacity building, and higher education quality assurance. 

Appendix 3 presents the Bank’s on-going portfolio in Namibia. According to the Bank’s July 2017 

Portfolio Flashlight, 71.4% of Namibia’s active projects performed satisfactorily. There is no 

problematic or ageing operation. There is no agriculture sector project in Namibia. There is no PCR 

backlog of completed agriculture operations. 

 

1.3.  Donor Coordination   
 

1.3.1. Development Partners’ (DPs) coordination in Namibia is not very strong. Efforts to improve 
coordination have just started under the leadership of the United Nations Resident Coordinator’s office 

in collaboration with the National Planning Commission (NPC) to enhance cooperation, coordination 



 

4 

 

of policies, strategies and approaches which support development and effective communication with the 

Government. The dialogue platform under NPC is for all the sectors and thus there is no platform 

specific to agriculture sector. Through the dialogue platform coordinated by NPC, DPs carry out 

activities and finance projects whose outcomes are usually considered during policy formulation. The 

DPs contribution to the agriculture budget is about 4.2% (2016/2017 financial year), as summarised in 

Table 1.1. Although the Bank (AfDB) has been active in other Sectors (Finance, Transport and Social), 

it is one of the donors, coming on board, to support a major project in the agriculture sector. The Bank 

partnerships will be harnessed with all DPs particularly those operating within the CSP (2014-2018) 

focus areas.  
 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture (2016/2017 Fiscal Year) 
 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labour Force    

  Agriculture 3.4% 3.4% 70%    

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average) : 2016/17   

  Government Donors Japan,  EU       

ZAR m 

(%) 

ZAR 1,068.50 m 

(95.8%) 

ZAR 44.64 m 

(4.2%) 

China, 

FAO  
USAID       

   Level of Donor Coordination  

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups (this sector)   [Y]   

  Existence of SWAps or Integrated Sector Approaches   [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in Donors Coordination   [M]   
 

Key:    L: Leader.    M: member but not leader.     None: no involvement.      Y: Yes.      N: No 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

 

2.1.  Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 Project Objectives: The Project’s goal is to improve household food security and reduce poverty. 
The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce annual importation 

of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance household incomes, which will 

improve the lives of the rural people. 

 

2.1.2 Project Components: NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 
Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, (i) Capacity 

Building, and (ii) Project Management. The NAMSIP components and major activities are summarised 

in Table 2.1. 

Table 2.1: Description of Project Components and Sub-components 
 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

1 Value Chain 

Improvement 
0.99 

(69.8%) 

Sub-component 1.1: Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion, 

55.3%) 

• Procure assorted crop production, harvesting, processing and storage 
machinery and equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmer 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Procure assorted livestock production (animal health, livestock feed and 
traceability) equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmers 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Supply and install 3 drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each covering 
200ha) for crop production. 

 

Sub-component 1.2: Certified Seed Systems Improvement (ZAR 0.21 

billion, 14.5%) 

• Supply and install 169 standard drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each 
covering 10ha, total 845ha) for production of certified seeds (maize, 

pearl millet, sorghum and cowpeas). 



 

5 

 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

• Procure assorted machinery and equipment for production and 
processing of certified seed (as indicated in Appendix 4). 

• Facilitate production of certified seeds under dryland and irrigation. 
• Support 200 certified seed inspection activities (seed production under 

dryland/rainfed and irrigation). 

• Facilitate distribution of certified seeds to silos. 
• Construct 5 full-house-certified seed processing plant (buildings 

including installation of appropriate equipment). 
 

2 Institutional 

Support 
0.43 

 (30.2%) 

Sub-component 2.1: Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion, 4.8%) 

• Support 3 agricultural institutions, under MAWF. 
• Sensitise/mobilise communities/beneficiaries to participate in 

NAMSIP activities. 

• Form/strengthen 111 farmer cooperatives (total membership 10,681, 
including 6,912 women). 

• Train 2,100 households in food security and nutrition activities. 
• Support infants feeding programme (Government support). 
• Support behaviour communication change at household on Infant and 

Young Child Feeding Practices (IYCFP), food diversification and 

water born related diseases (Government support)  

• Intensify campaign on Conservation Farming, agricultural 
mechanisation and improved seeds (Government support). 

• Support livestock (small stock) pass-on scheme for women groups (at 
least 80% women) 

• Train 4,000 farmers in various agriculture-related practices. 
• Facilitate international training for 5 MAWF staff (Training of 

Trainers/ToT, covering operation and maintenance of agricultural 

machinery and equipment).  

• Conduct national training (ToT) for 28 MAWF staff from the 
participating Regions (Training of Trainers/ToT, covering operation 

and maintenance of agricultural machinery and equipment).  

• Facilitate implementation of ESMP activities. 
• Support the existing MAWF-ESMP Task Force. 
• Recruit 3 TAs for MAWF. 
• Support gender mainstreaming activities. 
 

Sub-component 2.2: Project Management (ZAR 0.36 billion, 25.4%) 

• Support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). 
• Provide PIU and Focal Point with Government offices including 

utilities and vehicles (on-going/existing arrangement-Government). 

• Facilitate 5 financial audits and procure 1 accounting package. 
• Facilitate 5 procurement audits. 
• Support activities of Project Steering Committee (PSC). 
• Carry out Project coordination activities. 
• Establish and operationalize gender sensitive participatory Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) system. 

• Prepare 5 Project annual work plans and budgets. 
• Conduct 1 baseline survey, 1 beneficiary impact assessment (BIA), 1 

MTR and 1 PCR. 

Total 1.42  
 

Notes:  

i. Unless stated otherwise, for each activity, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 
ii. Under Component 1 (Value Chain Improvement), the type, quantities, and distribution of Project interventions are indicated in 

Appendix 4 of this Project Appraisal Report (PAR) - Volume I.  

iii. Details of the activities are provided in PAR Volume II Technical Annexes B.2 and C.2.  

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored 
 

The technical solution which was retained comprises use of modern farming machinery, 

equipment and vehicles in order to reduce the time required for land preparation. The drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems have been chosen, due to their high irrigation efficiency, taking into account the 



 

6 

 

scarcity of surface and groundwater resources in Namibia. NAMSIP has included the equipment to 

address the problem of livestock diseases in order to enhance the marketing of livestock and livestock 

products. Table 2.2 indicates other alternatives which were explored.   

 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 
Altenative Name  Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Animal draught 

power and manual 

system. 

Use of work oxen for 

garden preparation.   

Use of animal draught power is relatively less efficient. Livestock 

diseases may affect farming activities if not timely controlled  

Use of traditional hand 

hoe.  

Use of hand hoe is less efficient in terms of timeliness and increases 

drudgery on farmers (low factor productivity – land and labour). 

Surface irrigation 

system 

Irrigating crops from 

open canals using 

furrow or beds.  

This technology is not suitable since water is very scarce resource and 

there is very high evaporation. Surface network attracts high 

maintenance costs and may accelerate soil erosion.  

 

2.3.  Project Type 

 

The NAMSIP is a stand-alone investment Project aimed at improving cereal-crops/grains and 

livestock value chains.  

 

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 
 

2.4.1 The proposed ADB loan is denominated in South African Rand (ZAR) since Namibia Dollar 
(NAD/N$) is pegged to ZAR (1:1) thus (i) avoiding further exchange rate risk exposure, and (ii) 

increasing foreign exchange reserves. The Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is 

ZAR 1.42 billion (net of taxes and duties) which will be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion 

(70.5%) covering all major Project activities, (ii) the Government contribution of ZAR 0.36 billion 

(25.5%) through in-kind (monetary value) for existing Government staff salaries linked to Project 

activities, office space including utilities, and vehicles, and (iii) beneficiaries in-kind contribution of 

ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%) through specific labour during agricultural production activities and also 

valuable time for attending training sessions. The price contingencies were based on projected local and 

foreign inflation rates of 5% and 2% per annum, respectively. The physical contingencies ranged from 

0% (Government staff salaries) to 8% (works) based on (i) common technical practices, and (ii) 

available Engineer’s cost estimates. Summary of the Project costs by components, sources of financing, 

expenditure categories and schedule by component are presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6 and the details are 

in Project Appraisal Report (PAR) Volume II Technical Annex B.2.  

 

2.4.2 Justification for Government Level of Contribution: The Government/beneficiary’s total 
contribution of ZAR 0.42 billion represents about 29.5% of the total NAMSIP cost which is less than 

the recommended 50% minimum counterpart contribution as per the Bank’s 2008 “Policy on 

Expenditure Eligible for Bank Group Financing”. The policy further stipulates that the ADB may 

finance more than 50% of the total project costs on a case-by-case basis and up to a limit that does not 

exceed 100%. The justifications for the reduced Government contribution is based on (i) Government’s 

budget situation and debt level, (ii) country’s Financing Allocation to the Agriculture Sector, and (iii) 

Government’s commitment to implement other development programmes including proposed Transport 

Sector project (ZAR 5.52 billion) in which the Government has contributed over 64%. Details are in 

Appendix 5. In view this, there is a case for the Bank to reduce the Government’s counterpart funding 

of NAMSIP to 25.5%.  

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.3:  Project Cost Estimates by Components (NAD and ZAR ‘000) 

 
Component 

Name 

NAD ‘000 ZAR ‘000 % Foreign 

Cost Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 46 

2. Institutional 

Support 
332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 13 

Total Base 

Costs 
812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical 

Contingencies 
21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 46 

Price 

Contingencies 
82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 20 

Total Project 

Cost 
916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 35 

 

Table 2.4:  Sources of Financing (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (ZAR ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

ZAR % ZAR % ZAR % 

ADB Loan 501,937.63 100.0 498,062.37 54.3 1,000,000.00 70.5 

Government - - 362,174.70 39.5 362,174.70 25.5 

Beneficiaries - - 56,627.65 6.2 56,627.65 4.0 

Total 501,937.63 35.4 916,864.72 64.6 1,418,802.35 100.0 

 

Table 2.5:  Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Category of Expenditure 
Total Amount (ZAR '000) % Foreign 

Cost Foreign Local Total 

A. Investment Costs     

1. GOODS     

Vehicle 67,352.00 - 67,352.00 100 

Equipment 126,519.00 - 126,519.00 100 

Plant and Machinery 100,368.00 333,940.00 434,308.00 23 

Sub-total 294,239.00 333,940.00 628,179.00 47 

2. WORKS     

Irrigation Works 84,500.00 80.00 84,580.00 100 

Seed Processing Plant 1,080.00 42,414.91 43,494.91 2 

Sub-total 85,580.00 42,494.91 128,074.91 67 

3. SERVICES     

Training 31,138.00 52,150.00 83,288.00 37 

Technical Support (MAWF) 30,760.00 - 30,760.00 100 

Financial Audit 1,500.00 - 1,500.00 100 

Procurement Audit 2,000.00 - 2,000.00 100 

Consultancy – Other (Individual) 17,500.00 - 17,500.00 100 

Sub-total 82,898.00 52,150.00 135,048.00 61 

Total Investment Costs 462,717.00 428,584.91 891,301.91 52 

B. Recurrent Costs     

1. OPERATING COST     

Personnel-Govt Staff/NBF - 274,400.00 274,400.00 - 

Daily Subsistence Allowance - 4,590.00 4,590.00 - 

Operation and Maintenance - 105,300.00 105,300.00 - 

Sub-total - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Recurrent Costs - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Base Costs 462,717.00 812,874.91 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical Contingencies 18,474.82 21,346.82 39,821.64 46 

Price Contingencies 20,745.81 82,642.99 103,388.80 20 

Total Project Cost 501,937.63 916,864.72 1,418,802.35 35 

 

  



 

8 

 

Table 2.6:  Expenditure Schedule by Components (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Item Description 
Amount (ZAR ‘000) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
225,436.51 212,053.60 152,053.60 151,628.60 150,516.60 891,688.91 

2. Institutional Support 101,492.00 74,273.00 76,673.00 65,792.00 65,673.00 383,903.00 

Total Base Costs 326,928.51 286,326.60 228,726.60 217,420.60 216,189.60 1,275,591.91 

Physical Contingencies 11,678.86 8,271.59 6,831.59 6,548.94 6,490.66 39,821.64 

Price Contingencies 5,467.56 13,774.15 20,323.71 27,692.29 36,131.09 103,388.80 

Total Project Cost 344,074.93 308,372.34 255,881.90 251,661.83 258,811.35 1,418,802.35 

 

2.5.  Project Target Area, Population and Beneficiaries 

 

 The Project will be implemented nationwide (14 Regions of Namibia) as indicated in Appendices 

4 and 6. Appendix 4 has also included population data for each Region. Namibia has 517,649 households 

with estimated population of 2.28 million (2016/2017 NHIES). The agriculture mechanization scheme, 

if fully implemented, will target 58,900 crop producers (including 50% female) with about 117,857 ha 

of land to be serviced per annum and thus within a period of 5 years the scheme will benefit 

approximately 294,500 producers (including 50%) on 589,285 ha under production. The Project will 

directly target and empower 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). In 

addition, 33 agricultural extension staff will be capacitated on agriculture mechanization for transfer of 

skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 111 farmer cooperatives with a total 

membership of 10,681 of whom 6,912 will be women. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, 

women and youth in agricultural production and processing, as indicated in Appendix 7. The Project 

will also indirectly benefit from 300,000 people under dryland/rainfed agriculture and irrigation through 

generation of employment along cereal crops and livestock value chains, including suppliers, local 

traders, casual labourers, agro-processors, millers, transporters, rural youth, men and women. About 

500,000 people will indirectly benefit and be food secure due to improved cereal crop production. 

2.6. Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

 

The proposed Project intervention areas have been extracted from the HACCIADEP which was 

developed by the MAWF after countrywide consultations with key stakeholders inorder to give 

practical, tangible and visible meaning to policy intentions of the Government, as defined in Vision 

2030, HPP and NDP5. These 3 policy documents had also gone through intensive countrywide 

consultations with key stakeholders during their formulation. The Bank, during NAMSIP preparation in 

January/February 2017, held consultations with senior Government staff in the Ministry of Finance, 

NPC, MAWF, Ministry of Gender and Social Welfare, Ministry of Poverty Eradication and Social 

Welfare, Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and SMEs Development, Ministry of Environment and 

Tourism (MET), and representatives from SOEs (Namibia Agronomic Board/NAB, Agricultural 

Business Development Agency/AgriBusDev, Agricultural Bank of Namibia/AgriBank, Agricultural 

Marketing and Trading Agency/AMTA), Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU), DPs, and Private 

Sector. Consultation and feedback on the interventions were undertaken which informed the NAMSIP. 

During the Project Appraisal Mission (July 2017) further consultations were made with the same 

institutions. Project implementation will be carried out through the existing Government/MAWF 

structures. In line with the Project’s capacity building sub-component, smallholder farmers (rural men, 

women and youth) will be fully involved during implementation of planned activities including 

participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

 

 The Bank has enormous experience in designing and implementation of agriculture projects in 

Africa. Some lessons learnt from implementing past projects and through experience of other donors in 



 

9 

 

Namibia have been used to inform the design and subsequent implementation of NAMSIP, as tabulated 

below: 

 
No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

1.  Lack of construction drawings at project start-up 
resulted in delay in implementation. 

Drawings and tender documents for standard drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems are available with the Government.  

2.  Role played by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
in expediting project execution. 

MAWF’s Project implementation capacity will be enhanced through 

recruitment of 3 TAs who will be part of the PIU. 

3.  Inadequate consultation with stakeholders results 
in poor management of the proposed investments 

Adequate consultations with key stakeholders were undertaken during 

Project preparation and appraisal phases. 

4.  Weak M&E system results in poor assessment of 
implementation progress 

M&E activities with adequate financial allocation have been 

included in Project design. 

 

2.8. Project Performance Indicators 
 

The logical framework (LogFrame) has provided the impact, outcome and output indicators 

which will be measured during Project implementation using M&E system. The impact indicator is 

“percentage (%) reduction of food insecure people”. The outcome indicators are (i) nutrient dense crop 

production (tonnes), (ii) percentage (%) reduction of annual cereal imports, and (iii) number of jobs 

created. Major output indicators are reflected in the LogFrame. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 
 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance 

 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: The financial analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as 
well as the entire Project level. This has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual 

beneficiaries, and aggregated for the Project as a whole on “with Project” and “without Project” basis. 

Gross margin analyses have been carried out for the major crops to be grown under the Project, namely 

maize, pearl millet (mahangu), sorghum and wheat with first 3 crops to be grown under dryland/rainfed 

while wheat will be grown under irrigation. Pearl millet will take up the largest share of land which 

constitutes about 57% of the total land under cultivation. These analyses assumed full utilization of the 

area targeted for production starting from third year of Project implementation period. The land 

distribution per crop per season, summary of analysis of individual crop budgets, and net income (gross 

margin) at household level have been presented in PAR-Volume II Technical Annex B.7. Results: The 

analysis shows that annual net income (gross margin) per farming household in the Project increased 

(under crop production) from ZAR 19,742 to ZAR 74,179 while income from livestock production 

increased from ZAR 5,221 to ZAR 16,012. The gross margin analyses took into consideration the farm 

gate prices of the produce and the total cost of production, including an imputed wage of ZAR 300 per 

hectare for family farm labour per farming season. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) to the 

Project is estimated at 26.00%, and the net present value (NPV), at 12% opportunity cost of capital, is 

estimated at ZAR 1.13 billion.  

 

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The agriculture sector farm inputs market is subsidized by Government and 
therefore financial prices for the farm inputs have been adjusted by a standard conversion factor of 1.3 

that took into account the level of subsidies for the farm inputs and taxes. The economic prices for farm 

produce have been derived using a standard conversion factor of 0.82   Results: The economic internal 

rate of return (EIRR) to the Project is estimated at 23.74% and the net present value (NPV), at 12 % 

opportunity cost of capital, is estimated at ZAR 1.03 billion. 

 

3.1.3. Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity analysis shows that an increase in the cost of production  by 
10% reduces FIRR to 17% and NPV to ZAR 0.51 billion and a fall in the revenue by 10% reduces FIRR 

to 13 % and NPV to ZAR 0.065 billion. An increase in the cost of production by 5% reduced EIRR to 

18.78% and NPV to ZAR 0.64 billion while a fall in revenue by 5% reduced EIRR to 16.88% and NPV 

to ZAR 0.45 billion. 



 

10 

 

 

FIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 26.00% : ZAR 1,13 billion 

EIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 23.74% : ZAR 1.03 billion 
 

Note: calculations are indicated in Appendix 8 of this PAR and also in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.7. 

 

3.2.  Environmental and Social impacts 

 

3.2.1. Environment and Social Issues: The Project was classified as Category 2 in line with the Bank’s 
Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which requires only the Environmental and 

Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMP was prepared by the Government, cleared by the Bank 

and posted on Bank’s website5 on 25th October 2017. The provision of farm machinery and equipment 

to smallholder farmers and agro-processors as well as the development and supply of improved seeds 

are slated to engender significant positive impacts on food production, climate resilience, economic 

development, livelihoods and quality of life of NAMSIP beneficiaries. Nevertheless, the development 

of crop and livestock operations can result in direct and indirect environmental and social impacts, 

including loss of fauna and flora, degradation of terrestrial habitats and disruption or contamination of 

water courses. These negative impacts are expected to be site-specific and can be minimized by applying 

appropriate mitigation measures. During Project implementation, the existing MAWF ESMP Task 

Force will be maintained inorder to ensure adequate environmental and social management, compliance 

with national laws, and to monitor and report on ESMP implementation. NAMSIP has made financial 

provision to address ESMP implementation capacity gaps and environmental and social management 

needs. The total cost associated with ESMP implementation is about ZAR 8 million, excluding costs for 

mitigation measures related to civil works which will be reflected in respective contractors’ bills of 

quantities (BoQs). Additional information on environmental issues is in Appendix 9 and also in PAR 

Volume II Technical Annex B.8. 

 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project was classified as Category 2 and is potentially vulnerable to climate 
risk. Practical climate risk mitigation measures have been taken into consideration in the location and 

design of the proposed irrigation infrastructure. Furthermore, arid conditions and erratic rainfall threaten 

the viability of agricultural production. Therefore, the inclusion of the component on certified seed 

(cereal crops) production through irrigation qualifies as an adaptation activity. This Project will be 

implemented taking into consideration opportunities to enhance climate resilience of the agriculture 

value chains and also enhance adaptive capacity of stakeholders to manage the impacts of climate 

change through improved extension services. The implementation of these activities is aligned with 

national ambitions to “instil resilience to impacts of climate change in the most vulnerable sectors of 

the economy” articulated in Nationally Determined Contributions to the UNFCCC. Proposed activities 

include developing and implementing appropriate responses and adaptation strategies to reduce the 

impacts of floods, low rainfall and high temperatures on people, crops, livestock and infrastructure. 

Agricultural adaptation strategies include (i) coordinating the timing of ploughing and crop planting 

with rainfall events, (ii) using drought-resistant crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) shifting 

livestock to alternative grazing areas, and (iv) implementing soil and water conservation activities. 

Mechanisation in agriculture is usually associated with use of diesel powered equipment whose emission 

will be mitigated through specifications of engines which include either (i) recirculation of exhaust gas 

to dilute intake of air/oxide, or (ii) cooling the exhaust gases in order to inhibit formation of nitrogen. 

With regards to climate finance, NAMSIP’s climate related activities will contribute ZAR 0.2 billion to 

the Bank’s target. The majority of Namibian population, especially rural households, depend on climate-

sensitive sub-sectors such as crop production and livestock farming. Consequently, climate change 

variability will only serve to compound the impacts on livelihoods, food security, and community well-

being. Changes in rainfall patterns and increased temperatures affect crop yields, increases droughts and 

reduces feedstock resulting in livestock losses. Namibia has thus prioritized environmental protection, 

specifically climate change, as evidenced by the adoption of the National Policy on Climate Change 

                                                 
5Web-link:    Namibia - Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) - ESMP Summary 

https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Environmental-and-Social-Assessments/Namibia_-_Namibia_Agricultural_Mechanisation_and_Seed_Improvement_Project__NAMSIP__-_ESMP_Summary.pdf


 

11 

 

(2011) and the National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (2013-2020). The latter aims, under 

the food security and sustainable resource use pillar, to: (i) improve climate change understanding and 

related policy responses in food security; (ii) develop, identify and disseminate climate resilient crop 

farming practices; (iii) enhance sustainable land management and suitable land use practices; and (iv) 

ensure maintenance of resilient ecosystems to ensure climate resilience, and environmental 

sustainability. 

 

3.2.3. Land Issues: Land is fundamental to the lives of smallholder farmers especially women and 
youth since women account for 59% of people engaged in skilled and subsistence agriculture in 

Namibia. The Namibia Constitution and the National Land Policy (1998) lay the foundation for land 

ownership and established basic principles for the governance of all land in Namibia, with a strong 

emphasis on protecting the rights of the poor and women and promoting transparency and accountability 

in land administration. Namibia’s agriculture sector consists of 2 types of land ownership, namely, 

freehold title deeds mainly in the central and southern commercial areas and non-title deeds mainly in 

the Northern Communal Areas (NCA). The Government efforts are in place to bring equity in land 

ownership, through land redistribution and tenure reform which have been shaped by Agricultural 

(Commercial) Land Reform Act 6 of 1995 and the Communal Land Reform Act 5 of 2002. These land 

reforms focus, amongst others, on redistribution of commercial farmland to redress past imbalances in 

land ownership among Namibians. Considering that land tenure is important for the Project, the MAWF 

emphasised the role the communal land reforms plays in strengthening the smallholder farmers’ access 

and ownership to land and credit. The Namibia Constitution in Article 95 (a) accords women the same 

status as men, with regard to all forms of land rights, either as individuals or as members of family land 

ownership trusts. Equal rights to land have been granted to both men and women in communal areas. 

 

3.2.4. Gender: In Namibia, 44% of rural households are headed by females. Most female landowners 
are widows who inherited the land from their husbands, followed by women who obtained land through 

divorce or inheritance from families. Since the commencement of the Communal Land Reform Act 

(CLRA) No. 5 of 2002, single women can register their land without the consent of family members. 

The CLRA protects wives and gives them the right to apply for and register land in their names. In 2016, 

it was estimated that more than 40% of all land use certificates in Namibia were issued to women. The 

land use certificates for communal land guarantee the use of the land in perpetuity. Furthermore, the 

CLRA mandates the inclusion of a minimum of four women in the Communal Land Board (CLB) that 

facilitates land registration. The main source of income for female farmers is subsistence farming. They 

dominate in most cropping activities except in land preparation. On the other hand, animal husbandry 

(cattle, sheep and goats) is almost exclusively a male domain although herding small stock is sometimes 

done by women whilst feeding livestock has a 50/50 gender division of labour. Women and children are 

responsible for fuel wood and wild fruit gathering. Women also dominate post-harvest processing of 

crops such as sun drying, threshing and winnowing, head-loading to markets, and storing for market or 

future use. The Government has embarked on new levels of improving women’s lives in rural areas but 

according to the 2013 Gender Needs Assessment, there are challenges which include: (i) unequal access 

to and control over resources such as agriculture support services, appropriate technology – about 0.9% 

of females in rural areas own tractors in comparison with 2.6% of males; (ii) rural women’s workload - 

family welfare and subsistence agriculture functions increase due to rural-urban migration of men; and 

(iii) inadequate representation in structures of decision making, at community levels - only 10% of 

women head traditional authorities. 

 

3.2.5. Equitable agricultural mechanization in the agriculture value chain will therefore contribute to 
addressing some of the challenges faced by women farmers. Equitable distribution of equipment will 

contribute to higher production levels and reduce the drudgery that women face through non mechanized 

agriculture. Current figures indicate that women form majority of members of seed multiplication, crop 

production and marketing cooperatives. Women will participate as individuals or members of 

cooperatives. The Project will promote: (i) equitable access to farm equipment by women; (ii) training 

female farmers to increase the uptake of technology and mechanization, and in the maintenance of the 



 

12 

 

equipment (at least 50% for female farmers); and (iii) women’s participation in leadership of 

cooperatives. 

 

3.2.6. Social: NAMSIP is aimed at addressing some of the major limiting factors to increased food 
security and sustainable agricultural production through provision of agricultural mechanisation and 

improvement of seeds which will result in multiple socio-economic benefits including contributing to 

improved household income, enhanced food security and nutrition, and increased rural employment. 

The Project will also result in social risks, safety and security concerns related to the increased use of 

machinery and equipment which will be addressed and minimized through implementation of the 

ESMP’s mitigation measures. 

3.2.7. HIV/AIDS: According to the 2015 National HIV sentinel survey, out of the population of over 
2.2 million people, about 210,000 to 230,000 people (10.5%) are living with HIV and the virus 

prevalence is highest among women aged 35-39 years at 32.3%, and women aged 45-49 years at 31.6%. 

The survey highlighted a higher prevalence in rural areas than in urban areas. The most affected Regions 

are Zambezi (23.7%), Omusati (17.4%), Kavango (17%), Oshana (16.1%) and Ohangwena (15.6%). 

Consequently, HIV/AIDS campaigns will be mainstreamed in the implementation of the Project, 

targeting beneficiaries including civil works contractors and consultants. The farmer cooperatives will 

be used to deliver HIV/AIDS awareness messages to the communities. 

 

3.2.8. Inclusive Growth: In the context of broad-based and pro-poor growth, the Project will promote 
inclusive growth with equitable allocation of resources to activities which will benefit all levels of the 

participating communities. In particular, NAMSIP will be implemented in rural areas which (i) have 

very poor households, (ii) are frequently affected by drought, and (iii) have food shortages during some 

months of the year and are consequently nutritionally vulnerable. The Project will assist poor rural men, 

women and youth to participate in planned agricultural activities for increasing productivity, job 

creation, and income generation. 

 

3.2.9. Food Security and Nutrition: Namibia’s food security and nutrition have been weakened by 
severe droughts leading to a number of households depending on market and Relief Food Programmes. 

Namibia produces about 40% of the food it consumes and is highly dependent on imports (60%), mainly 

from South Africa. According to NDP5, poverty is a major factor limiting access to food. Access to 

food in Namibia is affected by reliance on market purchases for food. When combined with the heavy 

reliance on food imports, it makes Namibia vulnerable to high food prices. Overall, the production scale 

of smallholder farmers is lower which is attributed to limited access to inputs, poor soils, access to land 

and frequent occurrence of natural disasters such a drought and flood. For 2016/2017 cropping season, 

MAWF has estimated below average cereal crop production of 75,300 tonnes. Considering that the 

annual national cereal consumption is about 326,500 tonnes, this leaves a huge deficit of 251,200 tonnes. 

Based on the number of food insecure rural people, the Project will scale up irrigated agriculture, dry 

land crop production intervention and promote food security resilience measures through the provision 

of agricultural machinery, equipment and improved seeds at subsidized rates for drought affected 

farmers. Nationwide, the stunting rate for children under 5 is between 24% and 30%. Malnutrition 

continues to blemish the future of children, with an average of 1 out of every 4 children under the age 

of 5 more likely to be stunted. Stunted growth is strongly associated with poor living conditions, 

household food insecurity, poor breastfeeding practices and inappropriate foods for children. The 

Project will support the Government’s efforts on (i) nutrition, especially, breastfeeding awareness 

campaigns, and (ii) expansion of the existing infant (6-24 months) feeding programmes within the 

NAMSIP communities. To that effect, the Project interventions will also lead to increase appropriate 

knowledge and practices regarding infant, young child and maternal nutrition with the aim of 

contributing to SDG #2 target. With regards to nutrition, NAMSIP will promote the Government’s 

feeding programme (1,000 days from pregnancy to two years) in order to reduce malnutrition and 

child/women morbidity. Promotion of availability, accessibility, and consumption of a variety of foods 

will strengthen the capacity of women and households to adopt the optimal nutritional practices. 

Sensitization on water related diseases will help to improve the health of the population.  



 

13 

 

 

3.2.10. The modernization of agriculture through agricultural mechanization for cereal crops and 
livestock production will contribute to overall increase in food production in the country. This will result 

into 40% reduction of the country’s imports of grains/cereal crops which is currently estimated at 60% 

for grain/cereals every year according to MAWF/FAO reports (2016). The use of mechanization will 

also enhance the value of the products and industrialization of the agriculture sector since some of the 

livestock and livestock products will be exported.  

 

3.2.11. Involuntary Resettlement: There will be no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition 
envisioned during implementation of Project activities. The agricultural mechanization and seed system 

development activities will be carried out in beneficiaries’ fields or public land which will benefit 

individual farmers and cooperative members. 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1. MAWF will be the Executing Agency (EA) of the Project which will be implemented, over a 
period of 5 years, using the existing Government structures. At National Level, the existing Programme 

Steering Committee (PSC) comprises (i) Presidential Advisor - Policy Implementation and Monitoring, 

as the Chairperson; (ii) Presidential Advisor - Constitutional Affairs and Private Sector Interface; (iii) 

Presidential Advisor - Economic, and (iv) Permanent Secretary (PS)-Ministry of Finance (MoF). MoF 

will serve as the secretariat of the PSC. This is in line with the Government’s wish to have oversight 

responsibility, at the highest level, for NAMSIP and also the Transport and Education Sectors’ projects 

which have been appraised concurrently, under the Bank’s current support to the country. The PS-

MAWF shall be co-opted when the PSC is deliberating issues concerning agriculture sector. The PSC 

will meet on semi-annual basis, and as need arises, in order to (a) approve annual work plan and budget, 

(b) review progress reports, and (c) provide overall policy and strategic direction of NAMSIP. At Sector 

level, the existing HACCIADEP Coordination Team (HCT) consists of MAWF’s (i) PS, (ii) Deputy PS 

(Department of Agricultural Development), and the Directors of: (iii) Directorate of Planning and 

Business Development, (iv) Directorate of Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering 

Services, (v) Directorate of Agricultural Research and Development, and (vi) Directorate of Veterinary 

Services. The HCT will (i) give the overall sectoral guidance to NAMSIP, (ii) approve Project 

information to be uploaded on MAWF website, and (iii) approve quarterly progress reports (QPRs). The 

MAWF DPBD will be the secretariat of HCT. The HCT has already appointed: (1) members of the 

Project Implementing Unit (PIU) comprising the (a) Project Coordinator, (b) Accountant, (c) Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and (d) Procurement Specialist who will be in charge of day-to-day 

Project implementation; (2) focal points/desk officers (existing MAWF staff) from each Directorate; 

and (3) a focal point (existing senior-level MAWF staff) in each of the 14 participating Regions. The 

PIU staff will spend, at least, 90% of their official time on NAMSIP activities. The Project Coordinator 

will report to the Deputy-PS (Agriculture). The PIU will work closely with the Government appointed 

focal points in the (i) Directorate of Planning and Business Development (DPBD), (ii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering Services (DAPEES), (iii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Research and Development (DARD), (iv) Directorate of Veterinary Services (DVS), and 

(v) Nutrition Unit. The DAPEES and DVS will be responsible for sub-component 1.1 (Agricultural 

Mechanisation) and DARD will be responsible for sub-component 1.2 (Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement). The DAPEES and DARD will be supported by 3 Technical Advisors (Cereal Crops, 

Livestock and Seed Systems) who will be competitively recruited by the Project, based on Bank’s Rules 

and Procedures. Based on the value chain approach, including construction activities, the PIU will be 

supported by SOEs, namely, (i) AgriBusDev Agency, (ii) AMTA, (iii) AgriBank, and (iv) Namibia 

Agronomic Board (NAB). The PIU will also work closely with the Namibia National Farmers Union 

(NNFU). 

 



 

14 

 

4.1.2. The NAMSIP Component 1 will mainly be implemented through farmer cooperatives or 
individual farmers who will be required to save part of their income in a group bank account. The 

cooperatives and individuals, with the assistance of MAWF, AgriBusDev and AMTA, will identify 

appropriate machinery/equipment for their operations based on their needs. A qualifying 

cooperative/farmer will be expected to directly pay about 10% of the overall cost of the associated 

machinery/equipment from their own resources. Procurement of standard machinery/equipment will 

commence in Project Year 1. 

 

4.1.3. Procurement Arrangements:  Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting 
services, financed by the Bank for the Project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and 

following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, procurement will be carried 

out using the following: 

 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 
under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations, Procurement Act of 2015 and Public 

Procurement Regulation (no. 2016), using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) 

or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for various group of 

transactions to be entailed under the project.   

 Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (Bank’s PMPs): The Project will use Bank 
standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   Solicitation Documents SDDs, for contracts 

that are either: (i) Contracts procurement under Open Competitive Bidding (OCB)–international; 

Limited Competitive Bidding (LIB) and Consultancy services of firms; (ii) in case BPS is not 

relied upon for a specific transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case Bank’s PMPs have 

been found to be the best fit for purpose for a specific transaction or group of transactions. 

 

4.1.4. Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 
the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

or Bank’s PMPs)  being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.5. 

Various items under different expenditure categories and related procurement arrangements have been 

developed for goods, works and consultancy services, as reflected in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex 

B.5. 

 

4.1.5. Financial Management (FM): An assessment of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 
(MAWF) as Project Executing Agency (that included a review of the budgeting, accounting, treasury 

systems, internal controls, reporting, and external audit arrangements) was done to ascertain effective 

financial management of the project. The Department of Finance headed by a Director of Finance within 

the MAWF is responsible for the function of planning and budgeting at central and local levels including 

recording expenditures and maintaining assets through the use of the Government-wide IFMIS. The 

system has, however, not been configured to enable comprehensive Project reporting, therefore, a 

suitable system that will include the use of spreadsheets will be used for supplementing the recording 

and reporting of the Project transactions. The MAWF staff (Finance Department) have been involved 

in implementation of donor (EU, FAO, JICA and South-South Cooperation China) funded projects. 

Given the fiduciary requirements related to the Bank’s financing, MAWF has already appointed a well-

qualified Project Accountant to handle Project financial management (FM) tasks.  The Project 

Accountant will work together with other PIU members including Project Coordinator, M&E, and 

Procurement Specialist. Training in Bank requirements regarding financial management will be 

provided as part of project launching and during implementation.   

4.1.6. Internal audit function at the Ministry will cover the project, the reports resulting from the audits 
will be shared with the Bank during supervisions. All deficiencies identified by internal audits will be 

communicated in a timely manner to the Government, for action. The PIU will also be responsible for 

ensuring compliance with the Bank’s reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic 



 

15 

 

progress reports with financial information for the Bank loan and Government contribution to the Bank 

not later than 45 days after the end of the respective quarter. The PIU will also be required to produce 

annual project financial statements. The Ministry’s financial statements are audited annually by the 

Auditor General of Namibia.  In this regard, the Project financial statements will also be subject to audit 

by the AG (or a private independent audit firm under the oversight of the AG) with the audit done in 

accordance with a Bank approved Terms of Reference. The audit reports (including management letter) 

will be submitted to the Bank within six months after the end of the reporting period with costs of the 

audit borne by the loan. These arrangements are in line with the current moderate country fiduciary risk 

levels after mitigation factors. 

 

4.1.7. The overall conclusion of the assessment is that the MAWF’s capacity, to handle all the FM 
aspects of the project, currently meets the Bank’s minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM 

guidelines. In addition, with the implementation of the proposed FM actions, there will be further 

improvement in the Project financial management systems to ensure funds to be made available to 

finance Project activities would be used economically, efficiently and for the purpose intended. The 

overall initial FM risk for the Project is assessed as “Moderate”. This is also in line with current country 

fiduciary risk levels that allow the use of existing systems subject to their satisfactory assessment. The 

detailed analysis and financial management arrangements are contained in PAR Volume II, Technical 

Annex B.4. 

 

4.1.8. Disbursement arrangements: Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the 
Direct Payment method for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification 

of invoices submitted and preparation of disbursement application which will be reviewed and signed 

off by Government designated staff and submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account 

method to be managed by the PIU will be limited to financing the smaller and recurring operating 

expenses. The opening of the Special Account denominated in ZAR together with the associated local 

currency account denominated in NAD will be “other condition” to the Loan. In addition, the 

Reimbursement method will also be available. All disbursements under the Loan would be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s rules and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement Handbook, as 

applicable. In addition, the Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter whose contents were discussed and 

agreed upon during the loan negotiations meeting between the delegations from the Government of 

Namibia and the Bank. 

 

4.2.  Monitoring  

 

The Project monitoring will be at different levels with the highest level being the NPC. NPC has 

developed an M&E framework that guides various sectors and assists to monitor the HPP and NDP5 

Results Framework. In addition, the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) will assist the Project to carry 

out regular surveys. At Sector level, the DPBD will have the overall responsibility for Project monitoring 

and evaluation activities. The Project activities will commence with preparation of AWP&B (based on 

detailed cost tables/DCTs, PAR Volume II Technical Annex B.2), which will be submitted to the PSC 

for approval, before transmission to the Bank. The Project M&E Specialist will establish participatory 

M&E system based on performance indicators. If need be, a short term individual consultant will be 

recruited by the Project to develop the participatory M&E system which will be linked to NPC M&E 

framework. The Project has allocated financial resources to facilitate training on data collection, 

processing and reporting. In Project Year 1, the PIU will develop the Project Implementation Manual 

highlighting the organisation, implementation, financial, disbursement and procurement arrangements. 

The Regional Project launch workshops will be organised by MAWF for key stakeholders with the 

purpose of (i) ensuring that all partners understand the Project components, subcomponents, activities, 

implementation modalities, and reporting needs, and (ii) acting as a networking event to build 

relationships for future knowledge sharing. All spending Regions will submit monthly reports for 

compilation of Quarterly Progress Report (QPRs). All QPRs will be reviewed and cleared by HCT 

before submission to the Bank, not more than 45 days after the end of reporting period. The key Project 



 

16 

 

M&E milestones/reports are presented in Table 4.2. The Bank will monitor NAMSIP implementation 

through supervision missions, at least twice per calendar year, in order to verify progress and monitor 

key verifiable indicators. 

 

Table 4.2: Project Key Milestones 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring and Evaluation Process/Feedback 

Loop 

Year 1  Baseline Survey Report MAWF/NSA: Baseline data generation 

Year 1 - 5 
Procurement (goods, works 

and services) Reports 
MAWF/Bank: Review and approvals 

Year 1 - 5 
Project Implementation 

(QPRs and Aide Memoires) 

MAWF/Bank/Beneficiaries: Progress review 

meetings. Bank supervision missions. 

Year 1 - 5 Audit Reports MAWF/Auditors: Annual financial audit  

Year 3 Mid-Term Review Report MAWF/NSA/Bank Mid-Term technical review 

Year 4 
Beneficiary Impact Study 

Report 
MAWF/NSA: Project beneficiary impact assessment  

Year 5  Project Completion Report MAWF/NSA/Bank: End of Project technical review 

 

4.3. Governance  
 

4.3.1. Namibia is one of the countries with the best governance record in Africa and has continually 
been ranked within the top ten performers on the Mo-Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG), 

which measures the quality of governance in every African country. Namibia has been ranking 6th since 

2000 and improving to 5th in 2015 (2016 IIAG report) based on 4 categories of governance, namely, (a) 

Safety & Rule of Law (score 76.1/100, rank 4th/54), (b) Participation and Human Rights (score 76.1/100, 

rank 2nd/54), (c) Sustainable Economic Opportunity (score 62.2/100, rank 7th/54), and (d) Human 

Development (score 64.7/100, rank 10th/54). The 2013 Corruption Perception Index by Transparency 

International ranked Namibia as the 7th least corrupt country in sub-Saharan Africa. In January 2017, 

Namibia unconditionally acceded to the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), which provides for 

self and peer-assessment of governance policies and practices in Africa. 

 

4.3.2. To achieve inclusive and sustainable development, Namibia has put in place strong 
accountability systems in line with the Constitution and the State Finance Act of 1991 (amended 1995). 

The Minister of Finance presents accountability report, together with other budget documents, at the 

National Assembly every year. The Country’s efforts to reform the Public Financial Management (PFM) 

system are yielding results. This is testified by a transparent, consultative, and inclusive fiscal budgetary 

process that is succeeded by well-controlled and coordinated budget execution mechanisms, which have 

resulted in the decline in public sector over-expenditures. The modernization of the public procurement 

system is being pursued through the new Public Procurement Act 2015, which became effective on 1st 

April 2017, following issuance of Regulations. The Constitution clearly defines the legal and 

institutional framework for the fight against corruption. The Namibia Anti-Corruption Commission, 

established under the Anti-Corruption Act No. 8 of 2003, is mandated to combat and prevent corruption. 

The 2016 Corruption Perception Index ranks Namibia 53 out of 176 countries, with an overall score of 

52/100. The agriculture sector will benefit from AfDB-funded PBO reforms through (i) strengthened 

PFM and SOE efficiency; and (ii) improved business enabling environment, which are expected to result 

in higher GDP growth rates, and reduction in unemployment and poverty. NAMSIP institutional 

arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will serve as an instrument for achieving 

intended objectives. The Project’s specific governance risk mitigation measures include (i) recruitment 

of external audit firm, and (ii) training of PIU in Bank’s rules and procedures. 

  



 

17 

 

4.4.  Sustainability 
 

The Project has been designed in a participatory and consultative manner in order to enhance 

ownership by beneficiaries thus ensuring sustainability. The Project will be implemented using the 

existing Government structures and SOEs, with minimal outsourced technical assistance, which will 

assist to preserve the institutional memory and also build the capacity of the Government staff to ably 

assist the smallholder farmers during and after Project implementation (operation and maintenance) 

period. The Project’s focus on seed system development and agriculture mechanization will enhance 

Private Sector involvement, with good back-up service. Major maintenance of machinery and equipment 

will be carried out by the suppliers and the cooperatives will be paying for the services. Through the 

cooperatives, the beneficiaries will be mobilised and trained to properly operate and carry out routine 

maintenance of the agricultural machinery and equipment. The capacity building for MAWF staff and 

cooperatives will guarantee sustainability of planned activities when the Project phases out. The certified 

seed processing plant including associated equipment will be operated and maintained by the 

cooperatives (Private Sector) for sustainability. Behaviour communication and awareness campaigns 

for food diversification and nutritional interventions have been mainstreamed to build resilience and 

sustainability of the investments. The Project is financially viable and the analysis indicated that 

beneficiaries will be able to generate adequate funds for their household needs, as well as sustain the 

investments made in the agriculture ventures.  
 

4.5 Risk Management 

 
No Potential Risks Rating Mitigation Measures 

1.  Poor sustainability of irrigation 
schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 

Medium Project, through cooperatives, will facilitate 

establishment of management entity. The certified 

seed processing plant will be managed by the Private 

Sector. 

2.  Project implementation delays. Low Regular and close follow up by the NPC, HCT and 
Bank.  

3.  Drastic weather 
variations/climatic conditions. 

Medium Dryland/rainfed Project activities with be 

implemented together with conservation agriculture 

based on cropping schedule so that little amount of 

rainfall can fully be utilised by the crops. 
 

4.6 Knowledge Building   
 

4.6.1. The Project’s agricultural mechanization will scale-up the existing MAWF Dry Land Crop 
Production Programme subsidy-mechanisation programme but using a concept of ownership scheme 

which will generate considerable knowledge on access and sustainable use of modern farm 

machinery/equipment. The focus on livestock disease control will also generate lessons for future 

interventions to enhance livestock animal health, traceability, and productivity. The lessons and 

experiences from NAMSIP will be shared within the Bank and other institutions interested in 

implementing future similar projects. The value chain approach for both crops and livestock production 

will generate information on profitability and sustainability of agricultural investments. The 

establishment of certified seed processing plant to be managed by the Private Sector and cooperatives 

will also provide lessons on how the small-scale farmers’ cooperatives can be integrated into the 

certified seed production value chain.  
 

4.6.2. The Project will contribute to knowledge building through: (i) the M&E system which will be 
designed to generate information on implementation achievements, Project financing, disbursement 

trends, procurement, contractor performance, beneficiary participation, Project outputs and outcomes 

and sustainability; (ii) lessons learnt from supervision mission reports, MTR and PCR; and (iii) 

beneficiary impact assessment and final stakeholders’ workshop will provide feedback on key lessons 

and experiences. NAMSIP will provide an opportunity to strengthen the Bank’s knowledge on the 

agriculture sector in Namibia. Above that, the Project has incorporated specialised training which will 

help to build knowledge, skills and capacity of MAWF staff, cooperatives members and other individual 

beneficiaries.  



 

18 

 

4.6.3. Documentation and sharing of lessons, experience (successes and failures) and good practice 
will be carried out continuously during and after Project implementation. Depending upon the need, 

appropriate support (print and electronic media) and several communication channels (such as 

newspapers, mobile-phone-SMS, radio, TV and billboards) will be used in order to boost visibility. The 

Project-related online information will also be available on the existing Government/MAWF website 

which will be regularly posted after approval by HCT. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1.  Legal Instruments 

 

5.1.1 ADB Loan to the Republic of Namibia.  

 

5.2.  Conditions Associated with Bank’s Intervention 

 

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 

subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions 

of the Bank. 

 

5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Bank to make the first 

disbursement of the Loan shall be conditional upon the entry into force of this Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall:  

 

a. Prior to the request for disbursement of advance to the special account provide evidence of 
having opened one (1) Special Account denominated in ZAR and one (1) local currency account 

denominated in NAD, at the Bank of Namibia into which the proceeds of the Loan will be 

deposited (§4.1.8); and 

 

b. within six (6) months of the signing of the Loan Agreement, provide evidence, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Bank, of the recruitment of 3 Technical Advisors (TA) to MAWF, 

each with skills and qualifications acceptable to the Bank (§4.1.1). 

 

5.3.  Undertakings 

 

The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

of NAMSIP, and report to the Bank on a quarterly basis, as part of the quarterly progress report, 

throughout the Project implementation period (§3.2.1). 

 

5.4 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

 

 Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADB Loan of One 

Billion South African Rand (ZAR 1 billion) to the Republic of Namibia for the purpose of 

implementing the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 

 

 



 
 

























































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME  : GOVERNANCE AND AGRIBUSINESS PROMOTION 
     SUPPORT PROGRAMME - (PAGPA) 

 
COUNTRY    : REPUBLIC OF TOGO  

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
PROGRAMME INFORMATION 

 

INSTRUMENT :    General Budget Support 

PBO MODEL DESIGN:                                    Programme Support Operation 

 

GRANT INFORMATION 

Client Information  

BORROWER:       Togolese Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Permanent Secretariat for Reform Policy and 

Programmes Monitoring 

FINANCING PLAN  

 

Source Amount  Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

9.53 Million 

 

GRANT 

FMI 

BM 

UE 

59,67 Million DTS 

50 Million USD                

19 Millions Euros 

 

LOAN 

GRANT 

GRANT 

 

  
Key ADF Financing Information 

 

 

GRANT Currency  

 

UA 

Commitment Fee 0.0%  

Other fees (services) 0.00%  

Maturity  

 

 

Implementation Schedule – Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval 

 

June  2017 

Appraisal July  2017 

PAGPA Programme Approval  29 November 2017  

Effectiveness November  2017 

Last Disbursement  June  2018 

Completion December 2018 

 



iv  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Programme 

overview  

 

Country: TOGO. 

Programme Name: Governance and Agribusiness Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Overall Implementation Schedule: November 2017 – December 2018 

Operational Instrument: General Budget Support  

Programme Cost: UA 9.53 million disbursed in a single tranche in 2017 

Sector: Economic Governance and Agro-industry  

Programme 

Outcomes 
The main expected outcomes under Component A are: (i) a shorter ownership 

transfer timeframe from 283 days in 2016 to 60 days (WAEMU zone recorded 

average); (ii) a reduced agricultural trade deficit from CFAF 64 billion to 40 

billion, (iii) Togo's enhanced resilience to spatial and gender inequality-related 

fragility factors through the promotion of regional development around Agropoles 

and (iv) land tenure security on developed sites. Regarding Component B: (i) 

increased tax pressure from 17.9% in 2016 to 19.1% in 2018; (ii) optimized 

investment management, with the PI-11 rating moving from D to at least C in 2018; 

(iii) improved local tax governance through effective skills transfer and enhanced 

technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

Alignment with  

Bank  

Priorities 

 

PAGPA is aligned with the national development programme, SCAPE 2013-2017, 

notably Pillar (I) development of sectors with strong growth potential and Pillar 

(IV) strengthening governance. It is also aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's 

CSP (2016-2020), namely: (i) Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness 

competitiveness poles and (ii) Support for financial, sector and local governance 

and the Bank's 2013-2022 Ten-year Strategy as well as the Bank's Governance 

Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018), more specifically, it contributes to the 

achievement of three of the Bank's five key strategic priorities (i) "Feed Africa," 

(ii) "Industrialize Africa" through agro-industry promotion measures, and (iii) 

"Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" by supporting reforms seeking 

improved budget management and public action effectiveness through enhanced 

economic and financial governance. 

 

Needs  

Assessment and  

Programme  

Rationale 

 

The encouraging socio-economic performance notwithstanding, Togo remains in 

fragile situation due mainly to the wide spatial disparities in wealth generation and 

distribution. Economic activity remains mainly concentrated in the maritime 

region which generates on average 97% of the tax revenues collected by the OTR, 

against merely 2% for the other regions representing 89% of the territory and 57% 

of the population. To boost its resilience and accelerate its exit from fragility, Togo 

is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector, notably 

through the establishment of agriculture hubs (Agropoles) for economic as well as 

social inclusion reasons. The effective implementation of this strategy requires 

mobilizing substantial investments, both public and private. The total cost estimate 

for the 2016-2020 phase is CFAF 3,791 billion, with an average financing ratio of 

46% from the State budget and 56% from the private sector. PAGPA, by 

concomitantly supporting substantial increase in internal resources, improving the 

private investment climate and strengthening agricultural sector governance, will 

provide Togo with the required financial and technical capabilities to implement 

its agricultural policy, a vehicle for sustainable and inclusive growth. Additionally, 

budget support resources will cover some of the financing requirements of the 

2017 budget, amounting to CFAF 400.6 billion. 

Harmonization Efforts are still required to coordinate the interventions of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs), in particular those engaging in budget support. The budget support 

consultation framework (COAB) set up since 2010, remains inoperative. The TFPs 

are yet to develop a joint matrix of their interventions, for which agreement with 

the government is awaited regarding its orientation, but they are working to 



v  

strengthen the complementarity of their actions in terms of dialogue and reforms 

monitoring. 
 

Bank’s Value  

Added 

 

The Bank has acquired proven expertise in strengthening economic and financial 

governance in Africa, notably in the sub-region (WAEMU). More specifically, the 

Bank has a comparative advantage in Togo for dialogue on reforms, having been 

the first development partner to re-engage after more than 15 years of dialogue 

with the international community; and on account of the results obtained in highly 

strategic areas such as revenue mobilization. Indeed, the Bank lent its full support 

to Togo in its vast and ambitious tax transition project that led to the establishment 

of OTR. PAGPA supports complementary measures to complete reforms seeking 

to optimize this structure, and diversify the economy by creating an enabling 

environment for the establishment of Agropoles. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment  

Increased domestic resources mobilization and greater efficiency in public finance 

management will help improve the living conditions of the people in general and 

women in particular. PAGPA measures will lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the economy, particularly at the local and regional level. The 

numerous opportunities that will open up around major Agropole projects will 

benefit women. In particular, that of the Kara region, the first pilot Agropole to be 

established with the support of this programme should, by 2020, help create 2,500 

jobs, 30% for women and 65% for the youth.  

 

Dialogue on 

Policies and  

Associated 

Technical 

Assistance  

 

 

PAGPA will help reinforce dialogue with the Government on public policies to 

support Togo’s economic transformation. The dialogue will focus on conditions 

for the effective implementation of the agricultural policy, with special focus on 

issues related to broadening the tax base to maximize domestic resources 

mobilization, thus strengthening macro-stability and creating a private investment-

friendly environment. Through ongoing capacity-building projects, the Resource 

Mobilization and institutional capacity building support project (PAMOCI) and 

the Fiscal Governance Support Project (PAGFI), Togo will continue to benefit 

from the assistance of national and international experts in revenue mobilization. 

The implementation of the agribusiness reforms will be supported by the 

investment project being prepared by the department in charge of agriculture in the 

Bank, which is aimed at establishing the Kara Agropole. The submission of this 

project to the Bank's Board of Directors is scheduled for December 2017. 



 

vi 

EXPECTED RESULTS - BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 

Country and Project Name: TOGO: Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Project Goal: Contribute towards creating conditions for strong and inclusive growth supported by agribusiness.  
 

RESULTS CHAIN   PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES  

Indicator (including CSIs)  
 

Baseline Situation Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 Growth is 

sustained and 

more inclusive 

 

Economic Growth Rate   

5,1% in 2016 

 

5.6% in 2020 

INS  

HDI adjusted to inequalities 0.332 in 2015  0.400 in 2020 UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 :  

The 

agricultural 

sector’s added 

value in the 

economy is 

increased 

1.1Number of taxes per year 

 
49 in 2016 At most 39 in 2018. DB-WB 

Report 

Risk 1: Political 

instability: strong 

tensions related to the 

claims  

concerning the 

limitation of the 

number of presidential 

mandates 

 

Mitigation 

measures1: The 

Government is 

committed to revising 

the constitution in 

order to limit the 

number of presidential 

terms to two. The 

dialogue between the 

political actors 

continues 

 

Risk 2: 

Macroeconomic 

instability linked to 

the country's 

economic 

vulnerability to 

exogenous shocks 

Mitigation measures 

2: The Government is 

committed to 

strengthening the 

country's resilience by 

implementing a 

genuine policy of 

structural 

transformation of the 

economy and 

pursuing reforms 

agreed with the IMF 

and other partners. 

Risk 3: Fiduciary 

Risks due to 

weaknesses in the 

public finance 

management system 

Mitigation measures 

3: The effective 

implementation of the 

PA- GFP and the 

measures provided for 

in the PAGPA 1 will 

contribute towards 

consolidating the 

1.2  

Property transfer timeframes 
283 2016 90 days in 2018 

2.3 

 Agricultural trade balance deficit 
-44% in 2015 -38% in 2018 INS/ MEF/ 

Agriculture 

Outcome 2:  

Internal 

resources 

mobilization 

and public 

investment 

management 

are  improved 

1.1 Improved Tax burden  17.9%  en 2016 18.3% in 2017 and 19,1% in 

2018 

OTR SP-PRPF 

MEF 

1.2 Improved investment 

management 
PI.11 D in 2016 PI.11= C in 2018 PEFA/ 

Auto 

A) Support for improved private investment environment and agribusiness promotion 
 

A.1) 

Improving the 

private 

investment 

environment 

a.1.1) Adoption of land code by 

Council of Ministers  

 

Draft Code prepared; 

Transfer timeframe 283 

days in 2016 

Land code and rural registry 

adopted in Ministerial 

Council in 2017 

DADC 

a.1.2) Review and adoption of the 

investment code 

2012 Code in force very 

unfavourable to the 

cross-cutting objective 

of rationalization of 

exemptions, promotion 

of agribusiness and job 

creation 

The Investment and Free 

Zones Promotion Agency 

Operational in 2018 

 

Min industry/ 

Commerce/ 

Agriculture 

a.1.3) Adoption of the revised 

simplified tax code  

Preliminary draft code 

in the validation process 

Simplified tax code 

validated in 2018 

 

a.1.4) Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of a National Strategy 

for Private Sector Development 

A draft Strategy already 

exists  

Private Sector Development 

Strategy adopted in 2018 

Ministry of 

Commerce and 

Private Sector 

MEF/SP-PRFP a.1.5) Creation of the Business 

Climate Unit 

No unit for the actions 

coordination 

Decree adopted by the 

Council of Ministers in 

2017 

A.2) 

Strengthening  

of the legal and 

institutional 

framework for  

agribusiness 

development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a.2.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy 

for Agropoles Development  

 

Preliminary draft 

strategy 

National Agropoles 

development strategy 

adopted in 20170 

Min industry/ 

Agriculture 

a.2.2) Rural roads  built in the area 

of the Kara agropole  

0 Km Km of rural roads built in 

2017 and 35 km in 2018 in 

the area of Kara Agropole 

a.2.3 Agricultural lands 

developed in the area of the Kara 

agropole 

0 Ha 

 
 500 ha in 2017 and 300 ha 

in 2018 of agricultural land 

developed in  the area of 

Kara Agropole, of which at 

least 30% for women's 

and/or mostly women's 

organizations 
a.2.4 Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

No industrial policy or 

agro-industry strategy  

The national 

industrialization policy and 



vii  

Industrialization Policy and  

National Agro-Industry Strategy 

the national agro-industry 

strategy are adopted in 2018 

gains and accelerating 

improved integrity of 

the public finance 

management system. 

Risk 4: 

 Weak human 

capacity to implement 

the reforms identified 

in general, and those 

related to Agropoles 

development, in 

particular. Mitigation 

measures 4: High-

level technical 

assistance to the 

Government on the 

design and 

deployment of 

Agropoles will be 

provided and financed 

by the Bank's Project 

Preparation Fund.  

 

Risk 5: Weakness of 

arrangements for co-

ordination of budget 

support 

 

 

Mitigation measures 

5 
the authorities are 

committed to 

strengthening 

arrangements for 

coordination and 

monitoring of budget 

support to make them 

more operational.  
 

 

 

 

a.2.5) Operationalization of the 

High Authority for Quality and 

technical Quality Structures  

The High Authority 

created is not 

operational 

. Director General is 

appointed and his team  set 

up 
   

B) Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal management of public 
investment 

 

B.1) Improved 

revenue 

mobilization 

 

 

 

 

b.1.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the new National 

Customs Code 

 Draft code 

 

 

Code adopted in 2017 

Code adopted in 2017 

 

SP-PRPF 

OTR 

SP-PRPF 

b.1.2) Establishment of the Fiscal 

Policy Unit by the MEF 

Draft establishment 

instrument 

Establishment in 2017 

b.1.3) Implementation of the 

Lomé tax registry 

 Study conducted The decree establishing  the 

Lomé region tax registry is 

adopted in 2017 

b.1.4) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the bill on the 

transfer of powers and resources 

to local and regional authorities 

Bill prepared  Bill adopted in 2017  

b.1.5) Study on gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy 

No analytical paper on 

the issue 

Study and adoption of an 

action plan for the 

implementation of 

recommendations validated 

in 2017 
b.1.6) Adoption of the national 

gender strategy in 2018 by 

Council of Ministers 

 No strategy National gender strategy 

adopted in 2018 

B.2)Enhanced 

investment 

management 

b.2.1Development of a public 

investments planning, selection 

and programming manual 

No manual or formal 

procedures 

 

Manual approved in 2017, 

PIP revised, 100% of the 

projects registered for 2018 

are validated by the 

selection committee 

 

SP-PRPF/DP 

b.2.2 Creation of Agency for 

government participation 

 

Poor performance  in the 

monitoring of investments 

Decree adopted in 2017 ; unit to 

be operational in 2018. 

b.2.3  adoption by the Minister a 

decree related on  reorganization 

and functioning of regional 

monitoring committees of 

investment project 

No coordinated 

monitoring of project 

implementation at local 

level 

 

The committees are set up 

in 2017 and 100% of 

investment projects in 

region have been supervised 

in 2018 

b.2.4) Finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the 

technical requirements of the 

implementation of programme 

budgets (2019 Budget Policy 

Debate follows programme 

budget) 

BPD does not follow 

programme budget 

format  

Holding of the DOB in 2018 

at the National Assembly 

according to the programme 

budget format  

 

b.2.5) Deconcentration of 

financial control and duties, 

organization and functioning of 

financial control 

 

Centralized financial 

control 

Decree adopted in 2017; 

The controllers of the 5 

regions and the Ministry of 

Agriculture are appointed 

and installed in 2018 

SP-PRPF/DCF 

 

b.2.6) Conduct and regular 

publication of public procurement 

audits 

 

Audits of 2013 

conducted and 

published 

 Public Procurement Audit 

Reports 2014 and 2015 

published in 2017 

Components Funding 

Component A: Support for the promotion of Agropoles 

and strengthening of local governance 

 

AfDB : UA 9.53 million in 2017  

External financing of the funding requirement 2017 

Bank: UA 9.53 million 

IMF: SDR 50.4 million 

EU: EUR 19 million  

WB: USD 50 million 

Component B: Support for internal resources 

mobilization and optimal management of public 

investments 
 



1  

I. INTRODUCTION - THE PROPOSAL. 

1.1 Management submits the following proposal and recommendation for a grant of 

UA 7.21 million from Transition Support Facility (TSF) resources, and a grant of UA 2.32 

million from African Development Fund (ADF) resources, to the Republic of Togo to 

finance the Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGBA). 

PAGPA supports reforms aimed at creating a private and public investment environment 

conducive to agribusiness promotion, and improving revenue mobilization notably for capital 

investment purposes. It is designed as a reform operation funded by a budget support of 

total amount of UA 9.53 million to be disbursed in a single tranche in 2017. 

1.2 Single tranche disbursement, was justify by the particularity of 2017 fiscal year 

situation, which presents a high level of need for concessional financing mainly due to Togo's 

limited access to borrowing resources;  this is in accordance to the Government commitments 

under the framework of the economic program (2017-2019) supported by the IMF's Extended 

Credit Facility approved in May 2017. It also emerges from the revised budget prepared 

following the conclusion of the program with IMF, an overall need for financing gap of 280.8 

CFAF billions excluding grants, part of which will be financed by the ADF and TAF grant 

resources. On account of this financial support for Togo's budget, social sector allocations will 

be maintained, thus minimizing risks of the social climate deteriorating at this crucial 

transitional phase towards exiting fragility. With the programme spanning the November 2017 

to December 2018 period, the Bank will maintain sustained dialogue with the Togolese 

authorities for the effective implementation of the reforms scheduled for 2018. These reforms 

will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF, World Bank and European Union whose 

programmes cover the 2017-2019 period. 

1.3 Despite the favourable outlook, Togo remains confronted with a number of socio-

economic challenges, including inadequate internal resources and an underperforming 

economy with low and non-inclusive value added creation. Despite efforts by GoT and the 

structural reforms implemented in recent years, including the creation of the OTR and the 

adoption of a new customs code, internal resources mobilization remains low compared to the 

financing requirements of the Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 

(SCAPE). The operationalization of the OTR, which is strongly supported by the Bank, has 

definitely yielded encouraging results, with a tax burden of 17.9% in 2016 that is expected to 

reach 18.3% in 2017 and 19.1% in 2018. However, despite this positive trend, on account of 

Togo's weak capacity to create value-added with one of Africa’s lowest GDPs, the absolute 

value of domestic revenues collected falls far short of the budget’s funding requirements. The 

average coverage rate of budgetary spending by tax revenue is about 60%, hence its heavy 

dependence on external financing and public borrowing both internally and externally. Indeed 

since 2016, Togo's debt risk is considered high with a debt ratio of 80.8% of GDP. In this regard, 

GoT has committed, under the new programme with the IMF, to lowering this rate to not more 

than 73% by 2019. 

 

 



2  

1.4 In a bid to maintain medium and long-term viability of the macro-fiscal 

framework, Togo is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector 

to give sustained and inclusive impetus to accelerated economic growth. To leverage this 

sector as a prime mover of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has formulated 

and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "a modern, sustainable and 

high value-added agriculture to support a strong, inclusive, competitive economy generating 

decent and stable employment by 2030". The country’s agriculture sector employs 60-70% of 

the working population and accounts for up to 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential 

with 3.4 million hectares of arable land, of which only 45% is currently under cultivation 

yielding less than 50% of the optimum level. Furthermore, the industrial processing of 

agricultural products is in its infancy, as is the Togolese industrial sector as a whole. Over the 

last three years, the industrial sector, which is not well developed and is poorly integrated with 

the rest of the economy, contributed an average of 17.8% to GDP, with an average annual 

growth rate of 1.3%. PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's previous PARG-II budget support 

and will allow more in-depth reforms focusing on strengthening public finance management 

and creating conditions conducive to agro-industry development. 

1.5 PAGPA is aligned with Togo's national development policies and contributes 

towards implementing the Bank's intervention strategies in Togo. PAGPA is in line with 

the national development agenda, SCAPE 2013-2017, particularly Pillar (I) "development of 

sectors with strong growth potential" and Pillar (IV) "strengthening governance". It is also 

aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's CSP (2016-2020), namely: “Development of inclusive 

growth and agribusiness competitiveness poles” and (ii) “Support for financial, sector and local 

governance”. It is also consistent with the Bank's ten-year strategy 2013-2022 and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018). More specifically, it is aimed at contributing to 

the achievement of three of the Bank's High-5s: (i) "Feed Africa", (ii) "Industrialize Africa" 

and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". 

1.6 In accordance with the Bank's Policy on Budget Support Operations, this proposed 

operation is subject to consideration by the Board following the implementation of the agreed 

prior actions, which are fully consistent with the reform programme of the Government of Togo 

(GoT), designed in consultation with civil society and the country's technical and financial 

partners. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1 Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Political Situation: The 2015 presidential election which was won by the Presidential 

Party, and intensified dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition, contributed towards 

easing the political climate up to the end of the first half of 2017. This relative political stability 

has been conducive to the implementation of structural reforms for a progressive exit from the 

situation of fragility. However, the August 2017 political demonstrations, with sporadic 

violence, indicate that the dialogue during the budget support programme period could unfold 

in the context marked by tension arising from the holding of the legislative elections in 2018, 

local elections in 2019 and the presidential election in 2020. 



3  

2.1.2 Fragility Situation: Despite the progress achieved in recent years, particularly in 

economic terms, Togo remains in a fragile situation. Its average score in the Bank's and World 

Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) is 3.2 out of 6. The reconstruction 

process following the political-democratic crisis is still ongoing. The North-South ethnic and 

regional divide continues to fuel the radicalization of the divergent positions among the political 

class and recurrent social tensions. The ownershipof sustainable mechanisms of socio-political 

dialogue, that is courteous, inclusive and constructive among the political class and the elite as 

well as the strengthening of institutions, constitute major challenges that Togo will face in terms 

of political governance. Moreover, the economy’s extremely heavy dependence on the 

phosphate sub-sector (over 40% of export earnings), and on revenues from port and airport 

traffic, also constitutes a source of fragility, as do the persistent spatial socio-economic 

development and gender disparities. The new development-oriented national agricultural policy 

has the dual objective of diversifying the economy and reducing inequalities in opportunities 

between the maritime region and other regions; and between men and women, by facilitating 

women's access to land through the provisions of the new land code that is in the process of 

adoption. 

2.1.3 Governance: According to the 2016 Mo Ibrahim report on the assessment of global 

governance in Africa, Togo ranks 33rd among 54 countries evaluated with a score of 48.5 out 

of 100. Notwithstanding its poor overall ranking, Togo, with an average change of +9.7 points,  

ranks 2nd  best governance reformer over the period 2006-2015, behind Côte d'Ivoire (13.1), the 

same as Zimbabwe (+9.7) and ahead of Liberia (+8.7), and Rwanda (+8.4). It is the only country 

whose overall governance has improved steadily with progress in each of the 14 sub-categories 

of the IIAG. The 2016 report by Transparency International ranks Togo 116th  out of 176 with 

a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 32 against 29 in 2014, on a scale of 0 (high corruption) 

to 100 (very low corruption). 

2.2 Recent Economic Developments, Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis 

2.2.1 The country is characterized by limited transformation of its economy, which is 

dominated by agriculture with 47.6% of GDP, followed by services (36.2%) and industry 

(16.2%)with merely 6.4% for manufacturing. However, despite a challenging external 

environment, the Togolese authorities were able to maintain a positive trend of economic 

activity. Indeed, the GDP growth rate, which was 6.1% in 2013, remained at an average of 5.4% 

over the period 2014-2016 due to the good performance of the agriculture and infrastructure 

investment sectors. This trend is expected to continue in 2017, with a growth rate of about 5.0% 

which could reach 5.3% by 2018, due to the combined effects of fairly good rainfall and 

increased productivity arising from the agricultural sector’s transformation and the improved 

transportation system. Inflation is also contained through the stabilization of food, energy and 

transport prices. It dropped from 1.8% in 2015 to 0.9% in 2016 and is projected to be negative 

at -0.1% for 2017. An analysis conducted in 2016 by the IMF and World Bank shows that Togo 

is at high overall debt risk. 

 

 



4  

2.2.2 The country's debt risk level is deemed extremely worrying. The public debt stock 

rose sharply from 48.8% at end- 2010 to 80.8% of GDP at end- 2016, above the Community 

norm of 70%. This increase is due mainly to infrastructure investments in 2015 and 2016. 

Togo's new programme (2017-2019) under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with the IMF 

seeks mainly to create conditions conducive to a substantial public debt level reduction from 

80.8% of GDP in 2016 to 67.8% by 2020.1 

TOGO – Macroeconomic indicators 2013 2014 2015 2016 
2017(e) 

2018 (p) 
2019 

(p) 

GDP Growth 6,1 5,9 5,3 5,1 5,0 5,3 5,6 

 population  growth 2,8 2,8 2,8 2,6 2,6 2,6 2,6 

Real GDP growth rate per inhabitant 3,3 3,1 2,5 2,5 2,4 2,7 3,0 

Inflation 1,8% 0,2% 1,8% 0,9% -0,1% 1,2% 1,4 

Budget balance (commitment base incl. grants)  (% GDP) -4,6 -3,4 -6,3 -3,2 -2,3 -2,5 0,2 

Budget balance (cash base)  (% GDP) -5,8 -7,9 -7,8 -9,6 -4,9 -4,7 -0,7 

Current account  (% GDP) -13,9 -10,2 -11,3 -10,1 -9,0 -8,3 -7,6 

Tax burden rate (% GDP) 

 
15,9 16,2 17,4 17,9 18,3 19,1 19,3 

Source : National administrations; calculations by the authors & IMF staff report article IV May 2017 

2.2.3 The budget deficit (cash basis) deteriorated progressively over the period 2013-

2016. It reached a record 9.6% of GDP in 2016,2 against 5.8%, 7.9% and 7.8% of GDP 

respectively in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Such deterioration in the budget balance is due mainly to 

a sharp increase in the aforementioned infrastructure spendings, and high cost of commitments 

under the "pre-financing" method used by the country to finance them. This deficit is projected 

at 4.9% in 2017 and should improve slightly to 4.7% in 2018 with the discontinuation of the 

pre-financing practice at end- 2016 and the renegotiation of the terms of the related 

commitments in 2017. The external current account balance is structurally in deficit, standing 

at CFAF 142.5 billion in 2016. It could rise to CFAF -140.5 billion in 2017, representing an 

improvement of CFAF 2 billion, attributable to an increased services balance (+ CFAF 4.1 

billion) and secondary revenues (+ CFAF 1.2 billion), which is cushioned by the decrease in 

the goods trade balance (CFAF -4.0 billion). 

2.2.4 The outlook is deemed favourable. The combined effects of support for the 

modernization of agro-industry, including Agropoles and extractive industries, and the 

envisaged reforms to strengthen competition rules in the hospitality, electricity, banking and 

telecommunications sectors, should help achieve an average growth rate of 5.3% over the 

period 2017-2019. Additionally, lessons learned from the implementation of budgets (2012-

2016) and the implementation of the programme with the IMF under the Extended Credit 

Facility (2017-2019) should lead to improved budget credibility and stability. 

2.2.5 Competitiveness of the Economy    

The Togolese economy’s competitiveness is structurally constrained by low overall 

productivity and high production costs. In the report Doing Business 2018 Togo loses two 
places compared to 2017 and ranks the 156th. Similarly, although the labour force has grown 

through improved education, physical capital accumulation has stagnated since the 1990s, 

contributing to a steady decline in overall factor productivity. However, significant progress is 

                                                 
1  Togo : Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under 

the Extended Credit Facility, May 2017 
2  Data from IMF staff report Article IV, Table1. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2013 – 21, page 25, May 2017. 



5  

being made by Togo in the international transport sector, which is crucial to improving its 

competitiveness. Mention can be made of (i) the 700 km trans-Togo road, (ii) the coastal back 

road (54 km), (iii) the modernization and extension of the port of Lomé, whose capacity has 

increased from 0.5 to 2 million containers per year, and (iv) the construction of a new airport 

in line with international standards. These impactful infrastructures, as well as their 

geographical position, represent opportunities that reinforce Togo's objective of becoming, in 

the medium term, one of the best performing logistics hubs in the region, given its current 

comparative advantage in that domain. In that regard, the World Bank's 2016 report on the 

logistics performance index (published every two years) shows that Togo has climbed 47 

positions, from 139th out of 160 to 92nd, and remarkably 64 positions on the "Speed" indicator, 

measured by shipment forwarding to freight forwarder times or  expected goods to port delivery 

times. 

2.3 Public Finance Management   

2.3.1 Since 2010, the Government has had a National Finance Reform Strategy with a 

Public Finance Management Reform Plan (PA-RGFP), the implementation of which is 

considered generally satisfactory although subject to improvement. Following the PEFA and 

PEMFAR conducted in 2008-2009, which revealed Togo’s extremely weak public finance 

management system, GoT in September 2010 adopted a public finance management reform 

strategy for the period 2010-2020, with an action plan (PA-RGFP) implemented on a sliding 

triennial basis. The PEFA and PEMFAR evaluations conducted in 2016 show that Togo has 

made significant efforts to put in place budget management tools and procedures that are 

good enough to restore public finance sustainability. 

2.3.2 Regarding budget preparation, the budget nomenclature in force (former WAEMU 

1998 standards) is considered adequate to ensure budgetary transparency. The new 

nomenclature, which complies with the new WAEMU guidelines, is being finalized and should 

enter into force for the 2019 budget at the latest. The budget programming process has also 

improved considerably since PEFA 2008, with an increased focus on short- and medium-term 

financial balances in conjunction with medium-term macro-economic and budgetary 

frameworks, debt sustainability analyses and cash flow plans. PEFA 2016 also noted an 

increased involvement of Parliament in the budget debate. 

2.3.3 In terms of budget execution and control, developments are also deemed positive, 

with noted improvement in revenue collection and the means used to ensure better tax base 

control, as well as enhanced taxpayer monitoring. Additionally, the national government 

procurement system has been assessed by the Bank as overall satisfactory, with a moderate 

level of risk. Similarly, financial control has been strengthened and is governed by general 

regulations that are aligned with good practices in terms of segregation of duties in public 

finance management. The national procurement system was assessed in accordance with 

accepted transparency and competition standards. 

 

 

 



6  

2.3.4 However, despite the above-mentioned progress, there are lingering weaknesses, 

although overall fiduciary risk has been assessed as moderate (see Technical Annex 1 on 

Fiduciary Risk Assessment). Accrual accounting is yet to enter into force, and still depends 

on the effective establishment of stock accounting. Similarly, the process of setting up the 

Single Treasury Account, initiated in 2013, has made no notable progress since the State’s 

accounts census stage. Through the Resource Mobilization and institutional capacity building 

support project (PAMOCI) project, the Bank is supporting the implementation of WAEMU 

directives and the Single Treasury Account. Furthermore, the adoption of the legal framework 

governing the financial regime of local and regional authorities has been delayed; the 

completion and publication of public procurement audits are not regular, and PIMA 2016 

reports that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a gap of almost 70% against 

the most efficient countries, which would represent an efficiency loss of approximately 2/3 of 

the potential impact. These weaknesses have been taken into account in the design of the 

PAGPA. At the end of the last PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA exercises conducted in 2016, the 

PA-RGFP was updated to take into account the findings and recommendations. The 

implementation of this plan should be accelerated, with a view to improving the overall 

performance of public finance management, in particular PI-11 "Investment Management." 

2.4 Inclusive Growth, Poverty and Social Context 

2.4.1 While the social indicators have improved slightly, Togo remains in the bottom 

quintile of the Human Development Index (HDI). The net enrollment ratio (NER) in primary 

education improved overall to 94.3% by 2015. The poverty incidence declined from 61.7% in 

2006 to 55.1% in 2015, but far short of the target of 27.6% expected in 2030 (SDG 1.2) and the 

extreme poverty rate has virtually remained unchanged , moving from 28.6% in 2006 to 28.7% 

in 2015. The Gini index improved from 0.393 to 0.380 between 2011 and 2015 (ODD 10), but 

growth is not yet pro-poor. Despite the progress of the last five years, spatial and gender 

inequalities persist. In rural areas, almost 7 out of 10 Togolese are poor and the availability of 

curative care decreased from 41% in 2014 to 37.7% in 2015, and more than a third of the 

population has to travel at least 5 km to a health centre. Only 50% of women are literate 

compared to 77% of men, and 25 women per 100 men own land, with their average areas 50% 

smaller than for men (CWIQ 2015). As a result, the Human Development Index 2016 remains 

low with a score of 0.487 ranking it 166th out of 188 countries. 

III. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

3.1 Governmental development strategy and medium-term reform priorities 

3.1.1 The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) is the single 

reference framework for interventions under the Government's development agenda for the 

medium term. In 2013, GoT adopted SCAPE for 2013-2017; it is the reference framework for 

governmental action and comprises five strategic Pillars: (i) development of sectors with high 

growth potential; (ii) strengthening economic infrastructure; (iii) development of human 

capital, social protection and employment; (iv) strengthening governance and (v) promoting 

participatory development. The National Development Programme (PND 2018 - 2022), which 

is being prepared, will replace SCAPE. The transformation of the agriculture sector into a strong 

and inclusive growth sector is at the core of the Government's priorities. Furthermore, Togo is 



7  

working to strengthen financial management by continuing, in particular, with reforms fostering 

increased tax revenues, optimal management of public investments as well as public debt 

reduction.  The proposed PAGPA supports the implementation of these reforms through its 

Component (A), which aims to create a public and private investment framework conducive to 

agribusiness promotion; and component (B) which supports reforms aimed at increasing 

internal resources and improving their predictability in order to facilitate the capital expenditure 

necessary for the agriculture sector’s development. 

3.2  Obstacles to Implementing the National/Sector Development Agenda 

3.2.1  Togo has made remarkable progress which certainly places it on the road to lasting 

resilience. These gains must be consolidated in order to firmly lay the foundations of social 

peace and sustainable and equitable development. Progress is noted in the following areas: 

strengthening of security and stability, economic recovery with average growth rates of 5% 

over a ten-year period, implementation of major institutional and economic reforms, and 

strengthening of regional cooperation. However, the persistent ethnic and regional divide could 

constitute a setback to political stability, thus posing a severe threat to social peace and to exit 

from fragility. These challenges, if not addressed speedily, could impede economic progress. 

Moreover, the effective implementation of the SCAPE is severely constrained by inadequate 

financial resources. It is indeed clear from the last review of SCAPE, ahead of the development 

of the new NDP 2018-2022, that during the period 2013-2015 a total amount of merely CFAF 

516 billion, or 68%, was mobilized for the implementation of the scheduled priority action 

programmes against a requirement of CFAF 2.228 billion. Furthermore, the unsuitability of the 

business environment also constitutes a major obstacle to the emergence of a dynamic private 

sector, capable of driving the transformation of economic activity which remains unstructured 

and over 90% dominated by the informal sector.  

3.3 Consultation and Participation Process 

3.3.1  SCAPE 2013-2017 was developed in a participatory manner to ensure a 

comprehensive consideration of the different concerns of political and socio-economic 

stakeholders countrywide. SCAPE was prepared in consultation with all central and regional 

level stakeholders (central government, local authorities, civil society, private sector, political 

parties, traditional and religious leaders, etc.). Moreover, Togo's technical and financial partners 

were involved throughout the preparatory process.  

3.3.2 The design of the proposed PAGPA benefitted from broad consultations with key 

stakeholders. In particular, detailed discussions were held with the Permanent Secretariat for 

the Monitoring of Reform Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) the Togolese 

Revenue Authority (OTR), the budget directorate and the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce 

and Industry, Livestock, Rural Development, Environment and Gender. These discussions were 

followed by broader consultations with civil society (ONGs and producer associations). These 

exchanges led to agreement with the authorities on the need to involve the Togolese rural 

organizations and farmers’ associations in the framework for follow up and monitoring of 

implementation of the reforms.         



8  

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1 Linkages with Bank's Strategy 

The reforms under PAGPA support the implementation of the Bank's Togo CSP (2016-

2020). The programme’s first component supports reforms within the framework of Pillar (I) 

of the CSP, which aims at "Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness competitiveness 

poles”, and its second component largely contributes to the implementation of the Pillar (2) 

"Support for financial sector and local governance ". The proposed PAGPA, envisaged in the 

CSP, also contributes to the implementation of the Bank's 2013-2022 ten-year strategy and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018 ); more specifically, it contributes to three of the 

Bank's High Five strategic priorities: (i) "Feed Africa"; (ii) "Industrialize Africa" through 

measures to promote agro-industry and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" 

by supporting reforms aimed at improving budget management and public action effectiveness 

through strengthening economic and financial governance and the key sector of agriculture. 

4.2  Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

Togo fulfills the pre-requisites for budget support operations, as defined in the Bank's policy 

on reform programme support operations (see Technical Annex 3). However, efforts are still 

required in terms of coordination. The budget support consultation framework (COAB) is not 

optimal; there is no joint policy matrix of budget support interventions. Additionally, delays are 

noted in the implementation of a number of public finance reforms, translating into 

unsatisfactory results in the PEFA 2016 evaluation, where 28 out of 30 indicators are rated "C" 

or "D". Similarly, PIMA 2016 assessed the management of weak-efficiency investments. 

However, in view of the consistency of the measures of institutional reform being implemented 

and the level of integration of the national framework of the public finance management (see 

technical annex 1), global fiduciary risk has been rated moderate. In addition it should be 

minimized if the reforms planned in the PAGPA and others being finalised in the different 

departments concerned were diligently implemented. Furthermore, the Government is 

determined to accelerate the implementation of the national public finance reforms plan of 

PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA, updated at the end of the 2016 fiscal year. 

4.3 Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

In designing the proposed programme, the Bank met with key technical and financial partners 

(TFPs) intervening through budget support, namely the IMF, WB, and EU. The AFD and 

UNDP also participated in the discussions. The operations in progress, or under preparation for 

the period 2017-2019, are: (i) the IMF's ECF of USD 241.5 million; (ii) the WB’s reform 

programme of USD 75 million and (iii) the EU’s budget support of EUR 54 million. Although 

thus far there is no joint intervention matrix, which awaits agreement with the government on 

its orientation, all partners, including the Bank, are strongly committed to harmonizing their 

actions in terms of dialogue and monitoring reforms. The areas of intervention of the TFPs are 

presented in Technical Annex No. 10. 



9  

4.4 Linkages with other Bank Operations 

4.4.1 Bank’s Active Portfolio in Togo: The active portfolio at April 2017 consists of ten 

operations for a total net commitment of UA117 

million (USD 160 million). It comprises eight 

national operations of UA 41.7 million (USD 57 

million) or 36% of the overall envelope. It also 

includes 64% for two multinational operations of UA 

75.3 million (USD 103 million). A high 75% of the 

portfolio is financed by grants. The sector 

distribution of the portfolio indicates the 

predominance of transport infrastructure with about 

64%, followed by economic and financial governance (17%), the social sector (16%), the water 

and sanitation sector (1%) and agriculture (1%). 

4.4.2  The March 2016 Portfolio Review assessed the portfolio performance as overall 

satisfactory, with a score of 3 out of 4 according to the rating of the latest Implementation Status 

and Results Report (ISRR). The portfolio’s performance is considered satisfactory with an 

overall disbursement rate of 42%, for an average age of 2.3 years. The portfolio is fairly young, 

with 50% of the projects approved between 2015 and 2016. The key challenges concern the 

mobilization of the national counterpart funds (particularly for transport projects) and the 

administrative red tape for disbursement and procurement. Special attention should be paid to 

the release of the national counterpart funds for the Togo-Burkina road rehabilitation and 

transport facilitation project, which is scheduled to close at end- 2017. The government will 

also take steps to accelerate the construction of the Togo-Benin juxtaposed checkpoint financed 

by the Lomé-Cotonou road rehabilitation project and transport facilitation on the Abidjan-

Lagos Corridor, Phase 1. 

4.4.3 Complementarity with Previous Operations: PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's 

previous PARG-II budget support through the strengthening of public finance management and 

improvement of the business environment (see technical annex 7 on the achievements of 

PARGII). The implementation of the first component reforms will create the appropriate legal 

and institutional framework for the investment project under preparation by the department in 

charge of agriculture in the Bank, aimed at establishment of the Kara Agropole. The 

presentation this project to the Board is scheduled for December 2017. Furthermore, the second 

component reforms will benefit particularly from the capacity building activities under PAGFI 

(2016-2020), which is institutional support for the modernization of the OTR for optimized 

revenue collection. Additionally, the programme budget and the deconcentration of payment 

authorization and financial control will be further facilitated as the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System (SIGFIP) will be fully deployed and adapted to the new the new budget 

framework. The technical assistance and equipment needs for its deployment are fully covered 

by PAMOCI (2015-2018). Lastly, PAGPA is in complete synergy with the project to support 

markets reconstruction and traders in Kara and Lomé (2014-2018); the project to support youth 

employability and integration (2015-2020) and the project to support the financial inclusion of 

vulnerable women (PAIFFV 2016-2018). 

Water & 
sanitation

1%

Agric
1%

Gov
17%

Social
16%

Finance
1%

Transport
64%



10  

4.4.4 Lessons Learned from Previous Operations:The completion reports for PARCI I and 

II, and PARG II, indicate the following lessons: (i) the match between the scope of the reform 

programmes and the implementation capabilities of the structures involved; and (ii) the need to 

underpin reform programmes with institutional support. These lessons are taken into account 

in the design of PAGPA. The programme focuses on a limited number of reforms, but is 

strategic and aligned with the national objectives of the SCAPE. Furthermore, the programme 

will be supported by capacity building projects (PAMOCI and PAGFI), and the monitoring and 

evaluation mechanism will involve civil society in periodic reviews.  

4.4.5 Analyses Underlying the Operation: Analyses conducted by GoT, the Bank and other 

technical and financial partners (TFPs) served as the basis for the preparation of the budget 

support programme. The foremost among them are: (i) Public Expenditure Management and 

Financial Accountability Review (2016 PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR), at the end of which the 

PA-RGFP action plan was updated; (ii) the WB's 2018 Doing Business report; (iii) the IMF's 

Article IV consultations report in November 2016; and (iv) the report of the Dutch Consultancy 

Kadaster on the reform of the Directorate of State Land and Cadastral Affairs (DADC). The 

main recommendations of these studies concern (i) strengthening budget credibility and 

accelerating the fiscal transition, (ii) improving land management, and (iii) the need for 

economic transformation to drive strong and more inclusive growth. 

V. THE  ENVISAGED PROGRAMME  

5.1 Programme Goal and Objective  

5.1.1 The programme’s principal objective is to contribute towards creating conditions 

conducive to inclusive economic growth. Its specific objectives are to support the development 

of an investment climate conducive to agribusiness development in a context of improved 

internal resource mobilization capacity to support the required public investment. The 

programme addresses Togo’s major persistent challenges in terms of exiting fragility and 

reducing its vulnerability to social crises. Furthermore, the programme will extend the Bank's 

interventions to reforms geared towards gender mainstreaming in government actions, 

particularly in the agriculture sector. 

5.1.2 The programme comprises two components: A) Support for improved private 

investment environment and agribusiness promotion: this component supports implementing 

reform measures aimed at setting up efficient mechanisms and a business environment 

conducive to agribusiness development; (B) Support for enhanced internal resource 

mobilization and optimization of public investment management: This component aims to 

strengthen the mobilization of internal resources, and streamline the management of public 

investments, in order to offset the agricultural sector’s infrastructure deficit and attract more 

private investors to agribusiness. 

 



11  

5.2 Component A: Support for improved private investment environment and 

agribusiness promotion 

Sub-component A.1: Improving the private investment environment 

5.2.1 Context, Constraints & Challenges. The private sector’s contribution to the national 

economy remains relatively low. It contributes merely15% to GDP and remains dominated by 

the informal sector. The formal industrial private sector contributes only 4 to 6% to GDP, which 

is well below the country’s potential. The agricultural sector offers the greatest potential in 

terms of job and wealth creation. However, formal private sector investment is undermined by 

the constraints of this sector. The main constraints on private sector development, particularly 

in  agribusiness, include: (i) predominance of the informal sector; (ii) lack of competitiveness 

due to the high cost of inputs (water, energy, transport, the Internet, etc.); tax policy not aligned 

with private sector development, in particular the need to create more synergy between the 

Investment Code incentives and the Free Zone regime; (iii) insecurity of land tenure; (iv) a 

dispersed institutional framework based on a multitude of entities dedicated to the same 

investment promotion functions (Togo's Presidential Investment Council, Togo-Invest, 

Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, Investment Promotion Agency and non-operational 

free zones, etc.); (v) limited capacity of management structures to support SME/SMI enterprises 

in developing business plans for access to markets and technology; (vi) mismatch between 

training and employment in relation to the actual needs of the Private Sector; and (vii) 

inadequacy of the regulatory framework for management of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 

Contracts (the revision of framework and establishment of the PPP Unit is envisaged after the 

adoption of the pertinent UEMOA directives). 

5.2.2  Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted national and sector strategy papers focusing on the private 

sector as the prime mover of economic growth, jobs and wealth creation. The establishment of 

structures, such as the One-Stop Shop and the Presidential Council for Investment in Togo 

(CPIT), which is a framework for dialogue between the Government and the Private Sector at 

the highest level, has been beneficial. The CPIT helped identify the major constraints on the 

Togolese Private Sector’s attractiveness and competitiveness, and made recommendations that 

enabled the country to climb from 164th to 149th position, moving up 15 places in one year in 

the Doing Business 2015 ranking. But this ranking has deteriorated in successive reports by 

2016, 2017 and 2018 with respective ranks of 154th and 156ieme on 190 ranked economies. 

However, the country has made progress compared to the year 2016, notably in the following 

areas: Starting a business (+7 points); Getting electricity (+1 point); Trading across borders 

(+10 points); and Resolving insolvency (+3 points). Togo must not only consolidate the above 

gains by pursuing structural reforms, but also make efforts to improve its ranking in the 

following areas: lengthy timeframes for: (i) ownership transfer (283 days against an average of 

60 days in WAEMU) and (ii) obtaining a building permit (163 days against 156 days in the 

WAEMU), and the multiplicity of taxes paid per year (49 against an average of 39 in the 

WAEMU). Furthermore, the government has established DOSI. This structure, supported by 

the bank under PAMOCI, is aimed at supporting informal sector operators to gradually 

formalize their activities. The government has also supported the setting up of recognized 

management centres in line with the directive of UEMOA. In addition, the government is 



12  

committed, under the FMI programme and the World Bank operation under preparation, to 

implement structural measures to improve the competitiveness of the sectors of energy and 

telecommunications with a view to reducing production costs.    

5.2.3  Reforms envisaged: Creating a business environment conducive to private sector 

development in Togo requires removing the above constraints through administrative and 

institutional reforms. These include: (i) updating the Investment Code to attract foreign and 

domestic investment and strengthen it, with a view to employment creation under SCAPE; (ii) 

operationalizing the Investment and Free Zone Promotion Agency by appointing the Director 

General and his team; (iii) adopting a National Strategy; (iv) adoption of a new tax code aimed 

at simplifying the tax structure and procedures; and (v) the creation of a Business Climate Unit 

dedicated to strengthened monitoring and improvement of indicators of performance relating 

to the business environment. 

Sub-component A.2: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for agribusiness 

development  

5.2.4 Context and Challenges: Since the 1960s, the State of Togo has demonstrated its 

willingness to promote the industrial sector, through the transformation of a substantial part of 

agricultural and mineral commodities successively through a State model based on imports 

substitution until the late 1980s and then through liberalization policies granting the private 

sector an increased role. Despite these efforts, it is clear that the industrial sector remains poorly 

developed and weakly integrated with the rest of the economy. Embryonic and sparse, Togo’s 

industrial fabric comprises around ten large companies, a hundred medium-sized industries and 

a relatively large number of very small industrial units. The industrial sector's contribution to 

GDP over the last three years averaged 17.8%, with an average growth of 1.3% per year. Togo 

has opted for the transformation of the agricultural sector as the basis for the structural 

transformation of its economy. Togo’s agricultural sector employs 60-70% of the working 

population and accounts for 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential, with 3.4 million 

hectares of arable land, of which, only 45% are currently under cultivation with low yields of 

below 50% of the optimum level. It is characterized by a very low level of mechanization and 

professional expertise, with 89% of the cultivated land sown manually (hoes and machetes). To 

leverage this sector as an engine of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has 

formulated and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "modern, 

sustainable and high value-added agriculture ". The promotion of agro-industry and Agropoles 

is pivotal in this policy, which will enable the creation of integrated development zones around 

agricultural activity in order to support the promotion of industrial and services clusters and 

stimulate growth. The Agropoles pilot programme covers three of the country’s five regions 

that have been selected on the basis of their comparative advantages, as well as inclusion and 

poverty reduction criteria. The priority target products are rice, soybean, cashew nuts and 

sesame, sorghum, millet, maize and livestock. The objective is to enhance food security through 

import-substitution and exporting surpluses in the regional markets of WAEMU and 

ECOWAS, given Togo's age-old trade tradition, the opportunities offered by its geographical 

position and the expected increase in regional demand due to population growth, urbanization, 

income growth and diet diversification. 



13  

5.2.5 Major constraints on the promotion of Agropoles and agro-industry in Togo are: (i) 

lack of industrial policy and lack of serviced industrial sites; (ii) weak integration of the 

industrial sector with other sectors of the economy in general and the agricultural sector in 

particular, due mainly to supply difficulties and the lack of organization of the sectors; (iii) 

inadequacy of quality infrastructure and production support that hamper the development of the 

industrial fabric and agribusiness in particular; (iii) weak competitiveness of industrial 

products, due notably to the high cost of production factors (energy, transport, communications, 

etc.), non-conformity of industrial products with international standards, unfair competition 

from some industrial products imported fraudulently, and absence of legal instruments and an 

institutional quality control system for consumer products marketing in Togo; (v) credit access 

difficulties, notably for the agricultural sector which represents on average 1-2% of the bank’s 

portfolio, due particularly to the poor organization and professionalization of agricultural value 

chains and land tenure insecurity, especially for women; (vi) weaknesses in the institutional 

framework for industrial support, due mainly to strategic, organizational and institutional 

weaknesses at the level of the Ministry of Industry and industrial support services3; (vii) lack 

of accredited laboratories and inspection bodies capable of carrying out physical/chemical and 

microbiological analyses of industrial and agro-industrial products, testing and calibration in 

metrology and certifications to international standards for local marketing and export; (viii) 

territorial imbalance between the maritime region, which hosts nearly all the industrial units, 

and the country’s other regions which are agriculture-oriented and under-industrialized due 

mainly to the lack of appropriate infrastructure.      

5.2.6 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted a number of reforms with special focus on industrial 

development. These include the Framework Law of 12 August 2009 on the organization of the 

national harmonization scheme for standardization, accreditation, certification, metrology, 

environment and promotion of quality in Togo; Decree of 27 December 2013 issued pursuant 

to Law No. 2011-018 of 24 June 2011 on the status of the industrial free zone; Law of 20 

January 2012 on the Investment Code in the Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 

issued pursuant to Law No. 2012-001 of 20 January 2012 on the Investment Code in the 

Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 on the allocation, organization and operation 

of the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments and the Free Zone and the Accelerated 

Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) 2013-2017, under which industrial 

development and the transformation of agriculture are major pillars. More recently in 2016, the 

Agricultural Policy, together with the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in 

Togo by 2030, was also adopted.  

5.2.7 Several measures have also been implemented with a view to facilitating access to 

financing, in particular the creation of the National Agency for the Promotion and Guarantee 

of Financing of SMEs and SMIs (ANPGF). Additionally, the WAEMU Directive on public 

procurement and the delegation of services was made internal in 2014. This instrument, which 

did not take into account partnership contracts, nevertheless provided for the development of a 

PPP strategy and the setting up of a PPP management unit. These two reforms are suspended 

                                                 
3  In particular the quality management infrastructure: Metrology-Standards-Quality Control (MSQC) 

 



14  

pending a new institutional framework by WAEMU, which more clearly separates delegation 

and partnership contracts, on the one hand, from public procurement, on the other. Lastly, the 

finalization of the National Industrialization Policy is underway and will be followed by an 

Industrialization Strategy, which will be prepared in collaboration with the Bank and UNIDO. 

To this end, the authorities sent a request for technical assistance to the Bank aimed at making 

Togo a pilot experiment for the implementation of the strategic pillar relating to the 

industrialization of Africa. 

5.2.8 Reforms envisaged: Accelerating industrial development in Togo requires 

implementing a number of reforms aimed at removing the above constraints, particularly 

through measures such as: (i) adoption of a National Industrialization Policy; (ii) 

operationalization of the High Authority for Quality and Technical Quality Structures (the Fund 

and the Agencies) through the appointment of the Director General and his team and the 

allocation of the necessary resources for its start up in the 2018 budget; (iii) the adoption of a 

National Agropoles Strategy; (iv) adoption of instruments governing the national Agropoles 

development structure; (v) adoption of a new Land Code governing the land registry which 

would foster agribusiness development and loan access. 

5.2.9 The main expected outcomes of Component A are: (i) improving the agricultural trade 

balance deficit, (ii) strengthening Togo's resilience to fragility factors related to spatial and 

gender inequalities; (iii) improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector; (iv) securing 

land for the development of agribusiness and facilitating access to financing; and (v) improving 

the business environment for domestic and foreign private investment. 

5.2.10 Component B: Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal 

management of public investments: 

Sub-component B.1: Improved Revenue Mobilization 

5.2.11 Context Constraints and Challenges: Togo has committed, under the programme with 

the IMF, to substantially reducing the level of public debt by prohibiting any new external non-

concessional loan and by capping the volume of concessional commitments. Against this 

backdrop, and faced with the urgent need to pursue investment spending that is crucial to 

achieving the development objectives of SCAPE, maximizing internal resources mobilization 

in the short term is essential as the main factor for macroeconomic stability and the 

sustainability of the budget framework. The establishment of the OTR in 2014, coupled with 

the modernization and extension of the Lome Port Authority, has definitely helped to enhance 

Togo’s revenue mobilization capabilities. The ratio of tax revenues (cash basis) to GDP 

increased from 15.9% in 2013 to 17.9% in 2016 and could reach 19% in 2018, nearly the 20% 

WAEMU standard. However, recent economic developments in the sub-region have 

highlighted the great sensitivity of OTR's performance to customs duties; with OTR’s, results 

for 2016 falling below target for the first time. This underperformance, though minimal (-1.1%), 

is mainly due to the sluggish economic conditions in the country's key trading partners (Nigeria, 

Ghana). In this regard, the major challenge for the country is to optimize domestic taxation by 

broadening the tax base through the exploitation of the land niche in particular. Additionally, 

simplification of customs and tax procedures should be pursued to attract private investment 

and accelerate added value creation. 



15  

5.2.12 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to the challenge of improving 

internal revenue mobilization, the Government, with the Bank's support, initiated structural 

reforms that culminated in the establishment in 2012 of the Togolese revenue authority (OTR), 

which incorporates the two State financial administrations (taxes and customs) into a single 

entity with administrative and financial management autonomy. The operationalization of the 

OTR has enabled Togo to increase its budgetary revenues substantially; they increased from 

CFAF 403.6 billion in 2013 to 568.5 billion in 2016, representing a 40.8% rise. The average 

growth rate of tax revenues over the period 2013-2016 is 12.7%. Furthermore, the country 

adopted a new Customs Code which entered into force in 2014 (Law No. 2014 - 003 of 28 April 

2014) replacing the old instrument dating from 1966. A new revision of the Customs Code is 

underway to, among other things, further clarify the division of powers and responsibilities 

between the OTR and the Ministry in charge of finance and fiscal policy. In addition, the draft 

text of the new Customs Code will take into account recent developments in international trade 

regarding trade facilitation and improved customs procedures. Similarly, the GoT initiated the 

revision of the tax code with a view to simplifying the tax system to make it more attractive to 

investors and also more accessible to tax administration and taxpayers. Lastly, the GoT in 2016 

committed to a feasibility study for the establishment of a tax registry for an optimized property 

tax base. 

5.2.13 Reforms Envisaged: To accelerate enhanced internal resources mobilization, PAGPA 

will support the adoption by the Council of Ministers of the: (i) Lomé Tax Registry Decree, (ii) 

new national Customs Code; (iii) decree establishing the fiscal policy unit by the MEF; and (iv) 

bill on the transfer of powers and resources to local and regional authorities. 

Sub-component B.2: Strengthening Public Investment Management 

5.2.14 Context, Constraints and Challenges: Investment management was assessed as very 

unsatisfactory by the PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR exercises conducted in 2016. The PIMA 

report shows that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a nearly 70% gap 

compared to the best performing countries. This represents a loss of approximately 2/3 of the 

effectiveness of the potential impact. The Public Investment Program (PIP) is not aligned with 

the budget. An absolute gap of 15% between the 2016 PIP component and the draft budget for 

2016 transmitted to Parliament was noted. Inadequacies have been identified at all levels of the 

process (multi-year programming, ex ante evaluation, project selection, public procurement 

performance monitoring, and availability of investment credits). PEMFAR4 noted the absence 

of "national guidelines defining the principles and conditions for the economic and financial 

evaluation of projects". Economic evaluations of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness are not 

always conducted, and whenever this is done no review mechanism for results review by an 

independent structure of the contracting authority is in place. Additionally, project recurrent 

costs are poorly estimated and only the operating costs of a project as an administrative unit are 

included in the budget. This partly accounts for the shortcomings noted in the public 

investments monitoring with irregular implementation monitoring activities and incomplete or 

non-existent data bases on physical and financial implementation of investments. The 

investment management situation in Togo deteriorated further with the so-called "pre-

                                                 
4  PEMFAR 2017 Report 



16  

financing"5 practice that the GoT applied between 2011 and 2016. Under this mechanism, 

besides the shortcomings of the basic financial package, pre-financing agreements were 

concluded and executed outside the public expenditure circuit and to the total exclusion of the 

internal control and external audit bodies. State reimbursements to banks thus faced high risks 

of fictitious progress payment claims and/or poor quality work. Lastly, investment management 

and, in general, the implementation of public policies in Togo are also handicapped by the lack 

of programme budgets, weak results-based budgeting practices and the centralization of 

financial control. PEMFAR 2016 noted that "in Togo, the centralization of authorizing officer 

and financial controller functions are veritable sources of delays and inefficiency in the 

expenditure circuit". Indeed, having no local or regional delegations, all vote holders in local 

authorities must travel to Lomé to submit their commitment and validation files. 

5.2.15 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: As part of its IMF- backed programme, 

the government stopped the pre-financing practice in the latter half of 2016. The government 

also pledged not to undertake new pre-financed investments, to validate all existing pre-

financed investments and to include pre-financing debt in the outstanding public debt. The 

authorities have also decided to follow in future the budgetary and procurement procedures for 

all new public investments. Besides the effective abandonment of pre-financing, it is crucial to 

establish an efficient investment management system, systematize programme budgets and 

decentralize financial control speedily in order to ensure an optimal framework for future 

investments, notably those required for the implementation of the national Agropoles 

development strategy. 

5.2.16 Reforms envisaged: PAGPA will support (i) the development of a public investments 

planning, selection and programming manual; (ii) adoption of the ministerial order on the 

framework for regional monitoring of investment projects execution; (iii) finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the technical requirements for the implementation of programme 

budgets; (iv) adoption by the Council of the Ministers of the decree on the deconcentration of 

financial control and powers, organization and functioning of financial control; (v) publication 

of the 2014 and 2015 public procurement audit reports; and (vi) the creation of Unit for 

government participation with a view to strengthening the monitoring of public investments 

and the management of state assets. 

5.2.17 The main results of Component B are: (i) sustained revenue growth, (ii) improved 

PIP implementation rate; (iii) improved local fiscal governance; and (iv) enhanced financial 

and technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

5.3   Policy Dialogue 

5.3.1 PAGPA will strengthen dialogue with the Government and consultation with other 

TFPs, mainly in the following areas: (i) internal resources mobilization, where discussions will 

focus on the need to broaden the tax base; and (ii) transformation of the Togolese economy with 

special focus on the conditions for effective implementation of the agricultural policy. In this 

regard, and relying on its country office, the Bank will continue support for improved land 

                                                 
5  PEMFAR 2017 Report: This mechanism consists in awarding a public contract to one or more contractors to carry out a public investment. 

Successful bidders are financed by commercial banks to perform the work with guarantees from the Togolese State. The State in its 

capacity as contracting authority reimburses the former as and when the works/services are performed, in principle after acceptance of 

progress payment claims submitted by the operators. 



17  

management in order to speed up the establishment of a reliable registry to secure land tenure, 

a prerequisite for attracting private investors. In addition, PAGPA will enable the Bank to raise 

the level of dialogue with Togo on issues of gender promotion and civil society’s participatory 

role. Lastly, ongoing discussions will be continued with the Togolese government towards 

operationalizing the joint framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the performance of 

budget support and reform program. 

5.4 Grant Conditions  
 

Table 2. PAGPA Preliminary Measures 

 

5.5 Application of Good Practice Principles on Conditionality 

In accordance with the 14 March 2012 Bank policy on budget support operations, the design of 

the proposed PAGPA applied good practice principles on conditionalities. Eight conditions 

precedent have been agreed with the Country and these are in line with the country's priorities. 

They are drawn from national reform documents, in this case the agricultural policy and PR-

GFP. The programme’s Pillars and the results-based logical framework were discussed, and 

agreed, with the Government and all stakeholders, including other TFPs and civil society. The 

disbursement schedule is aligned with the budget cycle. 

5.6 Financing Requirements and Terms 

The macroeconomic framework was updated as part of the supplementary budget approved by 

the Cabinet in November 2017 in order to take into account the commitments made under the 

IMF program which aims to reduce Togo's indebtedness risk. This revised budget 2017 projects 

a level of revenues (excluding grants) of CFAF 560.4 billion against expenditures of CFAF 

841.23 billion (including arrears payments). The resulting financing gap of CFAF 280.83 

billion is entirely covered by internal financing and external resources from technical and 

financial partners including the Bank.  

Preliminary Measures 

General Prerequisite – Maintaining a stable macroeconomic  framework, as reflected by IMF reports or evaluations 

Component A – Support for  Agribusiness Promotion  
Component B –  Support for Internal Resources Mobilization and Optimal 

Management of Public Investment 

 

Action 1: Adoption by the Council of Ministers of the 

National Agropoles Development Strategy 

Evidence 1: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy for Agropoles 
Development Strategy  

Action4: Establishment of the Tax Policy Unit. 

Evidence 4: MEF Order establishing the Tax Policy Unit  

Action 2 : Creation of the Business Climate Unit   

Evidence 2 : Decree adopted by the Council of Ministers  

Action 5: Adoption of the new national Customs Code 

Evidence 5: Release of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the bill on the new 

customs code.  

Action 3: Adoption of the National Private Sector 

Development Strategy, 

Evidence 3: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the national private sector development 

strategy 

Action 6: Deconcentration of financial control, powers, organization and functioning 

of financial control 

Evidence 6: Decree of the Council of Ministers on the deconcentration of financial 

control, powers, organization and functioning of financial control 

 Action 7 : Creation  of Agency for government participation 

Evidence 7 : Decree of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the creation of Agency for 
government participation  



18  

Table 3 – Estimated Financial Requirements and Sources in CFAF Bln 

  Rubriques 2017 (Bln CFAF) 

 

A Total revenues and grants 707,1 

                   Of which : tax revenues 503 

B                 Of which : grant 146,7 

C Total net expenditures and loans  771,23 

   Of which: interest payments  58,7 

   Of which :capital expenditures 313,5 

D Overall balance (base settlement excl. grants) (A -B-C) -210,83 

E Accumulation of arrears -70 

F Overall balance (cash basis) ( D+E) -280,83 

G External financing net (less Bank contribution ) 259,78 

H Bank contribution  7,95 

I Internal financing (net) 13,1 

J Financing (F + G+H) 280,83 

K Financing gap  (J+F)  0 

 Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy – Report’s Authors 

 

5.7 Application of Bank Group Policy on Non-Concessional Debts Accumulation 

The proposed PAGPA is financed by a grant and thus not governed by the Bank Group Policy 

on non-concessional debt accumulation. 

 

VI. IMPLEMENTATION  

6.1 Programme Beneficiaries 

The direct beneficiary of the programme is the Ministry of economy and finance through 

the financing of the national budget. In an indirect way the program will benefit to the 

whole Togolese population. PAGPA will help lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the local economy and regions around major Agropole projects, as a source 

of resilience to address fragility concerns in the rural areas (about 62% of Togolese population) 

and on the outskirts of Lomé and the regional capitals. In particular, the development of the 

Agropole in the Kara region should enable the creation of 2,500 jobs by 2020, of which 30% 

for women and 65% for youth, an electricity access rate of 43% (against 16% in 2015) and 55% 

access to drinking water (against 25% in 2015). 

6.2 Impact on Gender, the Poor and Vulnerable Groups 

Despite the progress made over the past five years, gender discrimination persists. In 2011, 

Togo adopted a National Policy on Gender Equity and Equality. In 2014, the Code of Persons 

and Family was also revised, thus enabling legislation on major discriminations that existed in 

marriage and inheritance. In particular, Article 99, which provided that "The man shall be the 

family head" has become "The family shall be run by the spouses". However, in the absence of 

a clear intervention strategy, exclusionary practices identified in the National Policy remain 

topical, including difficulty of access to farmland for women. In addition to the family code, 

PAGPA will support the adoption of the law on gender parity in elective and appointive 

positions, the effectiveness of which will do more to further raise the required awareness among 

opinion leaders. Moreover, the programme will support a study to explore equitable gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy without altering the impersonal nature of taxation. The 

recommendations of this study will form an integral part of the national gender strategy also 

supported by the programme. 



19  

6.3 Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

PAGPA is classified as Category III in accordance with the Bank's environmental and 

social impact assessment procedures. PAGPA has no negative environmental impact. 

However, the country is faced with the adverse effects of climate change and environmental 

challenges, particularly in the agricultural, forestry, energy, mining and water resources sectors 

and in coastal zone management. The GoT demonstrates a strong commitment to providing 

lasting solutions to the environmental degradation problems and considering climate change in 

public policy. Since 29 December 1998, Togo has adopted its National Environment Policy in 

accordance with international environmental agreements (the Vienna Convention and the 

Montreal Protocol, the Rio Conventions and their respective Protocols, Rotterdam Convention, 

Stockholm Convention)6. Furthermore, SCAPE 2013-2017 lays special emphasis on the 

environment and community resilience to climate change, with the intensification of actions 

provided for under initiatives such as: (i) National Adaptation Plan (PANA); (ii) National 

Programme for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + 2010-

2050); (iii) National Action Plan for the Management of Marine and Coastal Environmental 

Resources; and (iv) Environmental Management Capacity Building Programme (PRCGE). 

6.4 Macroeconomic Impacts 

The proposed PAGPA will contribute to macroeconomic stability by improving the agricultural 

sector’s performance and reducing the trade deficit. Furthermore, according to a study by the 

Dutch firm Kadaster on the reform of State lands and Cadastral Affairs Directorate (DADC), 

the potential yield of property tax (Land Taxes on built-on estates, land ownership registration 

duties) at the national level, based on a computerized cadastre on only the 400 000 plots already 

identified, would be over CFAF 100 billion against CFAF 1.4 billion of revenue collected in 

2016. PAGPA would help generate the budgetary resources required to make impactful 

investments, notably those needed for the Agropoles, which represent sources of new business 

and employment opportunities. 

 

6.5 Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 

The Programme’s executing agency is the Permanent Secretariat for the Monitoring of Reform 

Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) within the Ministry of Economy and Finance. 

The implementation of PAGPA will be monitored through semi-annual and annual 

implementation reports, prepared by the SP-PRPF on the basis of a joint review with the 

programme’s participating structures as well as members of civil society, in particular the 

Coordination of Togolese farmer organizations and agricultural producers. The Togolese 

authorities will also transmit to the Bank the compliance report on the 2017 budget review law 

no later than 31 December 2018, drawn up by the Audit Court. The Bank will monitor the 

Programme in coordination with the group of TFPs acting through budgetary support. The Bank 

will undertake at least two programme supervision missions per year, and ensure that it interacts 

with all Programme stakeholders, including civil society. 

 

                                                 
6  CSP 2016-2020 
 



20  

6.6 Financial Management and Disbursement 

 

6.6.1 Disbursement: The resources of the proposed operation comprise as follows:  

 An amount of UA 2.32 million (ADF) that will be disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, 

upon entry into force of the ADF Grant Agreement between the Republic of Togo and the 

African Development Fund and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the 

disbursement in section 7.2.3 below; and 

 An amount of UA 7.21 million, from the Transitional States Facility (TSF), that will be 

disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, upon entry into force of the TSF Grant Agreement 

between the Republic of Togo, African Development Fund and African Development Bank 

and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the disbursement in section 7.2.3 

below. 

 

6.6.2 Financial Management and Audit: The assessment of the fiduciary framework of the 

public finance management system shows moderate fiduciary risks (see technical annex 1). In 

accordance with the fiduciary strategy for the CSP 2016-2020 period, PAGPA will be entirely 

managed within the national public finance management system. The effective payment of 

budget support resources into the State budget will be monitored through the Audit Court’s 

General Compliance Report on fiscal 2017, which will be transmitted to the Bank and the 

National Assembly of Togo at the same time. In addition, the Audit Court will audit the 

financial flows of the Special Account opened in the name of the Treasury and intended for the 

deposit of the grant resources. This report must be sent to the Bank no later than 3 months after 

the disbursement. 

 

6.6.3 Goods and Services Procurement: The grant will be in the form of general budget 

support. Accordingly, its implementation does not directly entail any goods and services 

procurement issues. It is clear from the fiduciary risk assessment that the legal and institutional 

framework for public procurement in Togo is overall operational, and that public procurement 

is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement Code. However, some 

shortcomings are noted, particularly, the regular absence of: (i) annual audit reports; (ii) post-

auditing of contracts below the review threshold of the National Procurement Audit Department 

(DNCMP); and (iii) capacity constraints of the contracting authorities. The reform measures 

identified under the proposed PAGPA, and the political dialogue on the continued need to 

improve the procurement system, will help address these shortcomings. Furthermore, the 

revision of the public procurement code and its implementing instruments initiated since 2011 

is being finalized, and should lead to the adoption before end- 2017 of a new legislative and 

regulatory framework. 

 

 



21  

VII. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

7.1 Legal Instrument 

The Programme will be financed through two Grant Agreements between the African 

Development Fund (ADF) and the Togolese Republic, for the ADF grant and the African 

Development Fund, the African Development Bank and the Togolese Republic for the TSF 

grant. 

7.2 Conditions related to the Bank’s Intervention 

7.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the Grant Agreement: The entry into 

force of the Grant Agreements is conditional upon signature (i) by African Development Fund and the 

Republic of Togo of the ADF grant, and (ii) by African Development Fund, African Development Bank 

and the Republic of Togo of the TSF grant.  

7.2.2 Conditions Precedent to Board Presentation of the Programme: Presentation of the 
Programme to the Board of Directors of the Fund shall be subject to evidence, provided by the 

Republic of Togo, of the implementation of all preliminary measures agreed with the Fund as 

specified in Table 2 in para: 5.4. 

7.2.3 Conditions Precedent to Disbursement: The disbursement of the resources of the grants 
is conditional upon realisation, by the Republic of Togo, to the satisfaction of ADF, of the following 

condition: Submit to the Bank the details of the Treasury bank account into which the resources of  the grant will 
be deposited 

7.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The proposed PAGPA is in line with the Bank Group policies and guidelines on reform support 

operations (2012). 
 

 

 

Table 4 – Risks and Mitigation Measures 
 

Risks 
Significanc

e of risk 
Mitigation Measures 

Political instability related to demands 
for Presidential term limits 

Substantial The government is committed to revising the constitution to limit presidential terms 
to two mandates.  Dialogue on this issue is ongoing with political parties. 

Macroeconomic instability due to 

the country's economic 
vulnerability to exogenous shocks 

Moderate The Government is committed to strengthening the country's resilience by 

implementing a genuine policy of structural transformation of the economy 
and pursuing the reforms agreed with the IMF and other partners. 

Fiduciary risks due to weaknesses 

in the public finance management 

system 

Moderate The effective implementation of the PA-GFP and the measures provided for 

under PAGPA I will contribute towards consolidating the gains and 

accelerating the improvement of the integrity of the public finance 
management system. 

Weak human capacities to 

implement the reforms identified in 

general, and those linked to the 
development of Agropoles, in 

particular 

Moderate High-level technical assistance to the Government on the design and 

deployment of the Agropoles will be established and financed by the Bank's 

project preparation fund. Other institutional and technical assistance funded 
by the Bank and other technical and financial partners is aimed at enhancing 

public administration capacity both at central and decentralized levels. 
Weakness of the budget support 
coordination mechanism 

Moderate The authorities have undertaken to strengthen the institutional arrangements 
for coordinating and monitoring budget support for make it more operational 

 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

 

In light of the foregoing, it is recommended that the Boards of Directors approve a TSF grant 

not exceeding UA 7.21 million and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 2.32 million for the Republic of 

Togo, to finance the governance and agribusiness promotion support programme (PAGPA) in 

accordance with the conditions set forth in this report.




















































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 
 

UGANDA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

(AVCP) – PROJECT 1 
 

 

 

 

 

Loan and Grant Information 
 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER   : Republic of Uganda 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY : Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)  

 

Financing plan 

 

 

Source Amount (UA Million) 

 

Instrument 

ADF  

 

 57.00  Loan  

Government  

 

7.41 Not applicable  

TOTAL COST 

 

64.41  

 

 Key financing information 

 

Loan  currency 

 

UA 

Interest Type* Note Applicable  

Interest rate spread * Note Applicable  

Commitment Fee 0.5% 

Other fees* 0.75% Service Charge   

Tenor 600 months  

Grace period 120 months  

FIRR 

NPV (USD base case ) 

20%  

2.127 Million  

EIRR (base case) 23% 

*if applicable 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 
Concept Note approval 22 January, 2017 

Project approval 11 December 2017 

Effectiveness March , 2018 

Completion December ,2022  

Closing Date  June,  2023  

Last repayment 50 years; December, 2068  

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

iv 

 

Project Summary 

 
1. Project Overview: 

1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed within 
the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been designated 

by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate the country’s 

Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; generate 

employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote science and 

technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for accelerating 

socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, notably, 

construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to enhance 

household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan 

(ASSP) 2015/16-2019/20, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Local 

Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) (2013-2023), and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

AVCP will be implemented along commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention to 

regulatory reforms. In agreement with Government, the project will focus on three commodity value 

chains, namely: Rice, Maize and Dairy/Beef value chains; and will comprise of three (3) operational 

and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity Enhancement, ii) 

Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and (iv) Project 

Management and Coordination. 

 
1.2 According to Uganda National Household Survey 2013, about 19.7%, of the total population 

representing 6.7 million people, are unable to meet their basic needs and are living below absolute 

poverty line. The incidence of poverty is highest among food-crop growing category in the rural areas 

due to low income. The project seeks to increase farmer incomes through improvements in Production 

and Productivity Enhancement, Infrastructure Development and Market Development and Trade 

Facilitation.  

 

1.3  The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various Districts across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, 

Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, 

Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; 

Rice: Locations where the Bank and Government have developed large irrigation schemes, Sironko-

Acomai irrigation scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and 

Pader. The soft components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity 

building would be extended to all irrigation schemes undertaken with support of the Bank under FIEFOC 

1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on 

the cattle corridor districts (from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara 

district as the springboard. The target population in those districts is about 1,816,756 of which 51.7% 

are women and comprising 386,543.8 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase 

in yields of major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average 

of 10%. In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating 

activities from natural resources, capacity building  and service delivery of the project would specifically 

target women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved  yields and incomes. Moreover, the project is expected to 

provide technical skills in conservation and other farming practices through targeted training that 

promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural productivity in the proposed 

project area. It will also assist in the formulation and implementation of measures that reduce 

deforestation and promote agro-forestry through introduction of economic trees which will lead to 

emission reductions and the protection of carbon reservoirs as part of the Reduction of Emissions from 



 

v 

 

Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) agenda. The carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestered as a result of 

tree planting by the project is estimated at 245, 000 tons of over 20 years. Training under the project 

will provide an opportunity for special attention to be given to intensification of climate-smart farming 

operations. 

 

2. Needs Assessment:  

2.1 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to achievement 

of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; develop the 

infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in response to a 

request from the Government of Uganda to provide assistance for the transformation of agriculture in 

Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had initially fielded a Country 

Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, July and September, 2016 

respectively.  The missions were to understand the extent of implementation of the ASSP and the general 

context of agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to achieve 

the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting processing and marketing activities in this sector. 

The feasibility study and preliminary designs of the Achomai irrigation scheme in Bukedia/Bulambuli 

Districts was developed by JICA. In the course of the development of this project, the project team also 

held several consultation meetings with various stakeholders of the project; including civil society and 

development partners. 

 

2.2 Hence the project is demand driven by farmers, local governments, various stakeholders and the 

GoU to address requirements of increased agricultural production and enhancement of household 

incomes.  The project will build on Uganda’s relatively strong record in improving gender equity 

through deliberate inclusion and promotion of project activities with farms and agribusiness activities 

owned, operated, and managed by women. The project will aim to empower more women and youth to 

make decisions, invest in agriculture, and improve their social and economic status for the family’s 

overall wellbeing. 

 

2.3 In keeping with the Bank’s new strategy on addressing fragility and building resilience, the project 

has also been developed with the goal of building resilience in mind. Food security is critical to 

community resilience, and agribusiness provides value addition, creating agro-industries, and export 

promotion.  By helping the development of agribusiness and cottage industries, the Bank will contribute 

to more stable sources of income, greater food security, boosts youth employment, and expand economic 

opportunities for the communities. 

 

3. Bank’s Added Value: 

3.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP),  the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement 

Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department of the Treasury 

MDB Awards, the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm Income Enhancement 

and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws extensively from lessons 

learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of the completed Projects. The most pertinent 

lessons include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building the 



 

vi 

 

capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and project 

sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project 

 

4. Knowledge Management:  

4.1 Knowledge gained from implementation of the above projects, particularly on the need to build 

country capacity for project implementation, has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same 

pattern, the knowledge that will be generated by the project will be instrumental in designing and 

managing similar Bank-financed projects in the future. Provisions made for knowledge and information 

management include on web-based technology for natural resources data collection, ICT platform to 

network value chain actors, compilation and presentation, the market Information System (MIS) that 

will generate data pertaining to prices, sources and volumes of commodities to be shared with all 

stakeholders and the gender sensitive value chain analysis and development that allow women and youth 

to design and manage sustainable SMEs.



 

vii 

 

AVCP RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and project name: UGANDA: Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme 

Purpose of the project :  To improve farm incomes, rural livelihoods, food security and contribute to poverty reduction through irrigated agriculture, sustainable natural resources management and agricultural 

enterprise development. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
  

1.1 Farm incomes increased, food 
security improved and poverty reduced  

 

1.1: Average household farm income (USD per year) 

 
 

1.2:  Reduction in Poverty Level (%) 

 

2017 

1.1: 672 
(2016) 

1.2: 26 

 

2022 

1.1 730 
 

1.2: 14.2 

Household survey, 

Bureau of 
Statistics (UBOS) 

reports, 

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

 

2.1. Improved rice and maize 
production, and livestock genetic 

breed  

 
 

 

 
 

2.2 Improved integrated natural 

resources management 
 

 

2.3 Improved rural employment 
(30%youth and women) 

 

 

 

2.1.1  Number of hectares under improve rice production 
 

2.1.2  Number of hectares under improve maize production 

 
2.1.3 Number of farmers accessing improved livestock genetic breeds 

by dairy and beef farmers  

 
 

2.2: % change in tree cover (ha) in selected catchments 

 
 

 

2.3: Number of  skilled/semi-skilled jobs created (of which women and 
youth)  

2017 

 

2.1:  0 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

2.2: 0 

 
 

 

2.3: 0 
 

2022 

 

2.1.1: 7,750;  
 

2.1.2 6700;  

 
2.1.3 500,000 

 

 
 

2.2: 30% 

 
 

 

2.3: 40,000 
 

 

 

 

Crop forecasting 
survey. 

Market surveys. 

 
. 

  

 

Risk 1: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value addition 

activities. 

Mitigation 1: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services to 

potential SMEs actors will motivate 

them to participate in the project 

O
U

T
P
U

T
S
 

3.0 Components   

 
3.1 Irrigation infrastructure developed  

3.2 Access road construction 

3.3 Support ongoing consolidation of 
a central database for Ugandan 

farmers 
3.4 Establishment of an efficient input 

distribution system based upon the e-

wallet platform,  
35.Selection of best varieties of maize, 

rice, and dairy cattle for dissemination 

to farmers  
3.6 Improved breeds of dairy and beef 

cattle developed 

3.7 Farmer organization of the 
irrigation scheme established and 

trained 

 

 

 
3.1: Acreage of new irrigated area (Ha) 

3.2: Number of kms of access road constructed 

3.3 Number of farmers profiled in the central database for Ugandan 
farmers  

3.4. Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled maize seed  
       Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled rice seed  

 

3.5.1: Yield per hectare for maize, (MT)  
3.5.2: Yield per Hectare for Rice (MT)  

 

3.6.1 Change in productivity of  livestock developed through AI 
3.6.2 Change in litres of milk produced in the project area.  

 

3.7: Formation and registration of farmer organizations in the project 
areas. Number of farmers utilizing the services of the farmer 

organization 

 

2017 

 
3.1:  0 

3.2:0 

 
3.3: 0 

3.4: 0 
 

 

3.5.1: 0 
3.5.2: 0  

 

3.6.1:0 
3.6.2:0 

 

3.7:0 
 

 

 

2020 

 

3.1:  1608 
3.2: 20 

 

3.3 700,000 

3.4 450,000 

200,000 
 

3.5.1:5 

3.5.2: 4 
 

3.6.1: 20% 

3.6.2: 30% 
 

3.7  +35% 

 
 

 

 

Quarterly and 
Annual Project 

reports 

 
Crop surveys 

records 
Bureau of 

Statistics (UBOS) 

reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

Quarterly reports; 

 

 

Risk 2: Poor sustainability of 
infrastructure. 

Mitigation 2: Establish and support 

management entity for O&M. 
 

Risk 3: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value 

addition activities. 

Mitigation 3: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Risk 4: political willingness 

Mitigation 4: The design will be 



 

viii 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

3.8 Watershed management activities 
implemented 

 

3.9 Volume of value added 
commodities traded 

 

3.8: Number of tree seedlings planted in the water-shed managed 
 

 

3.9.1 Volume of Maize exported (MT) 
 

3.9.2 Volume of Rice exported (MT) 

3.8 
 

 

3.9.1: 
 

3.9.2: 

3.8: 18,500 
 

 

3.9.1: 4,000,000 
 

3.9.2: 404,000 

 
 

Credit Surveys by 
intermediaries 

 

participatory and stakeholder 
consultations 

 

4.  Project Management and 

Coordination 

4.1: National Project Coordination 

Unit fully constituted 

 
4.2 Disbursement of ADF loan 

 

 

 
4.1: Establishment of NPCU  

 

 
4.2: Percentage of ADF Loan disbursed 

 

 

2017 

 
4.1:  2 (40%)

  

 
4.2: 0% 

2022 

 
4.1: 5 (100%) 

 

 
4.2: 100% 

Progress reports, 

M&E reports, 
Audit reports, 

Supervision 

Mission reports 
 

Risk 7: Delayed fulfillment of loan 

conditions. 
Mitigation 7: UGFO will work and 

follow up closely with Government  

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 Components Inputs 

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement:  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development:  

Component 3: Market Development and Trade Facilitation:  
Component 4: Programme Coordination and Management. 

 

Total Project Cost:  UA 64.41  

ADF Loan:  UA 57.00 million 

Government: UA 7.41 million 
 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Timeframe  

 

 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 

Initial Activities                            

Internal Processing of Appraisal                            

Loan negotiations                            

Signature of loan agreement and Disbursement effectivness                            

Recruitment of project staff                           

Project Launching                           

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement                           

Award of contract to ICT companies                           

Genetic improvement of of Dairy/Beef cows                           

Production of required quality/quantity of seeds                            

Development of a central data base for farmers                           

Component 2: Infrastructure Development                           

Award of contracts for the project supervision                            

Bidding documents (BDs) preparation and award of contracts for the construction of the scheme                           

Construction of the irrigation infrastructure                           

Establishment of WUA and capacity building                           

Implementation of watershed management activities                           

Construction of a bridge and access road                           

Market Development and Trade Facilitation                            

Provide postharvest facilities and services                           

Develop database of village agents, processors, large offtakers of maize, rice, and dairy                            

Develop Market Information System (MIS)                           

Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) and quality infrastructure                            

Establishment of food safety laboratory building                           

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                           

Stakeholders sensitization and mobilization                            

Establishment of the baseline situation                           

Project Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                           

Capcity building interventions                             

Coordinate Financial Management and Annual financial auditing                            

Procurement of Goods                           

Environmental monitoring                           

Mid Term Review                            

Project Completion report                            



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OFMANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED ADF LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF 

UGANDA FOR THE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 

PROGRAMME (AVCP) 
 

Management hereby submits this Report and Recommendation for an ADF loan of UA 57 million, 

under ADF terms to finance the Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme activities in 

Uganda.   

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed 

within the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been 

designated by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate 

the country’s Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; 

generate employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote 

science and technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for 

accelerating socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, 

notably, construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to 

enhance household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic 

Plan (ASSP) 2015/16-2019/2020, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the 

Local Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

1.1.2 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to 
achievement of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; 

develop the infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in 

response to a request from the Government of Uganda, to provide assistance for the transformation 

of agriculture in Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had 

initially fielded a Country Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, 

July and September, 2016 respectively. The missions were to understand the extent of 

implementation of the Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan (ASSP) and the general context of 

agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to assist the 

Government in achieving the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting the development of 

financing arrangements that can support commercial production, value addition and marketing 

activities in this sector. 

 

1.1.3 The Project’s key outputs, notably, development of irrigation infrastructure, promotion and 

development of agribusiness, and trade facilitation to enhance household incomes are consistent with 

the country’s ASSP which operationalizes agricultural priority investments programme under the 

NDPII.  The ASSP prioritizes investment in water for production, value addition and value chains 

development, and, promotes investment in sustainable natural resource use. The Project is also 

consistent with the National Agriculture Policy (2013) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal 

Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), and the Irrigation Master Plan of the Ministry of Water and 

Environment (MoWE). Further, the project activities are also in line with the Gender Policy Brief for 

Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Uganda Forestry Policy, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 

and Uganda’s Ministry of Gender’s revised Gender Policy 2007.  

 

1.1.4 The sector and the project area face varying degrees of fragility. Food insecurity, lack of rural 

infrastructure, lack of economic opportunities for women and youth etc. are key elements of fragility. 

The project is designed to address these challenges and build resilient institutions and societies.   



 

2 

 

 

1.1.5 Regionally, the project is consistent with Pillar 2 of the NEPAD’s Comprehensive African 

Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP), which focuses on improvement of agricultural 

infrastructure and related capacities for enhanced food security; and with the Sustainable 

Development Goals. 

 

1.1.6 The Project was programmed to be financed under the ADF 14 window and the new CSP for 

Uganda (2017-2021). The Government of Uganda is committed to operationalizing its National 

Development Plan (NDP) but remains with the challenges of fully financing all activities using the 

limited budgetary resources available. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP), the Community Agricultural Infrastructure 

Improvement Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department 

of the Treasury MDB Awards the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm 

Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws 

extensively from lessons learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of completed 

Projects and from other small scale irrigation, natural resources, watershed management, and 

community driven development projects in Uganda and other countries. The most pertinent lessons 

include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects ; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building 

the capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and 

project sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project. 

 

1.2.2. With effects of climate change and the increasingly unreliable rainfall pattern, the need for 

investment in irrigation has become of paramount importance. Only about 5% of the irrigation 

potential of Uganda has been exploited so far and the GoU requested the Bank to support its renewed 

efforts to expand its irrigation investments. The GoU has developed an Irrigation Master Plan for the 

period 2010-2035 which targets to expand irrigation infrastructure to cover at least 70% of surface 

water irrigation potential by 2035. This will increase the total agricultural land under irrigation from 

the current 14,418ha to about 420,000ha by 2035. As a result, the GoU has ranked irrigation as the 

third most important infrastructural investment that will facilitate economic transformation of the 

country as envisaged under Vision 2040. 

1.2.3 The Project is in line with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) as it relates to inclusive growth 
and food security through the involvement of youth and women in skills development and 

entrepreneurship. Further, the Project is consistent with Bank’s High 5s for transforming Africa and 

the recently approved Bank Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025. The 

Project is also consistent with the Bank’s CSP (2017-2021) which aligns with the High 5s mainly in 

agricultural and industrial development. Bank interventions under this pillar will focus on the 

following three critical infrastructure sub-sectors: (i) Transport infrastructure to foster trade and 

market integration; (ii) Agricultural infrastructure to promote transformation of the agriculture sector 

in respect of improved production and productivity, value addition, and trade; (iii) Water and 

Sanitation to widen access to water and sanitation services, improve livelihoods as well as boost 



 

3 

 

value-adding and manufacturing activities, especially in small underserved towns all of which are 

well aligned to the NDPII. This Project is identified by the new CSP as one of the key investment 

projects to be supported by the Bank under its pillar mentioned above. In addition, the Project is 

aligned with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) by enhancing the regulatory framework to 

create enabling environment for women’s participation in the agriculture sector and supporting 

women’s economic empowerment along the agriculture value chains.  

1.2.4 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under FIEFOC-1 in implementation of irrigated agriculture and 

has also accumulated vast experience through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure 

projects. The first phase of FIEFOC has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and 

Agoro irrigation scheme with a total area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm 

families. It has also supported communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, 

enabled households to participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC 

project approved by the Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in 

Uganda and also increase productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will be developed under 

this proposed project. Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the 

completed and ongoing CAIIP projects.  

With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly, 

from 31.1% in 2006 to 19.7% in 2013, to which the Banks’ projects contributed in this reduction. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize synergies among projects 

implemented by the Bank. 

1.3. Donors coordination 

  
Sector or 

subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports 

Labor 

Force   

  Agricultural Sector 23.7% 57.2% 85%   

  
Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average 2010/2011 to 

2014/2015)**   

  Government Donors  
 

   

UA m UA 33.7 m UA 48.9 m 
  

          AfDB 21.5%   

% 40.8% 59.2%   IDA 21.6%  

     EC 15.2%   

     IFAD 12.9%  

      USAID 9.4%   

              Danida 5.8%   

             DfiD 5.3%  

             JICA 1.5%  

             Netherlands   3.6%  

             Italy  1.4%  

             FAO 1.8%  

  Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups Y   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches Y   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** M****   



 

4 

 

* as most appropriate; ** Years [yy1 to yy2]; *** for this sector or subsector 

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement 

 

1.3.1 The Bank is one of the major Development Partners (DPs) in Uganda, providing about 21.5% 

of development assistance in the agriculture and rural development sector. The Bank collaborates 

closely with the other Development Partners, especially the World Bank, IFAD, USAID, JICA, and 

the European Commission for agricultural related projects, within the framework of the Agriculture 

and Rural Development Donor Coordination Group. The Group has been greatly invigorated through 

the Bank’s field presence. In an effort to harmonize Development Partner intervention, the Bank has 

partnered with the other DPs under the umbrella of the Agricultural Sector Development Partners 

Group (ASDPG) to undertake development interventions in the choice of sub-sectors and activities 

where it has a comparative advantage. In regard to this Project, the Bank will work closely with JICA 

who are preparing an irrigation programme, but in particular to tap on their experiences with farmer 

groups development in irrigation activities; the IDA and USAID who are engaged in activities that 

promote agricultural input distribution  using advanced ICT methodologies that link the farmer to 

input dealers; the Netherlands Embassy on crop intensification and marketing; the EU on market 

oriented beef meet subsector development; etc.   

 

1.3.2 The ASDPG is currently chaired by the JICA. The Group is well informed about the project 

through consultations with Bank Teams at preparation/appraisal missions and also continually by 

Uganda Country Office (COUG) through monthly meetings. The Uganda Country Office is an active 

member of this group, which relates with the overall Heads of Missions’ Local Development Partners 

Group (LDPG), currently chaired and coordinated by the World Bank. 
 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project development goal:  The overall goal of the Project is to contribute to poverty reduction and 

economic growth in Uganda through enhanced productivity and commercialization of agriculture.  

 

Specific Project objective: The project objective is to improve household incomes, food security, and 

climate resilience through commercial agricultural practices, sustainable natural resources 

management and agricultural enterprise development.  

 

Project Implementation Modality: (i) The project will be implemented using a Business Service 

Provider, ICT based platform, which will be procured competitively. This model has been tried and 

tested by the Feed the Future project of the United States Agency for International Development 

(USAID).  The model will be replicated and expanded to reach our target Districts in Uganda. The 

platform has already demonstrated a private sector-led input distribution and extension ICT platform, 

that is integrated with the buyers and has successfully delivered to 301,000 farmers certified seeds, 

fertilizer, extension, and other services including mechanization, crop insurance, market, and soil 

testing services.  The ICT platform will be scaled up to reach millions of small holder farmers to raise 

their productivity while linking them to agro processors and other off-takers.  (ii) The GoU will 

nominate a Project Coordinator who will lead the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) based 

at MAAIF. The NPCU is charged with securing project implementation according to the relevant 

work- and procurement plans. The NPCU will consist of at least 4 other members (a Senior 

Procurement Officer, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation 

Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer), details are stipulated 

under 4.1 and 5.3 of this report.   

2.1. Project components 

AVCP will be implemented along a commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention 

to regulatory reforms. In agreement with government, the project will comprise of three (3) 

operational and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity 



 

5 

 

Enhancement, ii) Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and 

iv) Project Management and Coordination. The following key provisions under these components 

have been agreed for implementation under AVCP.  

Table 2.1: project components 
No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

1 Production 

and 

Productivity 

Enhancement  

14.96  Expression of Interest (EOI) for ICT companies interested in developing 
and operating an ICT platform that integrates farmers, village buyer 

agents, off-takers, seed and fertilizer suppliers, extension services and 

other service providers on a single efficient platform. 

 Supporting genetic improvement in Dairy and Beef cows through a robust 
multiplication program of using Artificial Insemination  

 The project will also support the purchase of Liquid Nitrogen containers 
to help preserve Siemen  

 Strengthening Ag Verify and the Uganda Seed Traders Association to 
increase the quantity of certified seeds required to reach millions of 

farmers 

 Support to research to increase production of breeder and foundation seeds 
in consultation with framers  

 Support the formation of Local Seed Businesses among the farmer groups 
that will partner with research institutes to increase the availability of 

quality controlled seed  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups in sustainable enterprise 
development  

 Support farmers and farmer groups to prepare seasonal action plans and 
Group Action plans  

 Link AVCP to the Technology for African Agricultural Transformation 
(TAAT) for the acquisition of improved technologies 

 Effective regulation of the quality of seeds and other inputs 

 Strengthen the National Seed Service, technical capacity development and 
provision of essential equipment 

 Strengthen the National Fertilizer Board and Bureau of Standards (UNBS) 
with the necessary support facilities,  

 Synchronization of the National policy on seed and fertilizer with that of 
Regional Economic Communities (RECs) 

 Development of leadership skills and capacity building of farmer 
organization 

 Support the ongoing consolidation of a database for Ugandan farmers 

 Deepening of efficient input distribution system based upon the ICT 
platform  

 Increase women’s participation: design strategy to integrate gender in all 
the activities under this component 

 

2 Infrastructure 

Development 

30.96 

 
 Irrigation Infrastructure Development: of Sironko gravity fed irrigation 

scheme with a gross command area of 1608ha. The works will include 

construction of head works, main canal, secondary and tertiary canals, 

drainage system, dykes, and on farm roads.   

 Access Road: construction of a bridge over Sironko River at the intake site 
to connect Bukedea and Bulambuli Districts.  In addition,  10 Km  access 

road will be provided to link the irrigation schemes with the nearest existing 

road network on both sides of the Districts; 

 Support Infrastructure: support infrastructures required within the project site 
for the operation of the scheme such as warehouse (500m2), grain storage 

(1000m2), offices buildings (800m2), workshop (400m2), rice drying yard 

(1320m2), essential O&M equipment will be provided 

 Consultancy services: The project will engage a consulting firm; (i) to review 
and update the designs, and supervise the construction of the irrigation 

infrastructure during implementation 

 Establishment of Water Users Association: formation of water Users’ 
Association (WUAs) with 40% women and youth representation. 



 

6 

 

No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

 Capacity Building: provision of capacity development for farmers, extension 
agents, and relevant government officials. 

 Watershed management: (i) Institutional strengthening through mobilization 
of local structures; (ii) Sustainable development and management of forest 

and tree resources in Mbale, Bududa, Bukedia, Bulambuli; and (iii) 

Integrated soil and water conservation technologies and measures.  
3 Market 

Development 

and Trade 

Facilitation 

13.09  Provide postharvest facilities and services and agri infrastructure to farmers  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups on post-harvest handling, 
storage and bulking of their produce  

 Network and link farmers to agro-processors and large traders,  markets 
for farmers using innovative and enduring ICT platforms, that includes 

digital payment (see ICT platform in Component 1a)  

 Develop a database of processors, large off-takers of maize, rice, and 

dairy, their village agents and associated farmers for integration onto the 

ICT platform 

 Build capacity of the network of community based village buyer agents to 
provide additional services such as SPS standards, inputs, mechanization,  

crop insurance,  market information requirements  to farmers using 

existing country extension services 

 Develop a robust market information system to inform vendors and 

farmers on commodity prices  

 Link medium to large scale processors and traders to financial institutions 

and AfDB private sector financing windows 

 Trade Facilitation and Quality Infrastructure: Build capacity of 
stakeholders to comply and conform to quality related issues with its 

exportable commodities  

 Strengthen the Sanitary, Phytosanitary (SPS) and Quality Infrastructure to 
meet the export requirements  

 Support Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) in ensuring 
standardization of quality across commodities 

  Establishment of an appropriate food safety laboratory for conformity 
assessment 

 

4 

Project 

Management 

5.40  Coordinate activities of MAAIF and other Agencies through an 
appropriate Steering Committee.  

 Coordinate Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting activities. 

 Coordinate Financial Management processes and also ensure preparations 
for External Audits. 

 Facilitate Procurement processes.  

 Mainstream Gender and also facilitate HIV/AIDS Awareness raising. 



 

7 

 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection  

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Alternative 1 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 2 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 3 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

Alternative 4 Using government 

institutions to drive the 

extension service and input 

delivery 

Government will do better supervising a 

Business Service Provider recruited to play this 

role based on realities on the ground 

2.3. Project type 

AVCP is a public sector investment project that builds on successful Bank’s investments in Uganda. 

It is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of scaling up 

production and productivity in rice, maize and dairy/beef value chain development, agribusiness 

development, risk sharing facility and capacity building activities funded by ADF 14 Loan resources. 

2.4. Project Cost and financing arrangements  

2.4.1 Project Costs: The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 64.41 Million, net of taxes, 

comprising UA 18.59 million or 34% in local costs and UA 45.82 million or 66% of the total cost in 

foreign cost. This cost is inclusive of physical and price contingencies estimated at 9%.  All project 

costs are exclusive of taxes, and therefore Government should provide budget allocation for VAT in 

each quarter of the financial year in addition to the 12% Government contribution. A summary of 

project cost estimates by components, expenditure categories, and schedule are presented in Tables 

2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes B2 Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

8 

 

Table 2.3: Summary Project Cost by Component 

 

F. E local currency Total F. E local currencyTotal

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement:       14 391             4 059         18 450       10 659          3 006       13 665 78       23         

Component 2: Infrastructure Development       29 020             9 164 38 184             21 496          6 788       28 284 76       48         

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation       11 788             4 360 16 148               8 731          3 230       11 961 73       20         

Component 4: Project Management and 

capacity building         2 066             4 599 6 665                 1 531          3 406         4 937 31       9           

Total BASELINE COSTS 57 265     22 182         79 447       42 417     16 430      58 847     72       100       

Physical Contingencies         3 169             1 113 4 282         2 347       825           3 172     74       5           

Price Contingencies         1 418             1 806 3 224         1 052     1 336                2 388 44       4           

Total PROJECT COSTS 61 852     25 101         86 953       45 816     18 591      64 407     71       109       

Components

(UA '000)

% F.E

 % Base 

costs 

(US$ '000)

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (UA '000') 

 

F.E L.C Total F.E L.C Total Total

Works 24 010        6 960          30 970        30 970        

Goods 10 509        1 078          11 587        879             2 152          3 031          14 618        

Services 7 828          3 875          11 703        2 163          729             2 892          14 595        

Operating costs 145             1 528          1 673          128             1 356          1 484          3 157          

Personnel 154             913             1 067          -             1 067          

Total 42 646        14 354        57 000        3 170          4 237          7 407          64 407        

Categories of expenditures
ADF Government

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA '000')  

 
Components Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement: 10 232           1 763            1 481            173                16                  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 8 115             17 059          2 773            180                157                

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation 2 050             3 597            3 306            1 521            1 486            
Component 4: Project management and 

capacity building 1 545             888                877                799                829                
Total base costs 21 942           23 307          8 438            2 673            2 488            

Contingencies 1 892             2 187            820                375                286                
Project total costs 23 834           25 494          9 258            3 048            2 774            

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement: ADF loan will finance 100% of the agricultural 

infrastructure development component, production and productivity component and non-training 

based component of Market Development and Trade Facilitation, and part of project management 

activities. The Government will mainly finance capacity building activities,  salaries of Government 

staff assigned to the Project both at national and local government levels, compliance certification 

by NEMA, and part of component 3 activities (conservation farming and agro-forestry, forest 

plantation and woodlots, forest resources inventory, training in use of  weather information, and 

expand community radios coverage). The Government of Uganda will also finance some recurrent 



 

9 

 

costs of the National Project Coordination Unit. The beneficiaries will be responsible for the 

operation and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation infrastructure, and the agricultural enterprises 

will operate with the principles of private sector. The breakdown of financing for the project is 

presented in the Table 2.6 

 

Table 2.6: Financing Plan of the project (UA ‘000) 

 

F.E L.C Total

ADF 41 490         15 510         57 000         88                

Government 3 973           3 434           7 407           12                

Total 45 463         18 944         64 407         

Amount
Sources of funding %

 
 

2.4.3 Counterpart Funds: The Government of Uganda counterpart contribution to the project will be 

12% of the total project cost (equivalent to USD 10.0 million); in addition to 18% VAT contribution 

on all works, goods and services. 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various District across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Locations where the Bank has developed irrigation 

schemes, and the Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, 

Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, 

Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; Rice: Sironko-Acomai irrigation 

scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and Pader. The soft 

components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity building 

would be extended to all irrigation schemes of the Bank in FIEFOC 1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, 

Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on the cattle corridor districts 

(from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara district as the 

springboard.  

 

2.5.2 The population in those districts is about 14,227,201 of which 50.1% are women and 

comprising 3,078,673 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase in yields of 

major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average of 10%. 

In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating activities 

from natural resources, capacity building and service delivery of the project would specifically target 

women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved standard of living. The project will benefit further 

300,000 households of which 20% are female headed outside of irrigation command areas, by 

introducing or improving soil conservation measures in the catchments feeding the irrigation 

schemes. Moreover, the project is expected to provide technical skills in conservation and other 

farming practices that promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural 

productivity in the proposed project area. 

 

2.6 Participatory Process/Public Consultations: Key stakeholders in the AVCP Project include; 

Government, NGOs; Civil Society,; Farmer cooperatives including women and youth groups; Private 

sector companies; All these stakeholders were consulted in the project design,  etc. Furthermore, a 

stakeholder workshop was organized on September, 2016 which was attended by more than 45 

representatives of stakeholder organizations from national to community levels. During the sessions 

the participants provided valuable input to inform the shaping of the AVCP. A wide range of issues 

were noted for follow-up including among others: access to inputs and microfinance, market 

linkages, mechanization and post-harvest handling, the need for inclusion of value addition to the 



 

10 

 

produce, operations and maintenance of irrigation facilities, strong farmers’ capacity development 

programme, establishment of demonstration centers, consideration to multi-purpose use of water, use 

of existing government structures and the need to complement community initiatives. Stakeholder 

consultation activities will continue during project implementation to ensure their maximum 

participation and ownership of Project activities.    

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

2.7.1 The Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) highlighted some lessons, including: (i) 

role played by project implementation unit in expediting project execution after delay in start-up 

when implementation was entrusted to  Ministries; (ii) lack of project designs and drawings at project 

start-up results in implementation delay; (iii) inadequate consultation with stakeholders in selection 

of sites results in poor utilization of funds and lack of ownership; (iv) weak M&E system results in 

poor project monitoring; and (v) lack of irrigation scheme management entities compromises 

sustainability. Based on said lessons, (i) AVCP will have a PIU due to inadequate technical staff 

within MAAIF, (ii) participatory M&E system will be established in PY1 which will be linked to 

MAAIF M&E system, and (iii) detail designs of the irrigation schemes will be made available before 

the end of 2017 whilst the supervision consulting firm will be brought on board in PY1 through 

advance procurement arrangement to offset the time spent in the parliamentary approval process. 

2.7.2 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under AAMP, CAIIP 1, 2 and 3; MATIP 1 and 2, FIEFOC-1 and 

2 in project implementation and in irrigated agriculture and has also accumulated vast experience 

through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure projects. The first phase of FIEFOC 

has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and Agoro irrigation scheme with a total 

area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm families. The Schemes have supported 

communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, enabled households to 

participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC project approved by the 

Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in Uganda and also increase 

productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will developed under this proposed project. 

Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the completed and 

ongoing CAIIP and MATIP projects.  

2.7.3 With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize the benefits and gainful 

employment. 

2.8. Key performance indicators   

2.8.1 The Results Based Logical Framework contains indicators pertaining to the impact, outcomes 

and outputs of the project.  It includes the Bank’s Core Sector Indicators (CSI) and other institutional 

indicators that will be used to gauge the effectiveness of project management. Monitoring and 

evaluation of the project activities and results based logical framework indicators will be conducted 

by the Monitoring and Evaluation Expert of the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU), in close 

collaboration with all the partners involved. Special emphasis will be on disaggregation of data to 

capture benefits from the project to gender and the youth. Baseline data will be collected at the 

beginning of project implementation in addition to the baseline information collected during the 

feasibility study to improve measurement of indictors of the project. An experienced M&E expert 

will be put in place from the start of the project. 

 



 

11 

 

2.8.2 The impact and outcome indicators include: (i) income level among farmers, (ii) reduction in 

people living below poverty line, (iii) increase in yield of selected commodity value chains, and (iv) 

number of livelihood activities and businesses developed,  

 

Key output indicators are: (i) area developed under irrigation; (ii) number of farmers adopting 

conservation farming practices and land area protected against erosion; (iii) involvement of women 

and youth in decision-making bodies; (iv) volume of maize, rice and dairy/beef products traded.  

 

2.8.3  Baseline data: Baseline data was collected as part of the socio-economic study and used in 

the RBLF. The baseline data will be further strengthened and gaps filled including collection of 

gender disaggregated data in PY1. Indicators will be used to compare project performance against 

the baseline situations. Various supervision missions and periodic progress reports will reflect the 

level of achievement under each of these indicators. 
 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.    Economic and financial performance  

3.1.1 The main economic benefits of the project are increase in rice and maize procutivity and 

production, improvement in livestock parameters , increase in beneficiary incomes and strengthening 

of food security and climate resilience. Other project benefits include jobs generated by business 

developed, reduction in sediment load of rivers resulting from degraded forest rehabilitation and soil 

conservation measures and, improved balance trade of agricultural products as the country exports 

more and import less rice. At farm level, the project will reach out to at least 450,000 maize growers, 

205,000 rice farmers and more than 2 million herders. The project is expected to anually generate an 

additional production of 450,000 MT of maize and 328,000 MT of rice. Support to the development 

of value addition will enhance export of rice and maize milled products. On the average, it is 

estimated that about 200 000 MT of maize and 200 000 MT of rice will be exported annually. 

 

3.1.2 The economic and financial analysis was based on the incremental net benefit arising from the 

project investment. The main assumption underlying the economic and financial analysis is an 

anticipated increase in the productivity of the main crops (maize and rice) and livestock as a result 

of the development of irrigation, increased improved seeds and fertilizer use, and capacity building. 

It is estimated that the production of the basic crops will increase by 50% on the average and 20% 

for the livestock parameters.  The production costs including milling processing costs are derived 

from the results of the similar projects implemented in the country and computed field data from 

Uganda. Prevailing 2016 market prices are used for input and output valuation. Infrastructure 

operating and maintenance costs are estimated at 15% of investment costs. Prevailing 2016 market 

prices were used for input and output valuation. Because no government interventions in terms of 

input subsidies or import restrictions are recorded and, no duty or taxes are leveraged on all 

agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, semen and agro-chemicals, the market prices are used as the 

shadow prices for tradable goods used in domestic rice and maize production. For economic analysis, 

maize and rice market prices are adjusted to reflect their economic values.  

3.1.3 The FIRR is 20% with a NPV of US$ 2.127 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The 

EIRR is 23% for a NPV of USD 3, 2 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The summary 

result is tabulated below: 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV (12%): US$ 2.127 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV (12%): US$ 3.2 million 

 

3.1.4 The economic rate of return (EIRR) and the internal rate of return (FIRR) are sensitive to 

changes in prices and costs. A 10% increase in the prices of agricultural products generates an EIRR 



 

12 

 

of 25% and a FIRR of 22%. Similarly, a 10% increase in production costs decreases the EIRR and 

the FIRR to 21% and 19% respectively. Details of financial and economic analyses are shown in in 

Appendix VI. 

 3.2.   Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: The project is classified as Environment Category 2 according to the Bank’s 

Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which implies that the potential negative 

environmental and social impacts are not major and can be mitigated with the application of measures 

specified in ESMFs. An ESMF, with a budgetary allocation of USD 500,000, was prepared and its 

Summary posted on Bank’s on 21st March 2017  to provide guidelines for the management of 

potential environmental and social aspects at all possible project sites.  

 

3.2.2 AVCP will have significant positive environmental impacts including (i) contribution to the 

restoration of forest cover that will lead to reduced soil erosion, flooding, and water pollution. The 

carbon dioxide (CO2) removed from the atmosphere is estimated at 245, 000 tons over 20 years as a 

result of tree planting by the project as shown in the details under Technical Annex C.3.1 (b) of the 

Technical Annex; (ii) restoration and enhancement of the ecosystems through re-vegetation and tree 

planting activities planned as part of the project - this  will have significant impacts on combating 

deforestation and desertification as well as mitigating the impacts of climate change; (iii) 

rehabilitation of degraded watersheds to sustain and enhance water catchment ; and (iv) improved 

farm productivity, soil fertility management and increased uptake of proper crop husbandry practices 

that will improve agricultural production and marketing, thus contributing to food security and 

improved farm incomes.  

 

3.2.3 Most of the negative impacts to the environment will be attributed to construction activities 

with minimal operation and post operation effects. Some of these impacts will pertain to (i) loss of 

vegetation due to land clearing for irrigation schemes and farm/forest roads construction that can be 

minimized by refilling of burrow pits and re-vegetation, (ii) increase in water abstraction arising from 

small-scale irrigation schemes requirement, that  could upset the existing flow patterns of the rivers, 

but will be minimized through established water management systems and environmental flow 

requirements to allow sufficient water for downstream users, and (iii) soil erosion due to loose top soil.  

 

3.2.4 Climate Change: Climate change models for Uganda suggest a projected increase in 
temperature of 0.7o C to 1.5o C by 2020. These models also predict a likely increase in the variability 

of rainfall with most areas projected to experience higher rainfall. Uganda is already experiencing 

extreme weather events including droughts, floods and landslides.  Floods and landslides have been 

linked to drained wetlands, deforestation, and compacted soil that no longer have any water-retention 

capacity. The Uganda Vision 2040- the long term development blue print for the country-recognizes 

the impacts of climate change on all sectors of Uganda’s economy, and has committed to the need 

for preparedness through adaptation and mitigation strategies to ensure the resilience of the country 

to climate change impacts. The Bank categorized the project as Category 2 in terms of Climate Risk, 

requiring the application of the Climate Adaptation Review and Evaluation Procedures (AREP).  The 

project carried out Climate Screening Score (CSS) as shown in Appendix VII. The project design 

reflects the projected climate change risks in Uganda and has embedded adaption measures based on 

the Bank’s AREP and aligned with the country’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 

priority projects including community tree planting, land degradation and water for production 

projects.  

 

3.2.5 The AVCP programme is by design part of a strategic response to the impact of climate change 

evidenced by environmental degradation, dry spells and floods in the vulnerable districts of Uganda. 

The planned interventions of AVCP project will help reduce impacts of extreme weather events 

through the development of irrigation systems and promotion of alternative livelihoods that will help 



 

13 

 

smoothen the cyclical impacts of droughts and ensure all-year income generating activities. 

Specifically, the catchment management activities under component 1 of the project will facilitate 

the reduction of land degradation and related flood impacts; thus increasing the resilience of the 

community. The irrigation infrastructure will also be designed to be climate resilient in order to 

prolong the life span of the infrastructures. The project’s ESMP further elaborates the challenges 

posed by climate risks on the project outcomes as well as proposed adaptation and mitigation 

measures.  

 

3.2.6 Involuntary resettlement: The proposed new irrigation structures will be located on 

Governments owned land and communally owned land tenure systems. It is anticipated that all 

Project activities will not lead to land acquisition as project activities will be carried out on land that 

already belongs to the Government or the beneficiary groups, therefore no land disputes are 

anticipated. Extensive consultations on access were held with beneficiary groups, district officers, 

and other government counterparts including the Uganda National Environmental Management 

Agency. There is a strong commitment from all stakeholders and  Government will provide the Bank 

with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project infrastructure is to be constructed are 

free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities and/or government agencies who have 

consented to project activities.  

  

3.2.7 Green Growth: AVCP has been designed in accordance with the Green Growth principle of 

“quality and inclusiveness of growth”. The Program design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (equitable rural development, youth unemployment, equitable 

access to food, water and clean environment) without locking resources into activities that may 

deplete the country’s natural resource capital. AVCP has been designed in a holistic manner that has 

integrated economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of the well-being 

of the communities.  

 

3.2.8 Gender and Social: In 2014, 19.79 million females accounted for 51.5% of the total population, 
while an estimated 31% of rural households were female headed. The significance of women’s role 

in community is underscored by the fact that females are normally charged with the responsibility of 

food production at household level. The low access to water for production, especially in rural areas, 

undermines agricultural productivity. While the GoU has made substantial efforts in adopting gender-
related laws and with the amendment of the Land Act (2010), and the launch of Uganda National land 

Policy (2015), significant progress has been registered in increasing female land ownership, from a low 

16% in 2010 to 39% in 2012. Despite this,   issues of limited ownership, access to land owing to cultural 

barriers and lack of access to credit continue to affect women’s agricultural production. Other 

hindrances include, lack of extension service, inadequate access to information technology and poor 

linkages to markets, post-harvest loses, and degradation of the environment which mostly affects 

women. Consequently, AVCP has been designed to address gaps in sustainable agricultural water 

management and low agricultural productivity. The project will support a minimum of 30% 

representation of women in the leadership role in water user associations, and emphasize 50% of the 

target group training on agribusiness skills in crop value chain preferred by women and youth.  The 

project will support a minimum of 30% women, and 30% youth employment in the labour intensive 

infrastructure development activities on the scheme. 

 

3.2.9 The project will support gender capacity building activities for AVCP as detailed in Annex B8 

of the Technical Annex. Furthermore, the project will adopt a gender sensitive approach to support 

implementation, to ensure capacity is built for effective gender responsiveness in all project 

components. As such, gender mainstreaming guidelines will be developed in project Y1 to prepare 

women to participate in different community committees dealing with financing (Tier 4 Microfinance 

institutions), agriculture and natural resources. The project will also promote strong institutional 

involvement of women as beneficiaries in farmer cooperatives group trainings, specifically with 



 

14 

 

regards to extension service in agronomic practices, access of financial resources, post-harvest 

handling, collective commodity bulking and marketing and the establishment to sustainable market 

linkages. A Social Development Specialist/Gender expert will be assigned from MAAIF to focus on 

implementation of these activities. The gender mainstreaming in this project is estimated at UGX 

548,900,000 for capacity building as shown in the Technical Annex page B8.9 (ii). 

 

3.2.10 Youth unemployment:  The challenges facing the youth include limited job opportunities, 

inadequate employable skills and skills mis-match, limited access to productive assets, and early 

marriages hence forcing the youth into informal agricultural practices. According to the Uganda 

statistical abstract 2014, the overall national unemployment rate increased to 9.4% (2012/13) from 

3.6% (2009/2010) and 1.9% in 2005/06. Similarly youth unemployment remains high at 78% 

(NDPII). Majority (79%) of the youth live in rural areas engaging in agriculture. The AVCP project 

will ensure the participation of youth on the irrigation scheme management and engage youth farmer 

groups in agribusiness skills trainings, value chain activities especially in income generating projects 

such as Apiary and fish farming. At least 10% youth will be employed in any labour intensive 

agricultural activities on the irrigation schemes by providing targeted training programme. The 

Empowering Novel Agri-Business-Led Employment for Youth in Uganda’s Agriculture (ENABLE 

Youth Uganda) Program being piloted in Uganda by the African Development Bank (AfDB) under 

FIEFOC.2 Project. 

 

3.2.11 HIV/AIDS: The project does not envisage the creation of farm worker camps. Notwithstanding 

this, the Project will support selected activities aimed at reduction of HIV/AIDS new infection 

especially among women and youth who present a higher rates of infection (8.3% women, 6.1% men 

and youth 3.7%). The National HIV prevalence increased from 6.4% in 2004 to 7.3% in 2011 among 

15-49 year olds (Uganda Aids Indicator Survey). The core activities to be supported include 

awareness creation on HIV/Aids among farmer and agribusiness groups to enhance their protection 

from HIV/Aids infections and also improve the living conditions of those who are already persons 

Living with Aids. The schemes will designate an HIV-AIDS coordinator from farmer groups and 

collaborate with the existing national programmes to publicize the HIV/AIDs activities in the 

schemes. The project will collaborate with such organizations like the Uganda AIDS commission; 

and with local NGOs at the project levels (for execution purposes). It is mandatory that contractors 

to have an active HIV and AIDS workplace policy (with activities for (Staff) internal awareness 

raising, prevention, tackling issues like stigma and discrimination, treatment, focal point etc.). At 

implementation level, the partners will be mandated to enhance capacity of beneficiaries to address 

issues like awareness raising, prevention, treatment; the design should include community categories 

like the youth, farmers, mothers etc., incorporate HIV and AIDS module in the proposed 

entrepreneurial training, strengthen beneficiary referral systems with the already established 

structures like hospitals (for prevention and treatment purposes); strengthen/ create community 

support structures like e.g. treatment groups etc. 

 

3.2.12 Addressing fragility and building resilience: The project will help build resilience in target 

communities by addressing the issues of food security and increasing economic opportunities through 

agribusiness. 
 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 Executing and Implementing Agencies:  The Project’s Executing Agency will be the Ministry 

of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) who will be responsible for the overall 

implementation and management of the Project. The Ministry of Water and Environment will be 

responsible for implementation of the watershed management related activities (in conjunction with 

relevant MAAIF departments) and also provide technical backup in the development and 



 

15 

 

implementation of irrigation related infrastructure. Further, MAAIF will coordinate implementation 

of activities being undertaken by other institutions, namely, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

(UNBS)/Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC); Uganda Seed Trade Association 

(USTA), Farmer Cooperatives and Associations; National Agricultural Research Organisation 

(NARO); Diary Development Authority (DDA); the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and 

Data Bank (NAGRIC&DB); and, the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) and its related 

agribusiness associations.  

 

4.1.2 A National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established to assist MAAIF in 

coordinating implementation of Project activities between the respective implementing agencies. 

MAAIF will designate a National Project Coordinator who will be the overall Project Manager.  In 

addition, to the National Project Coordinator, a Senior Procurement Officer with engineering 

background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, a 

Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer will be recruited competitively as 

core staff of the NPCU. The NPCU will also draw from the technical staff in the Ministries and 

agencies involved in the implementation of Project activities to complement its work. Each Ministry 

or Agency will assign a technical staff who will lead implementation of activities in such an 

institution and will be a member of the Project’s Technical Committee to be chaired by the National 

Project Coordinator. The technical committee will ensure a collaborated implementation of project 

activities and provide technical support. A multi-sectoral Steering Committee will be established to 

provide policy oversight of the project, approve work plans and budgets, and ensure adherence to 

relevant strategies established by Government during project implementation. The Steering 

Committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF and will comprise Permanent 

Secretaries of MoWE, MoTIC, MoFPED, and technical heads of the three agencies responsible for 

implementation of Project activities (i.e. Diary Development Authority, Uganda National Bureau of 

Standards, and the National Animal Genetics and Resources Data Bank. Other members will be 

selected from relevant private sector organizations, research institutions, and beneficiary 

organizations. The Steering Committee will meet at least twice every year.  

 

4.1.3 Furthermore, the National Project Coordination Unit will be an integral part of the Executing 

Agency under the direction and supervision the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The National Project 

Coordinator will report directly to the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The NPCU will ensure that 

Project activities are initiated and are adequately budgeted for, consolidate project records, submit 

all procurement documents to the Bank for review and approval; compile and submit all disbursement 

applications and quarterly progress reports; coordinate annual audits of all Project accounts and 

facilitate submission of audit reports to the Bank. Each District will designate a Project Support 

Officer (PSO) among its staff, who will head the District Technical Support Team as detailed in the 

Technical Annex (B3.3) to support the implementation and technical supervision of the Project, 

including sensitization of farmers, training, and monitoring and evaluation in the respective local 

governments. The PSO will also coordinate the relevant stakeholders involved in the implementation 

of the project in the district.  

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.4: “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the 

provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out 

following: 

Borrower Procurement System ( BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 

under BPS comprising Public Procurement Disposal of Public Assets Act and Regulations, using the 



 

16 

 

national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) for various group of transactions to be entailed 

under the project. Considerations shall be made to promote Government efforts on local content.  

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPP): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank 

Standard or Model Solicitation Documents SDs, for contracts that are either: (i) above the thresholds, 

or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for any category of procurement;  

Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: the assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA),   were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes 

(BPS and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the 

project. The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement 

capacity development action plan (CDAP) under the project. 

 

4.1.5 MAAIF has a Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU) that is responsible for procurement of 

goods, works and services with technical support from the directorates. The PDU is headed by a 

Principal Procurement Officer and has a total of four procurement officers as well as four contract 

staff. A Contracts Committee that approves all procurement activities is in place and functional. The 

ministry has experience in managing procurements of Bank financed projects. The resources, 

capacity, expertise and experience of MAAIF are adequate to carry out the procurement activities 

financed under this project. However, in view of the work load, the capacity of the PDU will be 

further strengthened by the recruitment of a senior procurement specialist, who will fast track the 

procurement processes on the project (see appendix VI). A delegated contracts committee will also 

be established to facilitate the Project’s procurement processes.   

 

Financial Management Arrangements 
 

4.1.6 The project will make use of the country’s PFM systems and the Assistant Commissioner, 

Accounts of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries (MAIIF) will be 

responsible for the Financial Management (FM) of the project. With the Permanent Secretary MAIIF 

being the Accounting Officer. 

 

The Ministry’s Finance and Administration department led by a Principal Accountant who has 

appointed accountants to manage the day to day financial operations of all donor funded projects 

guided by the Government of Uganda (GoU) financial regulations and procedures and the PFM Act 

2015.  The project will use a manual accounting system for the funds received from the Bank with 

the GoU’s counterpart funding managed through the Integrated Financial Management Information 

System (IFMIS). All project’s financial transactions will be captured and reported based on the 

International public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The Finance Department of the Ministry 

has sixteen accountants who will assist the NPCU in normal Ministry financial documentation 

approvals. 

 

4.1.7 Budgeting for the project will follow the GoU rules and procedures on budgeting. The total 

project budget will be included in the ministry’s annual budget and included in the GoU’s National 

budget. The project will follow the GoU financial year of 1st July to 30th June and its financial 

statements which will be prepared within three months of the end of the financial year, will be audited 

by the Office of the Auditor General or his appointee. The audit terms of reference will be agreed 

between GoU and the Bank by negotiations. The audit report, complete with a Management Letter 

and responses, will be submitted to the Bank within six months of the end of the financial year. The 

Ministry will also be required to submit quarterly Financial Reports together with the Projects 

Progress report to the Bank no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter. The format of the 

quarterly reporting will be agreed by negotiations. 

 



 

17 

 

The Government procedures regarding internal controls in place and also applied for the existing 

projects should be used by the new project. The following internal control procedures among others 

are in place: Approval of bank accounts opening, proper authorization and approval of bank 

reconciliations, segregation of duties in payments and cash management, monthly bank 

reconciliations and timely banking of receipts. To provide oversight and assist in strengthening the 

project internal control mechanism, the Ministry’s internal audit section will include the project in 

its annual audit planning and the project’s audit reports will be shared with the Bank as needed.  

 

The results of the assessment indicate that the Financial Management overall risk rating is Moderate 

after mitigating measures. In conclusion, the proposed financial management arrangements put in 

place meet the Bank’s minimum requirements for project financial management and therefore 

adequate to provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely information on the status of the 

project required by the Bank. 

 

Disbursement Arrangements 

4.1.8. The Bank’s special account and direct payment disbursement methods will be available to the 

project as prescribed in the bank’s Disbursement Handbook. All Project expenditures incurred by the 

Ministry will be paid by the PIU either from the special account or using the direct payment method.  

All activities being done by other non-governmental entities will be paid for using the direct payment 

method with documents processing done by the PIU. 

The project will open one foreign currency special account into which the proceeds of the loan will 

be deposited. A project account in UGX will also be opened. The accounts will be opened at the Bank 

of Uganda and their opening will be a condition precedent to first disbursement of the loan. An initial 

disbursement will be deposited in the project Special Account (SA) in foreign currency based on a 

six-month work program and an estimated budget of activities drawn from the agreed work plan 

approved by the Bank.  The SA will be replenished through submission of Withdrawal Applications 

when the project meets the replenishment conditions as stipulated in the Disbursement Letter and 

Handbook. The direct payment method will be used for payments of contracts for equipment, supplies 

and services (including audit-where applicable and consultancy). The Bank’s Disbursement Letter 

will be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures and requirements. To ensure adherence to 

agreed financial regulations, the special account will be monitored by AfDB supervision missions. 

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring will be an integral part of project management activities. The M&E Specialist at 

the NPCU will be responsible for the overall monitoring and evaluation of Project activities.  In using 

the performance indicators and targets specified in the Results Based Logical Framework (RBLF), 

project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected to take special note of 

changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In 

developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated along gender lines. A 

gender sensitive baseline study will be undertaken in PY1 which will be followed up with annual 

gender sensitive surveys to assess performance and impact of project activities.  

 

Table 4.1 – Implementation Monitoring Timeframe 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2018 Project Launching Supervision and Progress Report 

Q2 – 2018 Procurement of Civil Works Completed Procurement Plan/Progress Report 

Q4 – 2020 Mid-Term review Midterm Review & Progress Report 

Q4 – 2022 Substantial completion of civil works Supervision and Progress Report 



 

18 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2023 Project Completion Project Completion Report 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 International assessments show that Uganda has progressed its accountability and transparency 

ratings and indicators of Governance including corruption control, rule of law, regulatory quality and 

Government effectiveness. The 2014 Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG) ranked Uganda 

19th out of 52 African countries. The 2013 IIAG provided Uganda’s performance across four 

categories of governance namely (a) Safety & Rule of Law (25 out of 52), (b) National Security (74.5 

out of 100), (c) Gender (6th out of 52), and (d) Human Development (19th out of 52). Uganda’s 

average score was 56.1 out of 100 which was higher than the continental average of 51.5. The 2012 

World Bank Institute’s Worldwide Governance Indicators rated Uganda as follows (0=low and 

1=high): (a) voice and accountability = 0.31; (b) political stability and absence of violence = 0.20; 

(c) Government effectiveness = 0.33; (d) regulatory quality = 0.45; (e) rule of law = 0.44; and (f) 

control of corruption = 0.14. The proposed measures in terms of project implementation include: (i) 

provision of financial management manual to guide Project staff; (ii) utilization of internal audit to 

identify pre-audit transaction challenges; and (iii) regular submission of progress reports.  

4.4. Sustainability   

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations 

by the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUA) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women and youth are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs 

are expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. The 

management of support infrastructures such as storage and essential O&M equipment could be 

outsourced to business service provider on agreed terms under the overall supervision of the WUA.  

 

4.4.2 Capacity Building: Lack of qualified engineers and farmers’ experience in irrigation 

development has been identified as a serious constraint in implementation of the project. The project 

will develop a proposal to train farmers, extension agents, relevant government technicians and 

agribusiness actors including in the use of the pilot demonstration site to enhance the capabilities of 

the operation and maintenance of the irrigation schemes. Further, the project through MAAIF will 

endeavor to partner with JICA, IsDB, WB, The Netherlands Embassy, DFID and others who have 

interest in the area of farmers’ capacity development to ensure sustainability of the irrigation scheme.  

4.5. Risk management:  

4.5.1 The first risk is related to the effect that the private sector may not be willing to take advantage 

of the opportunities in developing the value chains. Provision of Business Development Support 

Services to potential SMEs actors will motivate them to participate in the project  
 

4.5.2 The second risk is associated with difficulties of managing the infrastructure that the project 

will develop. The use of Business Service Provider (BDS) with requisite experience will do this 

before handing them over to farmer groups.  

4.5.3 The third risk is that the beneficiaries may not attain the required level of Operation and 

Maintenance of the infrastructures. However, this will be mitigated by developing an Operations and 

Maintenance Manual for infrastructure facilities, which the farmers also participated in identifying.  



 

19 

 

 

4.5.4. The fifth risk would be delayed fulfillment of loan conditions. However, COUG will work and 

follow up closely with the Government  

4.6. Knowledge building 

4.6.1 A number of studies/surveys are planned to be undertaken through the project, with a view to 

generating information that will inform both the farmers, the local governments, Ministries as well 

as other stakeholders in the course of decision making. The analytical work will focus on beef value 

chain study, study on the potentials for agro-poles and Farmers’ Cooperative Formation modalities. 

All knowledge attributes and lessons generated from the project will be shared with the respective 

Government and District authorities, the Bank, development partner agencies and civic society. 

 

 V.  LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument:   

ADF Loan to the Republic of Uganda. 

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention   

 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 
subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General 

Conditions of the Bank. 

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement:  The obligations of the Bank to make the first 
disbursement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Loan Agreement in accordance 

with the immediately preceding paragraph and the fulfilment by the Borrower of the following 

conditions:  

 

(i) Provide the Bank with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project 
infrastructure is to be constructed are free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities 

and/or government agencies who have consented to project activities.   

 

5.3. Other Conditions  
 

The GoU shall,  

 

 

(i) Prior to a request for disbursement into the Special Account and local currency account, 
provide evidence of having opened one foreign currency Special Account (SA) and one 

local currency account at the Bank of Uganda for the deposit of part of the proceeds of 

the loan and for transfer of funds from the SA respectively; and 

 

(ii) Within 6 months of first disbursement, recruit a Senior Procurement Officer with 
engineering background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring 

and Evaluation Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior 

Engineer for the NPCU. 

 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies: The project complies with all applicable Bank policies 

  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 



 

20 

 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADF loan of UA57 

million to the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of implementation of Agricultural Value Chains 

Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report 



 

