























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA20918

Project Name Forests and Communities (P132846)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Argentina
Sector(s) Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 

(20%)
Theme(s) Gender (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Rural non-farm income 

generation (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other 
envir onment and natural resources management (20%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P132846
Borrower(s) Argentine Government
Implementing Agency SAyDS
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 03-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 10-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

20-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

07-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
After rebounding from the economic crisis of 2002, Argentina has been one of the top two 
performers in the Latin America and Caribbean region in reducing poverty and sharing the gains of 
rising prosperity by expanding the middle class.  Total poverty (measured at US$4 per day) 
declined from 31.0 percent in 2004 to 10.8 percent in 2013, while extreme poverty (measured at US
$2.50 per day) fell from 17.0 percent to 4.7 percent.  Income inequality, measured by the Gini 
coefficient, fell from 50.2 in 2004 to 42.5 in 2012. Argentina’s poverty rate and Gini coefficient are 
among the lowest in the region. At the same time, the middle class in Argentina grew by 68 percent 
between 2004 and 2012, reaching 53.7 percent of the population.  
 
However, significant regional disparities persist with respect to poverty and access to basic 
services. The gap between regions has grown since the 2002 crisis, with Patagonia far outpacing 
Northeast and Northwest regions. The Northern provinces have poverty rates two to three times 
higher than the national average and lag behind the rest of the country in social services and basic 
infrastructure. In addition, disparities exist among and within provinces in terms of levels of 


economic and social development and access to high-quality basic services (see figure 1), such as 
education, health, roads, and water, which in turns limit the ability of the poor to participate in 
economic activities, particularly in rural areas. Improving basic services in impoverished rural 
communities is critical for human capital formation and building pathways out of poverty. 
 
Indigenous people are one of the largest and most vulnerable groups of rural poor in Argentina. 
Indigenous people (2.5 percent of the population) are present in all provinces of Argentina but more 
so in the northern provinces of Salta, Jujuy, Chaco, Formosa, Santa Fe, and Tucuman. In access to 
services, 23.5 percent of indigenous households have unsatisfied basic needs, compared to 13.8 for 
the rest of the population. 
 
Today, more than 40 percent of the Argentine population remains at risk of falling into poverty.  
Three challenges stand out for the poor and vulnerable population. First, the greatest vulnerability 
to poverty arises in periods of economic crises or prolonged sluggish growth, which reduce 
employment and earnings and limit the ability of the Government to finance social programs that 
directly support the poor. Second, although Argentina is a broadly inclusive society, endowments 
and opportunities continue to vary for different groups in society and across regions. Poverty risks 
are highest among those with limited access to, and command of, human and basic infrastructure 
assets. Third, Argentina’s economy depends on natural capital, and environmental degradation 
represents a significant cost to the economy, threatening livelihoods, especially for the poorest rural 
households that are the most dependent on these resources. 
 
Strong economic growth over the last decade was accompanied by rising macro-imbalances. Key 
macroeconomic challenges include the existence of inflationary pressures, deficits in fiscal and 
current accounts and falling international reserves. Argentina has relatively modest fiscal and 
current account deficits as well as low public sector debt to GDP. Nonetheless, given the limited 
access to international capital markets, they create pressures on the economy. These imbalances 
need to be resolved in order to avoid unwanted effects on the medium-term sustainability of the 
gains in equity and development achieved during the last decade. In this regard, the Government of 
Argentina (GoA) has recently implemented various public policy interventions aimed at resolving 
key macroeconomic imbalances. It must be noted, however, that continued and consolidated efforts 
are required for achieving the desired results.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
A third of Argentina’s continental territory is covered with natural grasslands, and another third 
with crops and forest plantations. Only around 11% of its territory is covered with natural forest 
totaling approximately 31.4 million hectares. Two thirds of this area is situated in the Chaco Eco-
Region (21.7 million ha), which also has around 13.4 million ha of forest and shrub land in various 
stages of degradation due to overgrazing and unregulated timber and fuel-wood extraction.  The 
Chaco Forest Biome occurs in  12 Argentinean provinces, four of which, Chaco, Salta, Santiago del 
Estero and Formosa account for 87 % of the total area (19.1 million ha) and produce 98 % of 
registered round wood, firewood and poles of the whole Chaco Eco-Region. 
  
The Chaco Eco-Region produces around 90% of all natural forest products in Argentina (mainly 
poles, tannin, firewood and charcoal), or around 6.3 million tons per year. Although the population 
of the 12 Provinces that make up the Chaco Eco-Region amounts to only 18% of the national total, 
they consume more than 50% of the total fuel wood in the country. Eight out of ten rural 


households in the most critical areas  of the Chaco Eco-Region use wood or charcoal to cook their 
food. The illiteracy rate there is three times higher than the national average and more than a third 
of its population lives with unsatisfied basic needs. 
  
Most deforestation in Argentina takes place in the fragile Chaco Eco-Region where a combination 
of limited development options, poverty and weak institutions combine to make the area extremely 
vulnerable both economically and environmentally. Between 2006 and 2011 more than 1.5 million 
ha of natural forest were destroyed, with conversion to agriculture and uncontrolled (often illegal) 
forest exploitation causing deforestation at a rate of 1.2% per year biodiversity has been lost, soil 
and water resources have been degraded, and carbon emissions have increased.  
 
Rationale for the World Bank’s Involvement. The Bank has maintained a partnership with the GoA 
by supporting work on sustainable natural resources management since at least 1995. Previous 
Bank supported forestry operations, have demonstrated that SAyDS and the provinces are 
committed to sustainable forest management. However institutional capacity and collaboration 
among the national, provincial and local levels are still modest compared to the magnitude and 
complexity of the task. Developing an effective working relationship with local communities and 
indigenous peoples in the area is still a work in progress. The Bank and the FAO, through its 
Cooperative Program (FAO/WB-CP), are uniquely placed to assist the GoA in this effort because of 
their twenty-year working relationship in forestry conservation, agriculture and demand-driven 
sustainable development in the country.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The PDO is to improve forest management and increased access to markets and basic services by 
forest dependent communities and small producers – indigenous and criollos – in Northern 
Argentina.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Sustainable Livelihoods
Comments (optional)
Financing for preparation and implementation of management plans for land and forests in 
approximately 250 Communities. Integrated Community Plans (Planes Integrales Comunitarios) 
will be designed to raise incomes and increase resilience to drought through demand-driven 
investments including both service delivery (among other, improving forest management planning, 
increasing dry season water availability, strengthening tenure, improving efficiency of wood energy 
systems) and locally-managed subprojects (among other, increasing production, processing and 
marketing of timber and non-timber products and installation/monitoring of improved cook stoves 
and charcoal kilns). Forest management plans prepared under this component will be considered for 
certification and for financing.

Component Name
Natural Forest Management and Civil Society
Comments (optional)
Financing for (a) a national forest and climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support 
for implementation of the Forest Law and (b) the establishment or expansion of existing community 
radio stations in a total of 25 locations to distribute informationlocally and in native languages. The 
campaign would highlight, among other things, the importance of the conservation of natural forest 

for agriculture (and agro-exports) due to their ecological functions (regulating hydrologic cycles, 
contributing to soil fertility and biodiversity conservation), and emphasize the important role that 
forests play in supporting rural livelihoods and maintaining the cultural values of the indigenous and 
criollo populations.

Component Name
Skills and Technology Transfer
Comments (optional)
Financing strengthening the technical and managerial skills of (a) indigenous and criollo community 
members, (b) small private forest owners, and (c) technical service providers and extension agents 
working in the project area. The training delivered under this component will cover project related 
topics; such as, sustainable forest management, improved production, climate resilient agricultural 
and livestock production, value addition and tenure security. Short training courses will be delivered 
through both classroom and community level instruction. Classroom instruction will be delivered to 
both community members and Rural Development Agencies (RDA) staff and others involved in 
project related service delivery.

Component Name
Forest Information and Monitoring Systems
Comments (optional)
Financing the expansion of SAyDS technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information 
and monitor changes in forest cover. The component would finance (a) expanding coverage of the 
Forest Administration, Control and Verification System (SACVEFOR) to 10 Provinces in Northern 
Argentina, (b) establishment of a national Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning 
System, and (c) the planning and establishment of a National Grid of Permanent Sample Plots. The 
component would finance consultant and non-consultant services, training, and equipment.

Component Name
Project Management and Impact Monitoring
Comments (optional)
Financing (a) the technical and administrative coordination of the project, (b) hiring consultants to 
staff the National Project Executing Unit (NEU) and (c) operational costs, training and equipment. 
This component also would support the development of an impact evaluation to identify changes in 
outcomes directly attributable to project activities. The impact evaluation is expected to help 
identify strengths and weaknesses in the design and implementation of existing policies and 
regulations related to forest management and forest tenure in Argentina and inform future decisions 
and regulatory revisions including during project implementation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 62.80 Total Bank Financing: 58.90
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 3.90
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 58.90
Local Communities 0.00
Total 62.80




V. Implementation
A.  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
Implementing Agency. The project will be implemented under the Ministry of Environment by the 
Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS). During implementation of the 
preparatory activity (BIRF-7520-AR) SAyDS established a National Executing Unit (NEU) in 
Buenos Aires integrated into its line functions.  
 
Project Management. The existing NEU includes an Executive Coordinator responsible for 
oversight of the Project and its operations, and the NEU will recruit individual thematic specialists 
acting as managers for each of the four technical components. By utilizing the NEU’s established 
administration and management capacity, systems and procedures initial costs and time frame for 
launching the project should be greatly reduced. The NEU led the development of the technical and 
institutional design of the proposed Project. The team of the NEU will be completed by M&E, 
safeguards, accounting, and procurement specialists and administrative assistants. Consultants will 
be recruited to fill knowledge gaps as they arise. 
 
Technical Implementation. Local Executing Units (LEU) located in the eight selected departments 
will include one specialist in charge of each of the following technical areas; (a) Community Forest 
Management, (b) Participatory Land Use Planning (PICs), (c) Land Tenure and Rights 
Strengthening, and (d) Marketing of Forest and NTFP. One of the specialists will act as coordinator 
in each LEU. LEU’s will also include administrative and M&E support officers (see Organogram 
Annex 3, Figures 2 and 3). Component 1 will be implemented in close collaboration with national, 
provincial and local Rural Development Agencies (RDA) that already work with targeted 
indigenous and criollo communities in the Project area. Selected RDAs will include public agencies, 
non-governmental organizations, and academic institutions. 
  
Consultation Committees. Each LEU will work closely with provincial institutions responsible for 
forest, tenure, social development, and indigenous peoples’ issues. To facilitate information 
exchange and coordination a Local Project Consultation Committee (LPCC) will be set up in each 
Department with representatives from local agencies, NGOs, and communities Project Consultation 
Committee should include IP and Criollos organization representatives.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
The results framework (Annex 1) details performance indicators by component and sub-component. 
Monitoring and evaluation efforts will include (a) biannual progress reports with performance 
indicator updates and (b) a project-specific impact evaluation designed in consultation with the 
Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME) . SAyDS has gained experience reporting on 
progress during the ongoing operation (LN 7520) however with a greater number of field activities 
and a larger number of implementation partners, SAyDS will need to rely more on Local Executing 
Units (LEU) and ensure that they follow established methodologies for reporting progress. An M&E 
strategy will be included in the operational manual and a M&E specialist will be providing support 
and capacity development at all levels (See Organogram Annex 3, Figure 3) The implementing 
agency was involved in the development of the results framework and plans to collect disaggregated 
data on gender and ethnicity. 
 
M&E reports, including environmental and social monitoring results, will be produced quarterly at 



the LEU level, and every six months at the NEU level. The data collected at the field level would be 
consolidated and analyzed at the LEU level and consolidated by the NEU for reporting and 
feedback. Annual evaluation and impact monitoring reports will facilitate adaptive management, 
allowing for the identification of issues and lessons that could help adjusting the operational 
strategy. The format and content of the annual monitoring report will be defined in the Project 
Operational Manual. The mid-term review of the Project would occur no later than 30 months after 
effectiveness. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
The proposed project design will increase the availability of key technical and managerial skills at 
both departmental and community levels and address shared prosperity by improving small-
producers’ access to financial resources for sustainable forest management (through links to the 
Forest Fund under the Forest Law). Adoption of a community driven approach ensures that 
beneficiary communities will acquire skills needed to advocate for improved natural resources 
management and access forest management funding through provincial authorities on an ongoing 
basis, after project completion, though the Forest Fund. Engaging a number of RDAs will contribute 
to inter-agency coordination and cooperation and spread the implementation burden across 
participating institutions allowing selected provinces and departments to meet a wide range of 
beneficiary needs (land tenure, water, and resilient agriculture). Investments in forest monitoring, 
early warning systems, publicity campaigns and community radio are expected to increase public 
awareness and cooperation with indigenous people and criollo communities’ efforts to manage 
natural resources sustainably.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC13820

Project Name Ecuador - Sustainable Family Farming Modernization Project (P151963)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Ecuador
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (56%), Irrigation and 

drainage (37%), Agricultural extension and research (4%), Agr o-industry, 
marketing, and trade (3%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management 
(20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151963
Borrower(s) REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

30-Oct-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

03-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

18-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

02-Jul-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. During the last decade, Ecuador has seen a period of relative political stability. The 
Government of Ecuador (GoE) has invested heavily in infrastructure and social sectors in an effort 
to stimulate growth, reduce inequality and promote inclusion for a total population of slightly more 
than 15.7 million inhabitants.  
 
2. The Ecuadorian economy relies largely on the extraction and export of oil, and on the 
export of natural resource-based products and services. The agricultural sector accounted for 7.8 
percent of the GDP in 2013. With more than 60 percent of its agricultural production destined for 
export, Ecuador could benefit significantly from stimulating productivity through integrated rural 
development approaches. 
 
3. Growth combined with falling inequality has led to important gains in reducing poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Over the last decade (2003-13), GDP per capita growth in Ecuador 
was above regional average levels (2.7 percent vs. 2.5 percent), while progress in reducing 
inequality has exceeded regional trends. Income distribution was significantly improved, as 
expressed by the Gini coefficient, declining from 0.54 in December 2006 to 0.49 in June 2014. 
Likewise, between 2006 and 2014, income poverty at the national poverty line fell from 37.6 
percent to 24.5 percent, while extreme poverty fell from 16.9 percent to 8 percent.  
 
4. Despite the significant reduction in poverty and growth of the middle class, more than half 
of the population in Ecuador remains poor or vulnerable to falling back into poverty, particularly in  
rural areas. In 2014, 4.2 percent of the urban population lived in extreme poverty compared to the 
16 percent for the rural population. The difference was less pronounced at the moderate poverty 
line, but even in this case the rural headcount was more than twice the urban headcount (41.7 
percent versus 16.3 percent).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. The proposed project is fully aligned to the National Development Plan for 2013-2017, the 
National Strategy for Diversification of the Productive Matrix, the institutional objectives of 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) and with the Irrigation 
National 2012-2027 Plan, which are: (i) to improve the lives of farmers and rural communities 
through the strategies: social inclusion of small and medium producers; (ii) to promote the 
modernization of agriculture; and (iii) to strengthen capacity of the Autonomous Decentralized 
Provincial Governments (GADPs) to assume the transferred competencies of constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and promoting agricultural activity. 
 
6.  Ecuador has 1.1 million agricultural households with land size between 1 ha and 20 ha, 
regarded as small and medium producers, who own about 1.6 million hectares (25% of total area at 
national level). This segment of farmers is crucial for many value chains such as rice (49% of 
national production), potatoes (64%), maize (76%) and onions (80%). Nevertheless, the 
development of this segment of farmers and its capacity to contribute to the diversification of 
productive matrix at national level are limited by the size of land, the access to market, and by the 
poor access to efficient water management in agriculture. Out of the 304,000ha irrigated by small 
and medium producers, 284,000ha are still under traditional irrigation methods with very low water 
efficiency and limited water storage capacity. The proposed project aims at supporting MAGAP’s 
initiative to strengthen this category of farmers in their effort for intensification and modernization 
of agriculture. 
 
7. The 2008 Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador defined the decentralization framework 
recognizing the political, administrative, and financial autonomy of the Decentralized Provincial 
Autonomous Governments (GADPs) at their different levels (canton, province, and parish). This 
decentralization grants each province jurisdiction to plan, build, and maintain the infrastructure 
(transportation, water, and sanitation) under its competencies and to promote the development of the 
productive sector within its territory. 
 
8. Within the competences of Provincial Governments under the current Constitution are: (i) 
planning, building and maintaining the road system at provincial level; (ii) planning, constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and; (iii) promoting agricultural activity. Therefore, 

the implementation of new development projects and the sustainable operation of existing irrigation 
projects are limited by the level of capacity for project preparation, implementation and financing 
by the Provincial Governments.

Relationship to CAS
9. The World Bank Group's Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for Ecuador approved on April 9, 
2013, identified agriculture and rural development as key priorities for the Government and the 
Bank to contribute to the country's goal for inclusive and sustainable growth. 
 
10. The proposed Project is fully consistent with the World Bank’s ISN for Ecuador for the 
period 2014-2015, which focuses on investment project financing in three strategic areas: (i) Pillar I 
-  Sustainable and Inclusive Growth; (ii) Pillar II - Access to Social Protection and Quality Services 
for All, and (iii) with the country’s Plan Nacional para el Buen Vivir, where five out of twelve key 
objectives outline the importance of enhancing the productive water access in a sustainable manner 
as key intermediate priorities to ensure quality of life and social cohesion for its farmers and rural 
communities. 
 
11. It is expected that the proposed Project will contribute to the reduction of extreme poverty, 
to the increase of shared prosperity and equality of access to opportunities in targeted provinces 
across the country by increasing agricultural revenues and resilience of Ecuador's family farming 
sector, promoting diversification and increase of agricultural production, and improving access to 
markets for smallholders and their organizations.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
12. The project development objective is to enhance the profitability and sustainable production 
of small and medium farmers in targeted areas by improving productivity and by supporting more 
efficient and climate-smart uses for land and water. 
 
13. To reach its objective, the project will support technical assistance, capacity-building 
activities, on-farm and complementary off-farm investments geared toward a more efficient use of 
natural resources, especially water, an increased adaptation to climate change, improvement in 
productivity and market access. On-farm investments are made within the farmer's plot. Off-farm 
investments are referring to interventions on irrigation and drainage networks upstream of the intake 
of the farmer’s plot. 
 
14. Project beneficiaries. The project beneficiaries are small and medium-sized family farmers, 
including indigenous communities. Small and Medium farmers are established by MAGAP 
according agroclimatological regions:  
• Sierra: 0 - 5 ha. (small farmers) – 5 to 20 ha. (medium farmers)  
• Costa: 0-20 ha. (small farmers) - 20 to 40 ha (medium farmers)  
 
15. Project areas. While the project is national in scope, the Sierra Central and the Coastal 
regions are the main target areas for investment subprojects where climatological conditions justify 
investments in water storage and irrigation to foster diversification and intensification of agriculture.

Key Results (From PCN)
16. The key indicators at the beneficiary level would measure changes in: (i) profitability of 

agricultural activities and; (ii) climate-resilience and sustainability of the improved production 
systems.  
 
17. Intermediate outcome indicators would include: (i) Profitability (margin) by unit of land 
(hectare), by unit of water (cubic meters) and by household (family); (ii) Reduced volatility of yield 
from year to year for main crops; (iii) Hectares of areas and number of beneficiaries with new/
improved irrigation and drainage services like drip or sprinkler (core indicator); (iv) Number of 
clients who have adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project (core 
indicator); (v) Number of Operational Water User Associations created and/or strengthened (core 
indicator); (vi) Sub-projects for which arrangements for community engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/or operation and maintenance are established (core indicator) and; (vii) Hectares 
of area with change in land use (increase of cropping intensity and diversification of crops).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
18. The Project supports a framework program to strengthen sustainable modernization and 
intensification of agriculture systems with an emphasis on beneficiary and community participation. 
The Project will support: (i) demand-based investment subprojects; (ii) capacity-building activities 
that strengthen national and local institutions (MAGAP, GADP, mainly) and farmers’ organizations; 
(ii) climate-smart project planning; (iii) training and technical assistance to enhance productivity, 
increase value-added and improve market access; and, (iv) small investments to protect natural 
resources linked to the subprojects (see details of Project Concept in Annex 3). 
 
19. In order to maximize the positive impact and sustainability of activities, the project will 
seek to coordinate its actions with existing government programs aimed at agricultural development 
such as the MAGAP’s Hombro a Hombro Program (national extension program for family farming) 
and the agricultural component of the Plan Nacional Buen Vivir 2013-2107; as well as programs 
developed by Provincial Governments in thematic support agricultural production and marketing. 
The project should also ensure that rural credit programs and/or micro-credit (Cooperative Savings) 
will be accessible to project beneficiaries. 
 
20. The proposed Project will build on the successful model of the PIDD (see details of project 
description and main lessons learned in Annex 3). The PIDD or Proyecto de Inversiones de 
Desarrollo Productivo (P094784), which closed in June 2014, financed subprojects of 
modernization works for 55 small and medium scale collective irrigation systems, benefiting 4,685 
ha and 7,900 families. The most important lessons learned from the PIDD, taken into account in the 
proposed project’s design are the following (details in Annex 4): 
a) Combining physical investments with capacity building. The PIDD followed an integrated 
approach with rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and strengthening of the 
capacity of Water Users Association and improving farmers’ irrigation and agricultural practices 
and the commercialization of agricultural produce.  
b) Frontloading technical assistance and training to the institutional stakeholders. This capacity 
building needs to be done in technical screening, design, supervision of sub-projects), and fiduciary 
aspects (procurement, in financial management and safeguards). 
c) Increasing ownership and sustainability. Irrigation component follows a demand-driven and 
participatory approach in which WUAs/farmers’ groups participate in subproject design, financing, 
execution and supervision and are fully responsible for Operation & Maintenance. This approach, 

by ensuring subproject ownership, increases subproject sustainability and effective use and will be 
used for the new operation.  
d) Thinking scalability. The project cycle developed by the PIDD, especially the effective 
participation of beneficiaries from the design to the construction, has been adopted by the Provincial 
Government of Chimborazo as a public policy to develop any investment intervention in the future.  
e) Building Partnerships. Several partnerships between different organizations and institutions 
at local, national and international level have been developed during the preparation and 
implementation of the PIDD, and will be replicated in the new operation.  
 
21. The proposed project will also be designed taking into account some lessons learned from 
other similar operations in the region such as, for example, the PSI Sierra in Peru (P104760), which 
has very similar scope, activities and target group, or the PROSAP (P106684) in Argentina, which 
can bring experie nce on the construction of the project framework and the progressive process of 
delegating responsibilities to the sub-national level (Provinces). 
 
22. The proposed project (US$60 million in IBRD financing) will be implemented over a 
period of five years and comprises four components: (1) Investments for productive sub-projects; 
(2) Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ organizations; (3) Natural 
Resources Management Enhancement and; (4) Project Management. 
 
23. Component 1: Investments for productive sub-projects (estimated amount US$ 50M.). This 
component will finance subprojects aligned with the project objective and provincial priorities 
related to the following investments: (i) individual and/or collective small water storages (ponds); 
(ii) collective and/or individual on-farm investments for modernization of irrigation techniques 
(drip, sprinkler or modern gravity techniques) and; (iii) complementary works aiming at improving 
off-farm irrigation and drainage networks.  
 
24. Subproject proposals will be reviewed against a set of objective criteria in order to be 
eligible for financing, including consistency with project objectives and scope. To ensure the 
balanced and equitable allocation of public funding, subproject preparation will include specific 
selection criteria to be applied early on in the selection and approval process, which will include: (i) 
demand expressed by the potential beneficiaries, which should have sufficient organizational 
capacity to manage sustainable infrastructure; (ii) formal prioritization by the relevant Provincial 
Government preferentially in their Provincial Irrigation Plan; (iii) compliance with the requirements 
of beneficiaries’ profile (small and medium farmers); (iv) valid water use concession granted by 
SENAGUA; (v) financial profitability presented in the project profile and validated by the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Project; (vi) social and environmental sustainability justified in 
the project profile and validated by the PIU; (viii) compliance with investment criteria (e.g. - 
investment ceiling per beneficiary family, per hectare, per sub-project, etc.); (ix) financial 
contribution of beneficiaries to investment costs and; (x) subproject activities that may affect 
International Waterways will not be eligible. Details will be elaborated in the implementation 
manual. 
 
25. Component 1 will finance works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment. Retroactive Financing may be provided for this Component 
under BP 10.00 for a selection of subprojects. The selection will be done during appraisal stage 
within the current MAGAP’s pipeline of subprojects and will be subject to the criteria identified in 
the operation manual.  



 
26. Component 2: Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ 
organizations (estimated amount US$ 5 M.). This component will support a range of services that 
provide support for: (i) agricultural modernization and intensification to the beneficiaries and their 
organizations (Water Users Organizations and Farmers Organizations) and; (ii) institutional 
strengthening to the main institutional stakeholders (MAGAP central and regional offices, 
Provincial Governments / GADPs). 
 
27. Component 2 will finance consulting and non-consulting services, training and workshops 
and goods and equipment. Activities will include: (i) Extension services, training and Technical 
Assistance and; (ii) Institutional and organizational capacity building (see details in Annex 3). This 
training will be focused on improving and supporting the outcomes r elated with the subproject 
investments. 
 
28. Component 3: Natural Resources Management Enhancement (estimated amount US$ 1.5 
M.). This component aims at laying the foundations for conservation and sustainable management 
of watersheds and natural resources, in areas where investments on irrigation sub-projects will be 
developed. 
 
29. Component 3 will finance small investment and management subprojects of natural 
resources protection (reflorestation, protection of páramos, and conservation of watersheds) linked 
to the subprojects of Component 1. The component will adopt an integrated and participatory 
approach to watershed management intended to make rural populations more accountable and 
encourage them to manage their land and natural resources in a more sustainable manner. Thus, the 
component would contribute to: (i) protect watersheds by reducing or preventing erosion and 
sedimentation; (ii) increase the productivity and sustainability of agricultural production based on 
agroecological and agroforestry technologies; and (iii) strengthen the management of natural 
resources to improve the environment and living conditions.  
 
30. Component 3 will finance small works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment (see details in Annex 3). This component will be placed under 
the responsibility of the regional offices of MAGAP who, depending on the local capacities and the 
existence of services, will enter into agreements with the GADPs, consulting firms, local ONGs or 
community organizations for the preparation and implementation of subprojects. The procedures 
will be detailed in the operation manual. 
 
31. Component 4: Project Management (estimated amount US$ 3.5 M.). This component will 
support the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be installed within the Sub-
Secretary of Irrigation and Drainage in the MAGAP in Quito and some eligible costs related to the 
Project on the regional offices of MAGAP and Provincial Governments/GADPs. The component 
will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation, impact evaluations, progress reports, and audits.  
 
32. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the overall administration of 
the Project, within the MAGAP in Quito. Component 4 will finance: consulting and non-consulting 
services, training and workshops, small works, goods and equipment and operating costs.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 77.30 Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 6.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 60.00
 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 6.15
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.15
 Total 77.30



























































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 


PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 
























































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.


12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.




producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of


7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.


41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Argentina for the Programme for Economic
Insertion of Family Producers of Northern
Argentina (PROCANOR)


Republic of Argentina

Programme for Economic Insertion of Family Producers
of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Argentina

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change (UCAR)

Total programme cost: US$39.18 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$24.17 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.33 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.48 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.21 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Argentina for the Programme for Economic Insertion of
Family Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Argentina for
the Programme for Economic Insertion of Family
Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the Greater North region. In
2010, 18 per cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed
households had unmet basic needs. The provinces in Northern Argentina have the
highest rural poverty rates in the country.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF), has
demonstrated the capacity to improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is
implemented within its country programme as an instrumental part of the public
policy to support family farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with
UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme is based on public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design leverages opportunities for
building partnerships among agribusinesses, commercial enterprises and farmers’
organizations. It will prioritize emerging and dynamic value chains: (i) quinoa;
(ii) potatoes and ocas (Andean potatoes); (iii) chia; (iv) amaranth; (v) llama meat;
(vi) llama and vicuña wool; (vii) yacón (a tuber); and (viii) horticulture. These
value chains are characterized by market limitations and the increased participation
of family farmers.

5. The programme area includes the 10 provinces of Argentina’s Greater North:
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Formosa, Jujuy, La Rioja, Misiones, Salta, Santiago
del Estero and Tucumán, with activities concentrated in the provinces of
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Jujuy, Salta and Misiones.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in the priority value chains and organized into producers’
organizations. The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

2

incorporation of vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to improve sustainable integration of

small-scale producers into value chains. The five-year programme aims to reach
8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has four components:

 Component 1: Development of inclusive markets. This component will
strengthen development of dynamic, emerging value chains, with a focus on
family producers and joint ventures between small producers' organizations
and other private-sector actors. To develop markets for products, it will
support market promotion, brand creation and certification of origin. It will
also promote public procurement and the creation of market infrastructure.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by funding: scholarships for the
daughters and sons of family producers; training in business management,
business alliances and strategic partnerships; and special training for
government staff and producers’ organizations.

In addition, the programme will develop technologies for smallholder
producers, including adaptive research, prototyping of equipment, installation
of laboratories and development of seed systems for quinoa and other Andean
crops.

To develop markets for financial services, the component will carry out a
study of rural financial markets, organize provincial workshops and provide
resources to support requests for formal credit by producers’ organizations. It
will also support a study and pilot initiative on smallholder insurance.

In the framework of policy dialogue on value chains, the component includes
studies on the priority value chains and support to regional forums at the
cluster level that will facilitate interaction by value chain participants at the
regional level.

 Component 2: Organizational strengthening. To improve the functioning
of value chains, the programme will support participating organizations in the
following ways:

(a) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid diagnostics, institutional strengthening prior to the formulation of
business plans and establishment of business alliances.

(b) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans, including physical assets, training and technical
assistance, and organic and fair-trade certification. In the rural finance
services sector, it will increase access to working capital through
guarantee funds to obtain loans from financial institutions and revolving
funds for direct credit. Land-use planning and tenure regularization
activities will include participatory development of maps to illustrate
local land tenure and resolve tenure issues.

 Component 3: Productive development. This component will strengthen
the productive capacities of producer families within participating producers’
organizations through investment in productive on-farm assets, technical
assistance, training and farmer field schools in which trials are performed by
producers’ groups and guided by technicians.

 Component 4: Management and administration. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

3

include valid systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
management.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) development of clusters
in the emerging value chains; and (ii) business plans as the principal instruments
for investments, technical assistance and training for producers’ organizations.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. UCAR will be responsible for programme implementation and will directly execute

most activities in component 1 (including those designed to address market
failures) and component 4. Provincial governments will be responsible for
implementing components 2 and 3 through provincial management units, based on
financing agreements with MALF. If necessary, UCAR may implement some
component 2 and 3 activities. Beneficiary organizations will be responsible for
developing and executing the business plans through participatory processes.

11. There will be ample opportunity for beneficiary participation in the programme. In
the planning process, producers’ organizations will participate in cluster-level
forums to identify specific needs, define priorities and exchange ideas on policies
related to value chains. They will be responsible for planning and implementing
business plans, including procurement. Finally, they will monitor and evaluate the
implementation of their business plans, which will provide the programme’s system
with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility necessary to implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. At the cluster level, improvement plans will
be prepared with the participation of provincial authorities, smallholder producers,
private enterprises and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods that use an organizational matrix to manage the
development of clusters and business plans. The system will be integrated into
UCAR’s existing management system, which allows the monitoring of physical
progress based on data entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will
facilitate analysis of information critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation,
implementers will collect information from beneficiary households using a family
questionnaire that includes IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
survey. Institutional advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating
producers’ organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse
experiences in programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MALF, through UCAR, will be responsible for the financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to two designated
accounts in euro. From each designated account, funds will flow to the respective
operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be managed by
UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial operational
accounts denominated in Argentine pesos.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

4

16. Procurement. UCAR, the provincial management units and producers’
organizations will carry out procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans.
Procurement of works, goods and services in the framework of business plans, and
accounting for these expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’
organizations, with support from provincial units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed on by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support
for rapid programme start-up and set up of the accounting, planning, and
monitoring and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s general conditions for agriculturalF.
development financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to the clusters supporting
priority value chains for activities beginning as of the date of negotiations will be
considered eligible up to US$500,000. For recognition, the borrower must submit
the expenses to IFAD for reimbursement once the financing agreement has entered
into force and disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for five years of implementation will be US$39.2 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$7.7 million relates to the inclusive markets component;
US$18.7 million to organizational strengthening; US$8.4 million to productive
development; and US$4.4 million to programme management and administration.
Management costs make up 11 per cent of the programme cost. Costs include
8 per cent for contingencies with respect to price escalation for goods, services and
operating expenses, and 0.3 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to
goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the Government, with a contribution of

US$11.5 million to cofinance support to the business plans of producers’
organizations, operating expenses and staff salaries; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of
US$24.2 million and a grant of US$330,000 for research and knowledge
management; and (iii) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$3.2 million to
cofinance the business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2 below.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

5

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of inclusive markets 5 984 78 188 2 1 531 20 - - 7 704 20
2. Organizational strengthening 11 586 62 - - 4 720 25 2 364 13 18 670 48
3. Productive development 6 136 73 - - 1 393 17 844 10 8 373 21
4. Management and administration 460 10 140 3 3 835 87 - - 4 434 11
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of producers’
organizations) 16 616 65 - - 5 837 23 3 208 13 25 661 66

2. Goods, services and inputs 3 512 90 - - 396 10 - - 3 908 10
3. Consultancies (technical assistance) 1 828 65 328 12 636 23 - - 2 792 7
4. Training 1 444 100 - - - - - - 1 444 4
5. Credit and guarantee funds 765 100 - - - - - - 765 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 3 742 100 - - 3 742 10
7. Operating costs - - - - 869 100 - - 869 2
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 37,700

people), including 7,100 smallholder families and 900 on- and off-farm jobs.
Smallholder producers, organized in approximately 119 producers’ organizations,
including 24 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected
benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The programme’s internal rate of return is 24.3 per cent, and
the net present value 364 million Argentine pesos.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) its choice of dynamic value

chains for which there is sound market demand and in which participating
producers have experience; (ii) its support to beneficiary organizations that will
ensure sustainability after programme completion; (iii) the adaptive research
integrated into component 1; (iv) the environmental, climate change adaptation,
land tenure security and commercial certification measures to be integrated into the
business plans; and (v) its support to sustainable rural finance services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the stable poverty-reduction policy framework in Northern
Argentina and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delays in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which will be mitigated by their early identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) possible hesitance of private companies to join the programme – to be
reduced by open communication and invitation to participate in the clusters;
(iv) market risks, which are low by virtue of the selected value chains’ dynamism
and the reduction of both supply and marketing constraints; and (v) technological
and climatic risks, which will be mitigated through local seed programmes,



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

6

technology development, adaptive research and support to the integration of
climate-proof infrastructure into business plans.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Agri-Food and

Agribusiness Strategic Plan (PEA2). It is also consistent with the recommendations
of IFAD’s 2010 country programme evaluation in seeking a programme approach,
expanding the financial services available to smallholder producers and introducing
the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on dynamic value chains;

(ii) bringing together smallholder producers, public institutions and private
companies in clusters to plan the development of the value chains; (iii) integrating
adaptive research into business plans; (iv) introducing sector-support activities
such as seed programmes and technology development to enhance production and
marketing processes; and (v) enabling access to a spectrum of rural finance
services.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to support family

farming in Argentina and beyond by generating and communicating evidence of the
new approaches it applies. Best practices will be disseminated in coordination with
IFAD’s regional programme for the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
which is active in strengthening pro-poor policy in the region.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Argentina and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will not be tabled at this session. The
Board is requested to approve the programme proposal subject to the completion of
the negotiations of the financing agreement before the April 2016 session of the
Executive Board. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the
April 2016 Executive Board session, as well as any substantive changes to the
terms presented.

31. The Republic of Argentina is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Argentina in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million eight
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 22,850,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Argentina in an amount equivalent to three hundred and ten thousand euros
(EUR 310,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President














































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening
Programme for the Camelid Value Chain in
the Bolivian High Plateau

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural Development and Lands

Total programme cost: US$38.76 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR12.87 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Contribution of borrower: US$16.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening Programme
for the Camelid Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau, as contained in
paragraph 47.

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the
Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In the past eight years, the performance of the economy of the Plurinational State

of Bolivia was sound, based on favourable macroeconomic policies despite slow
growth of major economies. From 2006 to 2013, the economy grew at an average
rate of 4.9 per cent, resulting in a fiscal surplus and a sustained increase in
international reserves. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased from 51 per cent in 2006
to 27 per cent in 2010. Per capita income increased from US$1,100 in 2006 to
US$3,000 in 2014, with a GDP of US$30,000 million. Notwithstanding this, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia is one of the poorest countries in South America and
one of the most unequal: about 65 per cent of a total population of 10 million
inhabitants live in poverty and 2.7 million people live in extreme poverty.
Inequality remains high. The Gini index dropped from 0.59 in 2006 to 0.51 in
2009, and in rural areas from 0.64 to 0.53 in the same period. Poverty here has
the face of indigenous and peasant women, and the highest levels of food
insecurity. Of the 340 municipalities, 102 (30 per cent) are in an extremely
vulnerable situation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. The proposed programme is fully justified in taking into account poverty conditions,
food insecurity and vulnerability of the rural population in selected priority
municipalities in the targeted area. Moreover, programme interventions are
relevant, taking into account the important contribution of South American
camelids to the economy of the population in the Bolivian High Plateau, whose
welfare is associated with the income derived from breeding and processing, and
from the marketing of fibre, meat and hides. The proposed activities will help
reduce difficulties and obstacles in primary production such as: (i) low productivity,
low quality and livestock numbers in the Bolivian High Plateau; (ii) improper
handling of animals and herds; (iii) limited availability of feed and water due to
deterioration of natural resources and climate change; (iv) expansion of the
agricultural frontier for quinoa cultivation; (v) low value added to raw materials;
and (vi) inadequate access to services (veterinary, inputs, etc.). The programme
will also address limitations on processing and marketing, including: (i) lack of
technical assistance; (ii) high production costs; (iii) inadequate access to markets;
(iv) lack of access to financial services; and (v) absence of relationships among the
diverse actors in the production complex. In this context, a long-term strategy is
proposed based on the sustainability of joint venture projects with access to
markets, and strengthening of organizational actors. Programme implementation
will scale up development approaches promoted by other IFAD-funded projects in
the country.The programme contributes to achievement of the objectives of the



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

2

National Development Plan, the Patriotic Agenda 2025 and the Agricultural
Development Sector Plan 2014-2018 of the Ministry of Rural Development and
Lands (MDRyT): poverty eradication and financial, productive and natural resource
sovereignty, which emphasizes that agricultural production must be used to meet
domestic demand and ensure food security.

3. The proposed programme, although not included in the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia 2008-2012 and its 2013-2014 extension, is consistent with IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 objectives to assist rural poor people in improving their
food security, increasing their incomes and strengthening their resilience by
implementing cost-effective and sustainable initiatives, which can create
opportunities for wealth creation and employment in rural areas.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. Programme area. The programme has been designed to be implemented in

approximately 47 municipalities in three departments of the High Plateau: La Paz,
Oruro and Potosi. Selection of the programme area was based on: (i) poverty
conditions; (ii) indices of economic, social and environmental vulnerability; and
(iii) the production potential of South American camelids and their by-products.
The programme area concentrates 67 per cent of the population of camelids in the
country, representing 1,915,436 animals, with Oruro accounting for 57 per cent, La
Paz 33 per cent and Potosi 17 per cent.

5. The programme area is characterized by altitudes ranging from 3,600 to
4,600 metres, presenting low humidity, low rainfall and high solar radiation. The
climate is cold and dry, with extreme temperatures up to minus 15° C in winter
and annual average temperatures of 4-8° C. Frosts occur throughout the year, and
hail by the end of the rainy period, causing serious damage to the few crops and
native grasslands of the area.

6. Targeting and target groups. Implementation of the programme will be based
on geographical targeting in accordance with IFAD’s targeting policy. The
programme will be consistent with the definition adopted by IFAD for interventions
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which determines that the target population is
composed of small-scale producers, artisans, women and men microentrepreneurs,
rural populations living in extreme poverty and food insecurity, and marginalized
groups (indigenous peoples, women and youth). The target group includes: rural
populations (Quechua, Aymara) with moderate to extreme levels of poverty,
limited access to irrigation and water, lack of financial capital, difficulties in
accessing financial services, training and technology, limited employment
opportunities, poor or inadequate socio-economic organizational levels and
outmigration in areas with high environmental vulnerability. As part of the
targeting strategy, the programme will take into account the New State
Constitution, which explicitly recognizes the collective rights of indigenous peoples
and the right to consultation processes.

7. Target group. Using geographical targeting criteria, a typology of farm families,
and data from the 2012 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the
programme area comprises 106,571 rural families. Of this total, it is estimated that
63,942 families are engaged in breeding camelids.

8. Gender. The programme is consistent with the three strategic objectives of IFAD's
gender policy: (i) promote economic empowerment to give women and men an
equal opportunity to participate in profitable economic activities and benefit from
them; (ii) give women and men the opportunity to equally express themselves and
influence rural institutions and organizations; and (iii) achieve a more equitable
balance in workloads and the distribution of economic and social benefits for



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

3

women and men. It will ensure that these considerations are taken into account,
identifying inequalities and furthering affirmative action. The programme will
promote equitable leadership in productive organizations that contribute to the
economic empowerment of women’s associations and groups, taking into account
the workload these economic initiatives will entail. It will also systematize
experience by productive organizations in the implementation of measures for
gender equality and inclusion of youth, disseminating findings and
recommendations through events and publications.

B. Programme development objective
9. The main purpose of the programme is to improve living conditions of families and

productive economic organizations linked to the camelid production complex, while
ensuring sustainable management of natural resources. The programme will
contribute towards: (i) reducing rural poverty and child malnutrition; (ii) increasing
physical assets (productive infrastructure) and financial assets of programme
users; (iii) enhancing the integration of business initiatives of beneficiaries in
camelid value chains; (iv) increasing the incomes of participating families;
(v) furthering adoption of practices conducive to natural resource management;
and (vi) increasing the capacities of programme users (human and social assets)
based on the principle of social inclusion of women and youth.

C. Components/outcomes
10. Programme implementation includes three main components:

11. Component 1: Primary production and management of natural resources.
The objectives of this component are to strengthen access by poor families to
initiatives seeking to improve: primary production at the level of family production
units and communities, and sustainable management of natural resources.
Programme initiatives will improve the productive environment, increase resilience
to the effects of climate change, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
provide conditions for competitive entry into markets.

12. Implementation of this component will include two subcomponents:

(a) Improvement of primary production in nutrition, animal health and
management and support to small farm infrastructure. Implementation will
include the following activities: (a) programme information dissemination
workshops; (b) participatory territorial planning; (c) competitive financing of
household and community production unit initiatives; and (d) training in
gender equality, rural youth and experience-sharing.

(b) Sustainable use of natural resources. This subcomponent will be based on a
territorial management approach to implementation of natural resource
management, aimed at improving livelihoods ecosystems through the
following activities: (a) integrated community management of water
resources; (b) management and soil conservation; and (c) strengthening
local institutions for natural resource management and systematization of
experiences.

13. Component 2: Processing and marketing. The objective of this component is to
support families and their organizations in generating productive economic
infrastructure conditions to encourage private investment, improve transformation
processes for value creation and deepen competitive access to markets, while
increasing interaction among actors in the South American camelid production
complex. The component links the dynamics of improving production and
productivity of camelid breeders with transformation initiatives to generate added
value in the fibre, meat and hides value chains.

14. This component includes two subcomponents:



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

4

(a) Processing of fibre, meat and hides. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) training of programme teams in competitive allocation of
financial resources and financing of business plans; (b) strategic analysis of
the camelid production complex in its three value chains; and (c) financing of
business plans in processing and speciality export markets.

(b) Marketing of processed products. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) support to marketing processes and markets; and
(b) innovation and systematization in terms of gender equality and rural
youth.

15. Component 3: Access to financial services. The objective of this component is
to enhance knowledge, access to and inclusion of participating farmers,
organizations and business groups in the financial services and products offered by
financial entities. This component includes three subcomponents: (i) information
and financial education; (ii) mobilization of savings; and (iii) promotion of financial
services.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme will pursue a territorial development approach in the context of the

camelid production complex. lt will strengthen the capacities of families and local
organizations to improve camelid productivity, while enhancing the management of
natural resources and resilience in order to support livelihoods and food and
nutritional security, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Assistance
will be provided in developing the business skills of productive economic
organizations to help them gain access to markets through implementing business
plans and through strategic investments in the processing of intermediate products
of the camelid complex value chain. The programme will also promote and deepen
the provision of financial services, thus furthering financial inclusion. It will allocate
funds through competitive mechanisms for the implementation of various
production and business initiatives in accordance with existing public policies.

B. Organizational framework
17. Programme implementation will be the responsibility of a programme

implementation unit (PIU) within the MDRyT, and departmental technical units
(DTUs), located in the three departments in the programme area.

18. Implementation. The PIU will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of
the programme, with technical, administrative, financial and legal capacity. The
PIU will be staffed by a programme coordinator and by the professional, technical
and administrative staff required for the correct implementation of the programme.
Staff will be located in a central office in La Paz and in the three DTUs located in
the programme area.

19. Programme guidance. Overall guidance will be provided by a programme
steering committee (PSC). At the departmental level, the programme will establish
territorial rating committees, community juries and local productive initiatives
approval committees (LPIACs).

20. Programme steering committee. The PSC will be responsible for providing
strategic policy for interventions. It will be composed of five members,
representing the MDRyT – which will head the committee; ministries involved in
programme implementation; and programme users.

21. Territorial rating committees. These committees will assess proposed primary
production and food security and nutrition initiatives. They will be established at
the departmental level and composed of five members selected according to
custom. One of the members will be a subject-matter specialist or local expert.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

5

22. Community juries. Participating communities will select an expert in natural
resource management according to local customs, who will qualify the physical
results in each community, together with a local municipal facilitator.

23. Local productive initiatives approval committees. Three LPIACs will be
established in the programme area and entrusted with selection and approval of
business plans submitted by potential users or beneficiary groups. The composition
of the committees and the requirements for the submission and approval of
business plans will be detailed in the programme implementation manual.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. Operational planning will be based on annual workplans and budgets
(AWP/Bs) prepared through a participatory process. The PIU will submit quarterly
progress reports and an annual report to IFAD.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. M&E will be the responsibility of the PIU. Activities
will include preparation of a baseline survey, a midterm review (MTR) and a
programme completion report. The baseline survey will be prepared in parallel with
the collection and systematization of information under the Results and Impact
Management System (RIMS), which will be replicated at midterm and at
programme completion.

26. Learning and knowledge management. Programme implementation will involve
introduction of an effective knowledge management system involving all
stakeholders. The programme will develop activities to enable a process of
reflection to better understand what processes and programme outcomes are being
reached. Knowledge acquired will contribute towards lessons learned and towards
adjusting the implementation strategy of the programme if needed. The
programme will support systematization, exchanges of experiences, life stories and
the use of audiovisual techniques in evaluation. These will be disseminated through
information and communications technologies and will contribute greatly towards
knowledge-sharing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Financial management. The MDRyT, through the PIU, will be responsible for

overall financial management of the programme, including AWP/Bs, procurement,
flow of funds, disbursement, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and
audit. The programme will use the national Integrated System of Management and
Administrative Modernization software, in addition to programme-specific software
for budget and accounting to ensure compliance with IFAD requirements.

28. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Public Finance will open, in the
Central Bank of Bolivia, a designated account in United States dollars, within the
treasury single account system. The designated account will be operated by the
MDRyT and will be used exclusively for the proceeds of the loan.

29. Procurement. Procurement will follow national procurement procedures and
regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines.

30. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding,
IFAD, the Government, departmental and municipal governments and communities
of users. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the
end of each fiscal year.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

6

E. Supervision
31. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD, which will oversee compliance

with the programme financing agreement, including procurement and contractual
agreements, in collaboration with the PIU. Supervision missions will be scheduled
after consultation with the national authorities and the PIU.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs have been estimated at the equivalent of US$38.8 million.

The cost structure includes the three main components and programme
management: (i) primary production and management of natural resources,
US$18.3 million (47.2 per cent); (ii) processing and marketing, US$13.7 million
(35.9 per cent); (iii) access to financial services, US$1.4 million (35.4 per cent)
and; (iv) programme management, US$5.4 million (13.8 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Primary production

and management of
natural resources 5 361 29.3 4 221 23.1 2 351 12.9 1 154 6.3 5 204 28.5 18 291 47.2

2. Processing and
marketing 7 005 51.0 1 901 13.9 1 461 10.6 2 747 20.0 610 4.4 13 725 35.4

3. Access to financial
services 808 58.5 55 4.0 518 37.5 - - - - 1 381 3.6

4. Programme
management 4 717 87.9 648 12.1 - - - - - - 5 365 13.8

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 329 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

7

B. Programme financing
33. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of approximately US$17.9 million

(46.2 per cent); the Government contribution of US$16.5 million (49.7 per cent),
made up of the national government counterpart contribution of about
US$6.8 million (17.6 per cent), departmental governments US$3.9 million
(10.1 per cent), municipal governments US$5.8 million (15 per cent); and
contributions in cash from beneficiaries of about US$4.3 million (11.2 per cent).
Table 2
Indicative Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Grants and

subsidies 9 151 38.5 3 442 14.5 4 329 18.2 1 471 6.2 5 352 22.5 23 744 61.3
2. Training 2 299 48.6 2 407 50.9 - - - - 20 0.4 4 726 12.2
3. Works 150 4.9 29 0.9 - - 2 431 79.7 442 14.5 3 052 7.9
4. Consultancies 1 920 84.0 376 16.0 - - - - - - 2 287 5.9
5. Vehicles and

equipment 524 83.2 106 16.8 - - - - - - 630 1.6
6. Operating costs 3 848 89.0 475 11.0 - - - - - - 4 324 11.2

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 392 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Benefits and beneficiaries. Programme benefits will accrue as a result of

increased herd productivity, value addition in fibre, meat and leather, strengthened
partnerships with other actors in the value chain, better participatory territorial
management of the sustainable use of natural resources (water, soil and
grassland), and cofinancing of business plans, capacity-building of users and
greater participation by women and youth. It will benefit a total of 30,000 families;
equivalent to 47 per cent of the target population, encompassing a total of
1,996 rural communities.

35. Economic analysis. The programme’s financial feasibility was evaluated for
10 years, taking into account the opportunity cost relative to the bank rate
(11.5 per cent). For farm models, the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated
at 22-37 per cent. Net present value (NPV) was positive in all cases, ranging from
US$107 to US$543, with incomes above the poverty line. Microenterprise models
showed an IRR from 18 to 56 per cent, and NPV ranged from US$5,882 to
US$45,312 with increased employment levels – implying a reduction of wage
labour outside the farm and greater commitment to business development. The
economic evaluation was projected for 20 years in terms of contributing to
improving the national economy. The evaluation considered adjustments in cash
transfers to programme users (competitions for primary production, management
of natural resources, productive infrastructure for proposed business plans and
savings). Price contingencies were adjusted, considering that imported inflation is a
distortion of actual prices. Adjustments were also made regarding economic input
prices (farm labour) and shadow prices (for tradable goods) whose ratio is
equivalent to US$1.24. Indicators show that the programme is economically
feasible and a good investment for the Government. The IRR is 27 per cent, NPV
US$23.5 million and the cost-benefit ratio 2.3:1, considering a discount rate of
12.67 per cent.

36. Sensitivity analysis shows that in terms of economic feasibility the programme is
more sensitive to the reduction of benefits than to increased costs. With reduced
benefits, the programme withstands up to 37 per cent, and with increases in costs,
up to 84 per cent. Considering delays, the programme withstands two-year delays,
maintaining positive benefits.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

8

D. Sustainability
37. Sustainability of programme interventions is based on: (i) strengthened capacity of

families, communities and municipalities to undertake sustainable territorial
planning to manage their productive base – assuming the adoption of improved
management of natural resources; (ii) organizational strengthening of communities
and productive economic organizations, which will enable greater empowerment
and capacity for coordination in intervention areas and will generate public/private
partnerships; (iii) improved access by producers – as a result of technical and
business management training – and strategic investments in productive
infrastructure (jointly with municipal and provincial governments) will enable them
to fully participate in value chains, gaining access to local, regional, national and
international markets; and (iv) adoption of gender and generational approaches
will allow for greater participation by vulnerable groups such as women and youth.
All of the above will be reinforced through financial education supported by savings
mobilization, which will allow producers and productive economic organizations to
graduate from dependence on government funding and grants, allowing them to
grow independently. The MTR and M&E of the programme will facilitate design of
an exit strategy – considering progress made and prospects for sustainability of the
results in different dimensions (institutional/organizational, financial, technical and
environmental).

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The following risks have been identified: (i) possible duplication with upcoming

financing by the World Bank; (ii) delays in launching programme operations;
(iii) limitations on the processes of establishing or formalizing small- and medium-
sized enterprises; (iv) funding for new business ventures will require transfers to
producer organizations with low implementation capacity, including for fiduciary
duties, which may affect implementation of economic initiatives;
(v) implementation of infrastructure initiatives in conjunction with departmental
and municipal governments will require financial contributions that may not be
available; (vi) market acceptance, increased demand for diverse products in the
value chain, and reduced barriers resulting from measures designed to ensure food
safety, especially meat products; (vii) climate change events such as droughts,
frosts and hailstorms affecting agricultural primary production; (viii) increased
deforestation of native species in favour of the introduction of quinoa, based on
market demand; and (ix) difficulty in making progress in financial inclusion, owing
to geographical and cultural distance between financial institutions and potential
customers.

39. Mitigation measures will include: (i) coordination during the design of new projects
and leadership of national authorities in generating synergies in the
implementation stages and agreements between funders to avoid duplication of
efforts; (ii) IFAD and national authorities will facilitate the processes needed for
effectiveness, including prompt approvals and no objections; (iii) the programme
will facilitate establishment of new ventures through support to strengthening
corporate governance and compliance requirements; (iv) it will provide training to
programme users in managing trust mechanisms of the financial resources
transferred; (v) the programme will ensure that funding by departmental and
municipal governments is assured before the start of activities, and that
agreements have been signed to ensure compliance with the agreements made;
(vi) it will support producers’ groups in fulfilling food-safety certification
requirements when it begins sponsoring implementation of this type of initiative.
The programme will also follow up on ongoing measures designed to streamline the
obtaining of health certificates from the National Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Service (SENASAG) for infrastructure and meat products; (vii) it will provide
funding for initiatives by target groups to improve their environment and reduce
their vulnerability; (viii) the programme will implement awareness workshops on



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

9

environmental issues, keeping in mind the balance that must exist in the
man/nature relationship, and strengthening knowledge management activities
through learning routes and other mechanisms; and (ix) a strategy to reduce
geographical and cultural distances in accessing financial services will be adapted
to include financial education and temporary monetary savings incentives, which
have proved to be useful tools in stimulating demand for deposit-taking services.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The programme is aligned with IFAD policies regarding: (i) targeting, by supporting

activities that benefit the rural population living in poverty; (ii) gender equality, by
furthering empowerment and promoting greater participation by women;
(iii) indigenous peoples, by adopting an intervention strategy based on sustainable
land management, strengthening the traditional local organization of production
units through a participatory approach and recognition of the value of ancestral
knowledge; (iv) management of natural resources, through more productive and
resilient ecosystems and activities including soil conservation, integrated water
resource management, and institutional strengthening of local communities and
municipal governments; (v) rural finance, by supporting access to financial services
and deepening access to credit for productive enterprises; and (vi) private-sector
development, through strengthening the capacity of camelid breeders to establish
partnerships with diverse actors in the fibre, meat and leather value chains
generated.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The programme is aligned with the Agricultural Sector Development Plan

2014-2018, which includes technological development, agricultural innovation, use
and management of soil, water and vegetation cover for agricultural production,
health and food safety, sovereignty and territorial management by indigenous and
peasant farmers. The programme will generate synergies and strategic alliances
with public and private entities that operate in some municipalities in the
programme area, thus contributing to harmonization of activities in rural territories
(e.g. the World Bank’s Rural Alliances and Community Investment in Rural Areas
Projects).

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The programme will innovate by introducing participatory planning, and supporting

economic initiatives on a more continuous basis, including provision of diversified
technical assistance. It will scale up development approaches promoted by the
VALE, PROMARENA and PROSAT projects funded by IFAD in the country.1 The
scaling up process is possible in the context of a favourable regulatory framework
that supports innovation with a territorial perspective aimed at management of the
primary production base, an efficient management of natural resources, financial
inclusion and inclusion of women and youth.

D. Policy engagement
43. Policy dialogue will cover: governance of municipal territories and communities for

sustainable territorial management; strengthening of local institutions in natural
resource management; and capacity-building of communities and municipalities in
land-use planning and in natural resource and risk management, including
strengthening municipal productivity and risk management units. The programme
will further engage in analysing the policy approach of the MDRyT in the context of
its National Camelid Programme.

1 Enhancement of the Peasant Camelid Economy Support Project, Management of Natural Resources in the Chaco
and High Valleys Regions Project and Technical Assistance Services Project for Small Holders.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

10

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in the amount of twelve million eight hundred
seventy thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,870,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural
Actors in the Popular and Solidary Economy
(FAREPS)

Republic of Ecuador
Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

iv

Republic of Ecuador

Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: National Institute for Popular and Solidary Economy
(IEPS)

Total cost of the project: US$35.97 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 14.25 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million)

Amount of IFAD’s Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 2.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.00 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of the borrower/recipient: US$12.00 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.07 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in
the Popular and Solidary Economy (FAREPS), as contained in paragraph 41.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Ecuador, with GDP in 2013 of US$94,470 million, is currently classified as a middle-

income country. The economy is largely dependent on oil and export agriculture.
Following years of political and economic instability, a stable government was
democratically elected in 2009 and has since implemented a programme of far-
reaching change in the political, economic and social spheres. In 2013, GDP grew
4.6 per cent. In view of the current decline in the price of oil and mining products,
the projected rate of growth for 2015 is somewhat lower at 3.8 per cent, though
still above the regional average.

2. In recent years Ecuador has made significant strides in combating poverty.
Between 2009 and 2012, poverty fell from 36.0 per cent to 25.5 per cent, one of
the most notable achievements in the region. The Gini coefficient improved from
0.55 to 0.484 over the same period. Despite the recent progress on social
indicators, the poverty gap persists, particularly in rural areas where poverty runs
at 42 per cent, close to double the urban rate. The campesino population generally,
and particularly Afro-Ecuadorans, indigenous people and women, occupy the
poorest quintiles. In addition, 1.6 million Ecuadorans live in extreme poverty, 70
per cent of them in rural areas.

3. In view of the foregoing, eradicating extreme poverty and reducing the incidence of
poverty is one of the major objectives of the Government of Ecuador. A key
strategy for promoting social and economic inclusion has been to strengthen the so-
called popular and solidary economy (PSE), which seeks to promote economic
development on an associative and solidary basis.

4. The concept of PSE arises from the need to recognize the value of the informal or
popular economy, and the economy formed by association-based or solidary
economic organizations, and their contribution to GDP. Indeed, the popular and
solidary economy is the largest employer in the Ecuadoran labour force. Sales by
microenterprises represent an estimated 25.7 per cent of GDP, 10 per cent of total
net income and 90 per cent of the country’s production units, and generate
approximately 60 per cent of total employment.

5. Formalizing the informal economy within Ecuador’s new regulatory and
administrative frameworks is one way of promoting more equitable and democratic
economic relations, as well as greater inclusion of people living in conditions of
poverty and vulnerability. The prevailing legal framework requires economic
organizations to adopt best practices in management, such as regularizing
employees, democratizing decision-making processes and distributing any
dividends in an equitable manner. These best practices make the PSE attractive to
people living in poverty, who may decide either to join an existing organization or
set up a new one.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and with
the RB-COSOP

6. In 2014, Ecuador approved the National Strategy for Equality and Poverty
Eradication (ENIEP), which calls for mainstreaming poverty reduction into the
overall initiative for change in the production matrix. In the case of the rural sector,
the strategy promotes a shift from providing support for campesino production to
adopting a more complex value chain-based approach. In this way the project is
fully aligned with the Government of Ecuador’s priorities and strategies for
economic and social inclusion, thus contributing to rural poverty eradication.

7. In addition, the project is completely consistent with the strategic objectives set
forth in IFAD’s new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for Ecuador, as follows: (a) improve access to assets and resources to
support diversification of the Ecuadorian rural economy, promoting, among other
measures, associative enterprises and investments that generate employment and
income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (b) Increase the capacities of poor
rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to engage in, and benefit from, pro-
poor and inclusive productive policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will take place in the south-eastern part of Ecuador, in the Costa, Sierra

Sur and Amazonia regions. In the Costa r1egion, the project will cover the
provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos; in Sierra Sur the province of Azuay; and in
Amazonia the provinces of Morona Santiago and Zamora Chinchipe, which borders
on Peru. The population of Morona Santiago is largely indigenous (48.4 per cent),
while in the provinces located in Costa, more than half the population identify as
Montubio, a regional ethnic group.

9. The project will focus on areas with high levels of unmet basic needs (UBN) and a
high incidence of vulnerability. In a context of UBN-based poverty calculated on the
order of 60.1 per cent countrywide in 2010, the cantons where the project will be
implemented post indexes that are higher than both the national and the provincial
averages. The highest levels are found in Amazonia, where UBN-based poverty is
95.9 per cent. The population in these cantons is young, with an average age of
under 29.

10. The project will work with organizations and association-based enterprises that are
already registered with the Superintendency of Popular and Solidary Economy
(SPSE), or with other public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion (MIES). New associations may also be legalized. The project beneficiaries
will be smallholder farmer and rural worker families living in poverty as measured
by UBN and/or vulnerability but no longer receiving the human development bond,
who have both the interest and potential to undertake and manage business plans
on the terms outlined in the PSE framework. Two specific target groups have also
been identified: women and their families, and young people. At least 30 per cent
of the beneficiary families are to be headed by women (about 6,000 families), and
10 per cent by young people (about 2,000 families).

11. Within this framework, those wishing to become project beneficiaries will need to
belong to or join a legalized PSE organization, or set up a new organization and
legalize it – IEPS will assist the latter in the legalization process within the EPS
system. The project is expected to cover at least 200 organizations in this way.

B. Project development objective
12. The development objective of the project is to increase incomes and employment

among PSE rural families living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability within the



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

project area. Upon completion of the project, approximately 20,000 rural families
living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability – in social, economic and climate
change terms – are expected to have received benefits, with at least 80 per cent of
them having seen a sustainable increase in income derived from agricultural and
non-agricultural activities promoted by the project.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project is structured in three interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building (initial and preinvestment phase). The aim is to lower the
barriers limiting the development of organizations and association-based
enterprises and to strengthen PSE actors to develop and manage them
sustainably. The component is intended to: (i) build the capacities of the
target groups in fundamental PSE areas; and (ii) promote dialogue among
PSE actors and between these and local and national institutions. This
component will also contribute to improving public policies promoting the PSE,
to facilitate access by PSE actors to resources, services, and public and
private markets.

(b) Enterprise development and commercial exchange (investment phase).
To support the target groups in developing profitable and sustainable
initiatives, the component calls for two types of direct investment:
(i) investment in solidary business plans; support will be provided for
organizations included in implementation of the first component with
comprehensive strengthening plans (CSPs) prepared on a participatory basis
and being applied by their members. On this basis the project may make
investments in the form of nonreimbursable transfers to cofinance specific
aspects or all of a solidary business plan (SBP), in accordance with the criteria
stipulated in the project operating manual. The SBP will cover goods or
services for which the territorial area offers strengths and internal or external
markets; and (ii) funds for conditional incentives; PSE organizations will be
offered incentives to achieve two kinds of specific objectives: economic
integration and decent employment. In the first case, incentives will ensure
that a larger number of farmers are able to place their products on the market
and have access to transportation, collection or technical assistance services;
and that small association-based enterprises are able to join an existing entity
or create a new one. In the second case, incentives will be linked to an
increase in decent jobs for people living in conditions of poverty or
vulnerability: young people, handicapped people, the indigent, women,
indigenous people, Afro-Ecuadorans and Montubios. These incentives are
reserved for organizations that are already consolidated and have access to
stable markets, with installed capacity that is sufficient and timely.

(c) Knowledge management, management and administration (investment
phase). Covers essentially promotion of a participatory planning, monitoring
and evaluation system for the target population, as well as knowledge
management and project administration. This component also includes
strengthening other PSE actors, including IEPS and local service providers, in
key areas for PSE development, including participatory monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) and management of the knowledge generated.

14. The project also includes activities to be implemented with ASAP funding to
complement the overall project strategy. Organizations will be trained to be better
adapted to climate change, and specific activities will be identified, proposed and
financed to improve the resilience of the beneficiaries and investments funded. A
specialized service provider will provide training. As part of the CSP preparation
process, information will be included on climate risks and proposed mitigation
measures, as well as specific adaptation measures to be included in SBPs. The



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

ASAP funding will cover implementation of such specific adaptation measures in the
context of the SBP.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The project strategy is intended to create and consolidate the capacities of

association-based enterprises that are to form the economic fabric of the PSE at the
territorial level. To this end, three main avenues of action will be established,
following the operating structure of IEPS: (i) strengthening of actors; (ii) productive
development and market exchange; and (iii) M&E, including participatory
monitoring and knowledge management. The project will develop and apply
differentiated local strategies in a concerted and participatory manner with local
actors, involving a process of ongoing dialogue with the main PSE actors, local
offices of government institutions, decentralized autonomous governments and, in
the case of indigenous peoples, traditional authorities.

B. Organizational framework
16. IEPS will be responsible for implementing the project. IEPS headquarters is located

in Quito and it is present in the project area in the Zone 5 Directorate, covering the
provinces of Los Rios and Guayas, the Zone 6 Directorate covering the provinces of
Azuay and Morona Santiago, and the Zone 7 Directorate, covering the province of
Zamora Chinchipe.

17. The project will have a general contractor hired by IEPS in accordance with
prevailing legislation in the country by means of a selection process acceptable to
IFAD. The general coordinator will report to the IEPS Director General and will be
responsible for project administration and day-to-day operations, in accordance
with the zone directorates of the provinces where activities are located. Financial
administration will be done in coordination with the financial administration
department of IEPS. The general coordinator will be supported by the professional,
technical and administrative staff needed for proper implementation.

18. The project’s financial administration will be the responsibility of a team to be hired
by IEPS, reporting to the financial administration department of IEPS. Project
management at the provincial level will be done by technical teams reporting to the
zone directorates for the provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos, Azuay and Morona
Santiago, and Zamora Chinchipe, in close coordination with the general coordinator.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will apply a planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
system in accordance with national and IEPS directives and IFAD guidelines. This
system will be an integral part of project management and a management tool
generating updated relevant information on project results, with an emphasis on
results measurement – outputs, outcomes and impact – and will facilitate the
development of learning platforms, exchanges of experiences, best practices and
dissemination of results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. The IEPS financial administration department will be responsible for overall financial

management of the project, including the annual operating plan, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and auditing. The
project will used the national financial management information system (e-SIGEF),
together with an additional specific system meeting IFAD requirements.

21. Flow of funds. The borrower will open an account at the Central Bank of Ecuador
designated exclusively for the loan proceeds, and another account designated
exclusively for the ASAP grant. Both will be denominated in United States dollars.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

22. Audit. The consolidated annual financial statements will be audited each year by an
independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those
relating to national counterpart funding. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months before the end of each fiscal year.

23. Procurement and contracting. Procurement and contracting will take place in
accordance with the National Public Contracting System Organic Law and
Regulations, to the extent they are compatible with IFAD’s guidelines on the
procurement of goods, works and services.

E. Supervision
24. IFAD will supervise the project directly. Support will be provided from the outset of

design to prepare adequately for start-up. IFAD and the borrower/recipient will
jointly conduct a midterm review at the end of year three.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost will be approximately US$35.97 million, including

contingencies. The first component will cost US$4.27 million (equivalent to 11.9 per
cent), whereas the second component calls for an allocation of US$26.43 million,
representing 73.5 per cent of total investment. The third component will involve
spending of US$5.27 million (14.7 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-
building 2 913 68.3 840 19.7 - - 512 12.0 4 265 11.9
2. Enterprise
development and
commercial
exchange 12 213 46.2 3 160 12.0 4 073 15.4 6 988 26.4 26 434 73.,5
3. Knowledge,
management and
administration 774 14.7 - - - - 4 500 85.3 5 274 14.7

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973 100.0

B. Project financing
26. The combined project financing totals approximately US$35.97 million. The

borrower/recipient will contribute US$12 million (33.4 per cent), the IFAD loan will
provide US$15.90 million (44.2 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$4 million
(11.1 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute US$4.07 million
(11.3 per cent) in cash or in kind.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/recipient

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Training 2 913 83.0 312 8.9 - - 283 8.1 3 508
B. Consulting 2 445 72.4 528 15.6 - - 405 12.0 3 379
C. Grants 10 256 42.1 3 159 13.0 4 073 16.7 6 878 28.2 24 367
D. Goods,
services and
inputs - - - - - - 127 100.0 127
E. Vehicles 285 88.0 - - - - 39 12.0 324
F. Salaries - - - - 4 267 100.0 4 267

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973

C. Summary of benefit and economic analysis
27. The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 20,000 rural families. Most

of the beneficiary households are expected to engage in agricultural production with
value added, and the remaining households to other kinds of production or
provision of other services. Most of the subprojects will be cofinanced with
contributions in cash or in kind by beneficiaries.

28. The activities financed will generate income of between US$400 and US$1,000 per
annum by family, depending on the type of activity, level of specialization and
allocation of productive assets.

D. Sustainability
29. The design of simple but efficient and effective SBPs that show motivating results in

the short term will ensure the economic sustainability of initiatives. The
sustainability of the cultural changes to be introduced with the project, in terms of
valuing and assimilating association-based and business-oriented concepts and
practices, will essentially depend on the actual benefits accrued by PSE families.
Accordingly, awareness-raising and capacity-building are essential; at the same
time, opening up spaces for participation and leadership by young people will be
key to the sustainability of initiatives. Finally, environmental risk analysis from the
design of initiatives will reinforce the environmental sustainability of association-
based projects, introducing specific technologies and practices to attenuate the
effects of climate change.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. The risks associated with project implementation relate mainly to management

issues. Among possible mitigation measures are: (i) development of a
communication plan to facilitate effective coordination and linkages among the
various actors involved in project implementation; (ii) conduct of a market analysis
and participatory design of business plans to assess the market feasibility of each
enterprise prior to making the investments; (iii) ongoing monitoring of service
providers based on process indicators, to mitigate the risk of low local supply of
sufficiently qualified service providers; (iv) finally, to mitigate the effects of climate
change, adaptation and risk management technologies will be introduced and
support will be provided for, inter alia, crop diversification.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
31. The project proposal falls under the overarching objective of IFAD’s Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives relating
to improving access to services contributing to poverty reduction, as well as



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

developing economic and natural assets to improve the resilience of disadvantaged
rural people. In addition, the project approach and implementation strategies are
aligned with the rural poor targeting policy, the gender equality and women’s
empowerment policy, the policy on IFAD’s engagement with indigenous peoples,
including the requirement of free, prior and informed consent, the policy on natural
resources and environmental management, the climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, and the policies on rural finance,
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
32. The project falls squarely within the priorities of the Government of Ecuador as

stated in the National Plan on Living Well 2013-2017 (national development plan),
and contributes to the strategy of economic and social inclusion under the approach
of changing the MIES and IEPS production matrix to eradicate rural poverty by
developing the popular and solidary economy. It is also consistent with the second
component of the ENIEP, whose pillars are agrarian revolution for food sovereignty,
promoting dignified work and strengthening the popular and solidary economy. The
project will also directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-COSOP 2014-
2018.

C. Innovation and scaling up
33. The project will allow for replicating the PSE approach, which has had very good

results under the Central Corridor Ecuador Project (PDCC) implemented by IEPS
with IFAD funding and closed in 2014. Given the positive impact of PDCC, IEPS
requested IFAD support to prepare this new operation to continue supporting PSE
actors by scaling up to a new intervention area and including new approaches and
tools based on lessons learned.

34. Moreover, this proposal includes innovative measures to promote the economic
inclusion of vulnerable people. Among these will be scaling up association-based
enterprises with conditional incentives, to be used to cofinance the operating capital
of consolidated solidary enterprises. In this way the project will enable particularly
promising solidary enterprises to grow in size.

35. Finally, knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and
capitalize on knowledge accumulated during project implementation, in order to
disseminate best practices and practical knowledge available in the project areas.

D. Policy engagement
36. The compilation of experiences and lessons learned, and exchanges on them among

the actors responsible for the PSE and their partners, will contribute to improving
IEPS workings, and will also serve as practical information on the use and
functionality of PSE public policies, and contribute to reform as needed. In addition,
the project will provide training to build the capacities of these actors and the
leaders of beneficiary organizations in applying PSE instruments.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. The negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

38. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to fourteen million, two hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 14,250,000, (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to two million eight hundred fifty
special drawing rights (SDR 2,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
United Mexican States for the
Rural Productive Inclusion Project


United Mexican States

Rural Productive Inclusion Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: United Mexican States

Executing agency: Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL)

Total project cost: US$19.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.87 million
(equivalent to approximately US$6.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: Maturity period of 15 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the United Mexican States for the Rural Productive Inclusion Project, as
contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed loan and grant to the United Mexican States for
the Rural Productive Inclusion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mexico is a country with a surface area of 1.96 million km2. The National Council on

Population estimated a total population of 121 million people in 2015 (112.3 million
according to the 2010 census), posting average demographic growth of 1.4 per
cent per annum. Rural people account for 23.1 per cent of the total population.

2. The Mexican economy is the second largest in Latin America and fourteenth in the
world. Mexico is a middle-to-high-income country at US$9,740 per capita. Although
total GDP grew at an annual average rate of 2.5 per cent from 1994 to 2013, this
was insufficient to improve living conditions for the population. Two key constraints
on economic performance are stagnant productivity and unequal income
distribution. Productivity over the past 30 years has declined at a rate of 0.7 per
cent per annum, while the Gini coefficient was 0.509 in 2010.

3. Within the agriculture sector, a highly heterogeneous productive structure prevails.
Family farms – subsistence farming with no market linkages and located mainly in
the central and southern regions of the country – represent 51 per cent of all rural
production units. Labour productivity in Mexican agriculture is notoriously low, at
just 26 per cent of the national average. Another critical problem in sector
performance is lack of access by rural smallholders to financing.

4. In recent decades the Government of Mexico has deployed significant efforts to
combat poverty, involving a broad range of public programmes with steadily
increasing budgetary allocations. The 2015 federal budget includes a package of
financing equivalent to US$22 billion for the Special Concurrent Programme for
Sustainable Rural Development.

5. Despite the scale of this institutional and financial effort, broad portions of the
population continue to live in poverty. In 2012 the National Council on Policy
Evaluation produced data indicating that 53.3 million people were living in
situations of poverty, 31 per cent of them in rural areas. Accordingly, the
administration that took office on 1 December 2012 designed a new social policy
that explicitly seeks to create synergy between income support (mainly conditional
cash transfers) and productive development programmes. Combining these
instruments was assigned as a mandate to Prospera, the social inclusion
programme created at the end of 2014, based on earlier experiences of the
Oportunidades and Progresa programmes. This new social policy seeks to give
families benefiting from income support the opportunity to develop their own
productive initiatives in order to autonomously and sustainably generate income
that enables them to improve their living conditions.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. In this context, the Government is looking for ways to implement the new social
policy and is thus simultaneously testing different approaches to productive
inclusion. The present Rural Productive Inclusion Project (RPIP) should be seen as a
pilot in that regard, as should the Productive Territories Pilot Programme (PPTP).
IFAD provided support to the PPTP for design and initial implementation, in the
form of a grant to the Government for technical cooperation from the Latin
American Centre for Rural Development. The PPTP is now in operation and will
provide valuable lessons for implementation of the proposed project.

7. The RPIP is aligned with the National Development Plan 2013-2018, and especially
the Special Program to Democratize Productivity and the Social Development Sector
Program, which shape the context in which a new generation of social policy has
been designed. High priority is now given to the strategy of productive inclusion,
whereby the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and Prospera have
undertaken a number of actions such as design of the RPIP.

8. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s country strategy, which sets forth two main
objectives: (i) help smallholders and campesinos significantly increase their
productivity by strengthening their assets, capacities, organization and access to
public services and to goods and service markets; and (ii) contribute to making
public spending for the economic development of smallholders and campesinos
more efficient and equitable.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. This project will be implemented in 26 municipalities in three federal states:

Guerrero, Hidalgo and Zacatecas. The municipalities have been selected on the
basis of: eligibility for the National Crusade against Hunger; incidence of poverty;
presence of indigenous peoples; a significant number of families served by
Prospera, especially those with land; and the location of strategic population
centres with market potential for carrying out the productive projects of Prospera
families.

10. The target population will comprise Prospera heads of household and their families
that: (i) live in rural areas in the selected states and municipalities; (ii) live in
situations of poverty; (iii) have the potential to engage in income-generating
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities; and (iv) show interest in
participating in the project. Priority will be given to indigenous populations.

11. The project is expected to reach 12,800 Prospera beneficiary families, of whom
65 per cent are expected to submit applications to access productive projects, with
promotion provided by the project (8,400 families), and 65 per cent of these will
successfully access investments under ongoing productive development
programmes (5,400 families).

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and the reduction of rural
poverty.

13. The development objective is that beneficiary families increase their income by
implementing profitable and sustainable productive activities.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will seek to achieve its development objective through two

components: productive inclusion and institutional strengthening. In addition,
financial inclusion will be incorporated as a cross-cutting axis.

15. Component 1: Productive inclusion. This component will support Prospera
beneficiaries and their families participating in the project in accessing programmes
for productive development. It will help them use the investments efficiently to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of their products, access markets,
and thus raise their incomes. To this end, the project will strengthen the
organizational, technical and productive skills of the beneficiaries and improve their
capacities to access other government programmes.

16. In coordinating project activities in the communities, project promoters of
productive and financial inclusion (PIPFs) will play a key role, being responsible for
assisting beneficiaries in identifying potential productive activities and facilitating
access to technical assistance in designing projects for financing by the
programmes. PIPFs will also facilitate access to technical assistance for
implementation of beneficiary productive projects, and build capacities in
beneficiary organizations for obtaining additional aspects needed by some groups,
such as additional financing, legal constitution of small enterprises, etc. On the
other hand, technical assistance for the design and implementation of productive
projects will be provided by external technical assistants.

17. Component 2: Institutional strengthening. This component is designed to
strengthen the ability of Prospera to successfully take on a new role as the key
actor implementing the national strategy for productive inclusion. Its current solid
capacities are focused mainly on implementing social programmes and, above all,
on efficiently providing conditional cash transfers to more than six million
beneficiary families. Capacity-building will thus be provided both to implement the
project in the three states selected and to implement the productive inclusion
strategy nationwide.

18. The component will contribute to the development of new institutional skills through
capacity-building and training of Prospera staff in the project area and at
headquarters. In addition, research and analysis will be conducted and proposals
for innovation developed throughout implementation of the national strategy for
productive inclusion, i.e. in planning and design, operation, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). Finally, organizational learning and discussion of public policies
will be promoted through targeted knowledge management activities.

19. Cross-cutting axis: Financial inclusion. As an integral part of the process of
developing capacity for effective productive inclusion and of facilitating technical
assistance provided to Prospera families, financial inclusion constitutes a cross-
cutting axis with three concrete activities: (i) financial literacy will be promoted
through provision of financial education among beneficiaries. This training will be
provided mainly by existing institutional programmes, and will be complemented by
PIPFs; (ii) the project management unit, with PIPF support, will strive to link
productive projects with the existing supply of rural financial services, including
existing guarantee funds, and will coordinate actions with government programmes
operating in the project area, thereby leveraging additional financing, mainly
working capital, for beneficiary productive activities; and (iii) each year, as part of
the annual project seminar, a forum promoted by Prospera will take place to raise
awareness among other actors in the financial sector. This will facilitate the
effective provision of finance to productive activities of family units within the most
vulnerable segments of the population, thus supporting them in their development
and income generation.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The project is being formulated in the framework of the new social policies, which
focus on promoting productive activities among beneficiaries. Thus the project
facilitates identification and creation of productive opportunities for people living in
poverty. It does this through access to resources from programmes for productive
development that enable beneficiaries to develop sustainable income-generating
activities, with the objective of structurally breaking the cycle of poverty.

21. Prospera’s mandate seeks to create synergy between the social and productive
policies, including the numerous programmes for productive development. In that
context, it should be stressed that the project will mainly facilitate access to
investments and services – such as productive investments, technical assistance for
implementation, and rural financial services – that are currently being offered by
the other government agencies or private actors.

22. The project will promote links with productive development programmes, based on
lessons learned from other pilot programmes, such as the PPTP. In that regard, it
will benefit from the institutional linkages and attention generated by the PPTP with
several federal productive programmes. It will also take advantage of valuable
lessons learned on the strengthening of producer groups and targeting
mechanisms, among other aspects.

B. Organizational framework
23. Strategic project direction will be provided by the Prospera Technical Subcommittee

on Employment, Income and Savings (STEIA), currently chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), with representatives of Prospera’s national
coordination and heads of various productive development programmes. The
executing agency is SEDESOL, through Prospera’s national coordination. To this
end, a technical team will be appointed within the existing Prospera structure,
specifically within the Office of Coordination and Linkages (DGCV), to direct project
implementation in coordination with the various Prospera operating divisions
involved, as well as with state-level branches. This team and its location within
DGCV, with functions to be specified in the project implementation manual, is
strategically important in ensuring project management in accordance with the
objectives and timelines set, as well as close coordination with other productive
inclusion actions operating within Prospera. The Office of General Administration
and Finance (DGAF) will be responsible for the project’s administrative and financial
management within Prospera.

24. The project calls for two types of key actors for technical assistance and capacity-
building: (i) national-level institutions to provide training of national coordination
project staff and technicians supporting Prospera families benefiting from the
project; and (ii) technical assistance and training service providers supporting the
design, processing, start-up and consolidation of productive projects of Prospera
family organizations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. The project will set up a system for planning and M&E that is compatible with
Prospera’s M&E framework. Prospera is known for its strong capacity in this area,
which so far, however, has focused mainly on evaluation of conditional cash
transfers and their impact on the beneficiary group. This project will complement
the current system with a strong focus on M&E of productive inclusion and
institutionalization of these new capacities in Prospera.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

5

26. Prospera has not yet defined a single operating modality for implementation of the
productive inclusion strategy, but is rather testing different methods, such as the
previously mentioned PPTP, to then evaluate which modality is the most efficient
and effective. The present project should also be seen as a pilot providing a
learning opportunity for the institution. The lessons learned from project evaluation
and systematization will be invaluable to the Government in refining the productive
inclusion strategy. Accordingly, knowledge management is a central activity for the
project and, indeed, one of its reasons for being.

27. Ensuring the kind of learning that enables continuing improvement – based on
results and experiences in implementation of the project and other pilots – is
critical. To this end, beginning in year one, a total of three seminars will be held on
public policy and productive inclusion, as well as to share experiences, analyse
project results and promote discussion and dialogue on comprehensive policies for
productive inclusion.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. The project's financial management, including budgeting,

procurement, flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial
reporting and audit, will be the responsibility of Prospera’s DGAF, under the
supervision of a federal financial entity, to be nominated by SHCP. Project
execution will be carried out according to Prospera’s operational rules and
procedures and the implementation manual. The project will use Prospera's
accounting software, ensuring compliance with IFAD's financial reporting
requirements.

29. Flow of funds. Loan funds will be disbursed using the reimbursement method of
disbursement, whereas a designated account denominated in euro, and
administered by the designated federal financial entity, will be opened for advance
receipt of grant funds. The financial entity will open and administer a project
account, which will receive both IFAD and counterpart funds.

30. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will follow national procurement
procedures and regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
procurement guidelines.

31. Audit. Consolidated project financial statements will be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with current procedures and terms agreed by
the Ministry of Public Administration and international financial institutions, to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All project
accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those relating
to national counterpart funding. Audit reports will be delivered to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.

E. Supervision
32. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, in accordance with its Policy on

Supervision and Implementation Support. This arrangement will facilitate two
supervision missions per year. Moreover, continuous implementation support and
problem-solving is envisaged, including initial support for the implementation
manual and annual workplan and budget.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs amount to US$19.5 million, of which component 1: productive

inclusion, costs approximately US$17.2 million, and component 2: institutional
strengthening, costs approximately US$2.3 million.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Productive Inclusion 5 516 - - 1 060 10 595 17 171
2. Institutional
strengthening 1 067 500 788 - - 2 355

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

B. Project financing
34. The total cost of the project will be financed by five sources. IFAD is financing

approximately US$7.1 million through its loan and grant, while Prospera is financing
roughly US$0.8 million in counterpart funds. Given that one of the project
objectives is to promote access by the Prospera population to current productive
development programmes, an estimated US$10.6 million will be made available to
beneficiaries under such programmes over and above the IFAD and Prospera
contributions, and a beneficiary contribution is estimated in the amount of
US$1.1 million to cofinance the productive investments.

35. The IFAD loan will be made available to the Government on ordinary terms and will
have a maturity period of 15 years, including a grace period of 3 years, with an
interest rate equal to the reference interest rate determined semi-annually by the
Fund.

36. IFAD financing for this project will also cover taxes, as requested by the
Government, given the impracticability of exempting the project from taxes from a
budgetary, operational and accounting viewpoint – and given that the World Bank
currently applies this practice in the country.

37. Retroactive financing will apply for eligible expenses incurred previous to loan entry
into force but after the date of Executive Board approval, of up to EUR 587,000 for
expense category 2 "Consultancies".

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Equipment, material
and communication 138 2 - - - - - - - - 138
2. Consultancies 6 445 98 500 100 788 100 - - - - 7 733
3. Productive
investments - - - - - - 1 060 100 10 595 100 11 655

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. This section describes the benefits expected from project interventions. The main

indicators of the analysis are as follows: (i) 12,800 Prospera families benefit from
the project in the form of basic advisory assistance on production issues and
information on access to financial services; (ii) about 8,400 families benefiting from
the project prepare and submit some 1,400 projects (averaging six families per
project) to productive development programmes, of which approximately two thirds
(approximately 900 projects) are approved, benefiting some 5,400 families;
(iii) 5,400 families access technical assistance for successful implementation of



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

7

their productive projects, as well as financial education; (iv) 75 per cent of the
productive projects approved are still operating after two years; (v) 400 young
people (Prospera beneficiaries and their children) are trained in project
management and leadership; and (vi) approximately 3,400 Prospera officers and
project operators have strengthened their capacity to implement the national
strategy of productive inclusion.

39. The economic analysis shows that the project represents a profitable investment,
with an economic internal rate of return of 29.5 per cent and a net present value of
US$164.6 million.

D. Sustainability
40. The project design points to the economic and social sustainability of productive

investments of the target group. The project strategy promotes development of
their technical, organizational and administrative skills, which will enhance the
sustainability of their activities.

41. On the institutional level, component 2 has the objective of strengthening
Prospera’s capacity to successfully carry out its mandate to promote the national
agenda for productive inclusion. In that regard, the project seeks to institutionalize
skills for and knowledge of productive inclusion, which will effectively ensure the
sustainability of the institutional approach to the subject.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. The main project risks are as follows:

Risk Mitigation strategy

Lack of normative provisions and
agreements with some productive
development programmes to ensure
priority and effective access for
Prospera beneficiaries to these
programmes.

Resistance by operators of productive
development programmes – which
have traditionally not worked with poor
populations – to facilitating access by
the Prospera population to such
programmes.

Through STEIA, which includes SHCP,
Prospera and representatives of these
programmes, an ongoing dialogue will be
maintained to strengthen their
commitment to the Government’s
objective of productive inclusion.

Awareness-raising will be provided for
programme operators in the field to
ensure their inclusion of the Prospera
population.

The isolated conditions of many
localities prevent families from learning
about opportunities to undertake
productive projects and access to
productive development programme
resources.

The project will incorporate promoters of
productive and financial inclusion within
its geographical coverage area to
disseminate information about these
programmes and facilitate liaison of
families with technical service providers.

Beneficiaries do not wish to formalize
new economic activities supported by
the project for fear of losing their
Prospera transfers and having to pay
taxes.

The project will emphasize the provision
of accurate information on the rights and
responsibilities of beneficiaries in two
areas: (i) receipt of conditional cash
transfers; and (ii) tax treatment of their
productive initiatives.

Insufficient quality of technical
assistance services are available in the
project area to support families in
developing and implementing their
productive projects, as well as
insufficient incentives to attract service
providers.

Lessons learned in Mexico and other
countries show the importance of having
technicians that are familiar with, and
ideally live in, the project area. A
preliminary assessment carried out
during project design shows that quality
services are available in the project area,



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

8

having work experience within the area,
and with populations with a similar profile
to that of Prospera.

Project management is hampered by:
(i) delays and/or deficiencies in budget
availability and changes in
programming structure that place
constraints on access by the Prospera
population; and (ii) unsafe conditions in
some parts of the project area.

Project management risks will be
mitigated by ongoing dialogue between
government authorities and IFAD, and
full ownership by Prospera during
execution. The security risk will require
constant monitoring of conditions in the
field.

Degradation of natural resources
caused by the implemented production
projects, particularly sheep breeding.

This risk will be mitigated by the
inclusion of criteria of environmental
impact on the design of productive
projects. In the case of sheep breeding,
mitigation actions will be included, and
compliance with an adequate ratio of
animals per designated grazing area will
be ensured.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

43. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011–2015 in promoting
an economic asset base that is resilient to market and climate change, and in
improving access to technical assistance services in support of smallholders. The
project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by applying a
geographical, direct and self-targeting strategy; (ii) gender and age equality,
through the strategy to target women; (iii) rural finance, through greater access by
smallholder farmers to the rural financial services they need to meet their
production requirements; (iv) engagement with indigenous peoples, respecting the
principle of free, prior and informed consent; and (v) environment and natural
resource management, through the promotion of good environmental practices in
production.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
44. This project is intended to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and to reducing rural
poverty and food insecurity. The project has been formulated in the framework of
the country’s National Development Plan 2013-2018, more specifically the Special
Program to Democratize Productivity, which coordinates government actions aimed
at carrying out public policies that remove barriers limiting the productive potential
of citizens and enterprises. Moreover, the project area falls within the areas of the
National Crusade against Hunger, which comprise the Government’s priority areas
for poverty reduction.

45. The project will be implemented in close coordination with other initiatives in
Prospera, such as the PTPP, among others.

Innovations and scaling upC.
46. The approach of this project is innovative in that it seeks to bridge the gap between

social transfer programmes and productive development programmes, allowing the
beneficiaries of the first to access the latter and implement sustainable productive
projects. In that way, the project will not directly finance productive investments,
but will facilitate access to already-existing funds in the country.

47. This project is being designed as a pilot project to contribute to the government
strategy for productive inclusion. If proven successful, it can be scaled up in



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

9

accordance with government priorities. As mentioned above, Prospera has not yet
defined a single operating modality for implementation of the productive inclusion
strategy, but is testing different approaches of which this project is one. The idea is
to evaluate the diverse modalities and scale up the option that has proven the most
efficient and effective.

Policy engagementD.
48. Being a pilot, the project will have a strong focus on learning. At strategic points in

time, and at least once per year, during the annual seminar on public policy and
productive inclusion organized by the project, policymakers will be updated on
progress and lessons learned and on concrete, evidence-based policy
recommendations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A financing agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the borrower. A grant
agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute the legal
instrument for extending the proposed IFAD grant to the recipient. Copies of both
negotiated agreements are attached as appendix I.

50. The United Mexican States is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred and
seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,870,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five hundred thousand United
States dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Paraguay for the Project for
Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Republic of Paraguay

Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$23.83 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.80 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.37 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.09 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.36 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for the Project for Improved Family and
Indigenous Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay, as contained in
paragraph 30.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for
the Project for Improved Family and Indigenous
Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. With a GDP per capita in 2013 of US$4,040, Paraguay has achieved an average

annual growth of 4.8 per cent in the past 10 years, albeit with wide variations
linked to climatic influence on the performance of the agriculture and livestock
sectors. Of the total population of 6.8 million people, 23.8 per cent are poor
according to the Continuous Household Survey conducted in 2012. Some 2.7 million
people live in rural areas, of whom 1.4 million are poor or extremely poor. Poor
producers are being displaced from their lands by the advance of export-based
farming, especially of soybeans. About two thirds of Paraguay’s 235,904
smallholder families are poor. Women stand out as particularly disadvantaged: out
of every 100 households in extreme poverty, 34 are headed by women. The
country has an indigenous population of 115,000, and over 90 per cent of these
people live in poverty.

2. The environmental situation is critical and exacerbated by the development model
followed by the country for decades, which is based on the extractive exploitation of
hardwoods coupled with deforestation to support the expansion of the agricultural
frontier on fragile soils and ecosystems. The projections of climate change models
predict higher temperatures and rainfall, which will increase the presence of disease
vectors and reduce the availability of water in the dry months, along with the
productivity of plants and animals.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)

3. The Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production in Departments of
Eastern Paraguay (PROMAFI) is aligned with national policies and responds to
IFAD's strategic framework for Paraguay as defined in the 2004 COSOP. It is
complementary to the ongoing Inclusion of Family Farming in Value Chains Project
(Paraguay Inclusivo), which is financed by IFAD and the Government.

4. The project is also consistent with current government policy, which prioritizes the
fight against rural poverty. As a consequence, the Government requested that the
project design reflect the strategic objectives of the current COSOP, to be followed
by the preparation of a results-based COSOP in 2015. The proposed project is
aligned with the poverty reduction and social development pillar of the National
Development Plan and the objectives of the Strategic Agricultural Framework,
2009-2018, which supports the development of family farming, food security and
the substantial reduction of poverty and social exclusion. It also complements the
Government’s "Sowing Opportunities" programme aimed at reducing extreme
poverty. This programme coordinates all ministerial and institutional interventions



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

2

through the Technical Planning Secretariat, and includes the Tekoporã programme,
which offers conditional cash transfers to families in extreme poverty.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area includes four departments in the northeast of the country. In each

department, priority will be given to districts with high poverty rates.

6. The project focuses on family farmers and indigenous communities. A high level of
participation by women and young people will be achieved through a positive bias
in the financing conditions. Environmental factors will be taken into account, and
specific measures will be introduced to increase producers’ responses to climate
change. The project will work exclusively with families that belong to rural
organizations (ROs), encompassing both existing productive organizations and
incipient committees of family farmers and indigenous communities.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s purpose is to contribute to the sustainable reduction of poverty among

the vulnerable rural population. Its development objective is to increase incomes
sustainably through strengthened social capital, productivity and adaptation to
climate change. The specific objectives are to: (i) consolidate organizations of small
producers; (ii) facilitate the use of productive assets by ROs to increase their
production and marketing sustainably and in a way that is adapted to climate
change; and (iii) provide ROs with access to appropriate financial services.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The project has four components:

 Component 1: Organizational strengthening. Starting with committees at
a relatively low level of organization, the grass-roots organizations will be
strengthened to enable them to identify and undertake business activities.
The methodology will involve identification of rural representatives chosen by
the organizations’ members from among their membership, who will be
trained to lead the participatory process of strengthening ROs. Participatory
rural appraisals will culminate in plans aimed at increasing the ROs’ capacity
for participation, organization, management and administration, production,
commerce and finance, and for identifying investment opportunities in
business plans. For the indigenous communities, a similar process will result
in the participatory development of indigenous community diagnostics, which
will serve as a foundation for the strengthening process and for investment
planning activities in community development plans.

This component includes services for climate change adaptation, including a
plan to complement the national network of weather stations with 20
additional stations in the project area, a climate information service to be
accessed by text messages, training of technicians, and support for preparing
the sector policy and strategy for climate change adaptation.

 Component 2: Sustainable productive development. This component
provides cash transfers and support services for investments at the level of
ROs through regular business plans, business plans with climate change
adaptation activities, and community development plans for indigenous
communities. The business plans will include productive investments,
technical assistance and activities to strengthen the ROs. The community
development plans will cover productive investments, social investments and
strengthening of indigenous communities. Advisory services will be provided
in order to integrate climate change adaptation activities into business plans,
especially for the production of vegetables and milk. In addition, ROs will



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

3

receive technical support from the project implementation unit to ensure that
the business plans meet market demand for public procurement programmes.

In addition, a production and marketing information service will be
established, delivering text messages and audio recordings provided by
various government units through a strategic partnership with a mobile
network operator.

 Component 3: Rural financial services. This component aims to
strengthen the capacity of ROs to finance their working capital needs through
credit from intermediary financial institutions. To this end, a guarantee trust
will be established to provide guarantee certificates to ROs with approved
business plans.

The project will contribute to the National Financial Inclusion Strategy
promoted by the Central Bank, through training-of-trainers courses in rural
financial education. The course topics will include financial literacy and
consumer protection for borrowers.

 Component 4: Project management. For efficient project management, a
project implementation unit will be established with headquarters in the field,
possibly in the city of San Estanislao. This office will have a project manager
responsible for overall implementation and a technical field coordinator
responsible for managing the field staff and for liaising with the target group
and local authorities in implementing project activities and instruments.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will expand, deepen and replicate activities that were successfully
implemented under the Paraguay Rural Project (PPR), in view of high demand. The
participatory methodology applied by that project marked a substantive change in
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock’s approach to rural development, and has
generated strong social capital through participatory assessments, institutional
strengthening plans and business plans that transfer authority for planning and
implementation to the ROs.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The executing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock through the

National Directorate for Project Coordination and Management (DINCAP), which will
constitute the project implementation unit. DINCAP will be responsible for project
implementation including planning, procurement and accounting. Since most of the
project activities are integrated into plans managed by ROs, supporting ROs in
planning, implementation and accounting for funds will be an important
responsibility of the project implementation unit.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

11. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), learning and knowledge
management system is based on experiences and lessons learned from the PPR,
especially in connection with applying participatory processes and assessing the
maturity of ROs and the use of participatory, community-owned dynamic maps as
graphical diagnostic tools for determining the baseline situation of ROs and families.
The system will promote results-based management in order to provide a coherent
framework for strategic planning and project management.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
12. Financial management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the

project implementation unit, will be responsible for the financial management of all
project resources, including the flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

4

accounting, financial reporting and audit. The project will implement an accounting
system acceptable to the Fund as a condition of disbursement from the loan and
grant accounts. The mechanism of start-up costs may be used for early project
expenditures, including to set up the accounting system.

13. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Finance will open two designated accounts in United
States dollars at the Central Bank of Paraguay exclusively for the loan and grant. In
addition, operating accounts (project accounts) in local currency will be opened at
the Banco Nacional de Fomento or other banks acceptable to the Fund.

14. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out by the
project implementation unit on the basis of national standards and in accordance
with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procurement in the context of strengthening
plans, business plans and community development plans will be managed by the
ROs in line with the project implementation manual.

15. Audit. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by
private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All project accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding. The
scope of the audit will include visits to the ROs and review of the guarantee fund.
Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of
each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
16. IFAD will be in charge of project supervision. The initial supervision tasks include

support for the rapid start-up of PROMAFI and setting up the accounting, planning
and M&E systems.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
17. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$23.8 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$4.6 million relates to the organizational strengthening
component; US$14.6 million to sustainable productive development; US$1.5 million
to improving rural financial services; and US$3.1 million to project management.
Management costs make up 13 per cent of the project cost. Costs include 3 per
cent for contingencies in respect of local price escalation for vehicles, goods,
services and operating expenses, and 2 per cent for physical contingencies in
respect of vehicles, goods and services.

B. Project financing
18. The project will be financed by IFAD through a loan of approximately

US$17.4 million and an Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant of US$5.09 million. The beneficiaries will contribute US$1.4 million (in kind).
In line with World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank funding operations
in the country, where applicable, IFAD’s resources will be used to finance taxes.
The financing plans by component and category of expenditure are presented in
tables 1 and 2 below (some of the categories of expenditures may be grouped in
the financing agreement).



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

5

Table 1
Financing plan by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Organizational
strengthening 3 500 76 1 094 24 - - 4 594 19

2. Sustainable productive
development 9 569 65 3 705 25 1 361 9 14 634 61

3. Rural financial services 1 418 94 98 6 - - 1 515 6
4. Project management 2 888 94 197 6 - - 3 085 13

Total project costs 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

Table 2
Financing plan by category of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles 72 100 - - - - 72 0
2. Goods, services and inputs 2 809 49 1 553 27 1 361 24 5 723 24
3. Grants and subsidies 8 121 77 2 463 23 - - 10 584 44
4. Credit and guarantee funds 3 654 77 1 077 23 - - 4 731 20
5. Administration 2 718 100 - - - - 2 718 11

Total 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
19. The project will reach approximately 14,000 rural households (around 60,000

people), organized in approximately 303 productive organizations and
33 indigenous communities. It is estimated that 80 per cent of project activities will
generate the expected benefits, which is equivalent to a portfolio of 195 successful
business plans and 26 community development plans.

20. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the viability of the family-based
project-level activities. The economic internal rate of return is 16.5 per cent.

D. Sustainability
21. PROMAFI is sustainable from a variety of perspectives: (i) institutionally, since it

responds to the framework of a specific national policy and an explicit decision by
the Government of Paraguay to replicate and extend the experiences of the PPR
and strengthen beneficiaries’ organizations; (ii) from a productive and market point
of view, given the guaranteed steady demand for food and in light of the policy
support to family farming as a positive prospect for the sustainability of productive
investments and markets; (iii) socially, by facilitating the access of rural poor
people, indigenous communities, women and youth to public goods and services;
(iv) financially, by creating sustainable rural finance services; and
(v) environmentally, by implementing environmental standards and
recommendations based on the rational use and conservation of natural resources.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
22. The risks of failing to achieve the stated objectives are limited both in quantity and

in potential adverse impacts. The main risks are: (i) difficulties in ensuring inclusion
of poor people, indigenous populations or producers, to be minimized by the
territorial targeting of beneficiaries in segments and ongoing evaluation of results;
(ii) slow pace of territorial coverage due to operational and management difficulties,
to be mitigated by the early hiring of technical support teams and provision of
training; (iii) slow rate of project implementation linked to the time required for



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

6

ROs to mature and implement business plans, to be addressed by timely annual
planning to ensure achievement of targets without distorting results; (iv) market
risks, to be addressed by affording special attention to marketing and supporting
linkages with public procurement; and (v) climate risks that may affect volume and
quality of production, to be attenuated by supporting climate-smart technology and
disseminating appropriate farming practices and meteorological information.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

23. The project approach and implementation modalities are fully consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. Specifically, they support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, climate change, environment and natural resource
management, gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting. The
project is also fully compliant with the ASAP objectives.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
24. The project is in line with the Government's plans and the objectives of the

Strategic Agricultural Framework 2009-2018. It is also consistent with the
Government’s policy of financing transfers to communities with a 30 per cent credit
element.

Innovations and scaling upC.
25. PROMAFI is based on a broadening and replication of PPR activities in view of high

demand. The PPR has shown that, when appropriately supported, ROs can improve
their production and marketing, and achieve business continuity. The participatory
methodology that allowed the PPR to generate strong social capital will be improved
and scaled up. Project innovations include: scaling up the group-based credit
guarantee mechanism to a national system of credit guarantees; a mobile phone-
based production and marketing information service, which has the potential to
enhance the provision of extension services; and the creation of a system for
assessing the institutional maturity of productive and indigenous organizations,
which will facilitate the design of suitable capacity-building activities for
organizations.

Policy engagementD.
26. The project capitalizes on the successful experiences of the PPR, and is in line with

government and IFAD policies. It supports the Government’s policy of reducing
conditional cash transfers by including a credit element for financing investments,
and the strategic uptake of information technology for agricultural extension
services. In addition, in collaboration with the Central Bank of Paraguay, the project
backs the country’s financial inclusion policy by supporting rural financial education.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
27. A financing agreement between the Republic of Paraguay and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached herewith as an appendix.

28. The Republic of Paraguay is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
Trust Fund, acting through IFAD in its capacity of Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

29. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

7

VII. Recommendation
30. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Paraguay for an amount of fifteen million eight hundred thousand
euros (EUR 15,800,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of
Paraguay for an amount of three million six hundred and fifty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,650,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





