























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21463

Project Name LVEMP APL-1 Additional Financing (P153466)
Parent Project Name Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 

(P100406)
Region AFRICA
Country Africa
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (70%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (30%), Other rural development 

(30%), Other environment and natural resources management 
(20%), Biodiversi ty (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
support (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153466
Parent Project ID P100406
Borrower(s) East Africa Community, MINISTRY OF FINANCE, The National 

Treasury
Implementing Agency Lake Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC), Ministry of Water, 

Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

23-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lake Victoria, with a surface area of about 68,800 km2, is the second largest freshwater body in the 
world. It is a transboundary resource shared by Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Rwanda and Burundi 
are a part of the upper watershed that drains into Lake Victoria through the Kagera river. Its 
catchment area of 194,000 km2 is shared by five countries: Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 
percent), Rwanda (11 percent), Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda (16 percent). The Lake is also 
part of the Nile River basin system, shared by ten countries: Burundi, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. The population of 

the Lake Victoria Basin (LVB) is about 35 million people, and it represents approximately 30 
percent of the total inhabitants of the East African Community (EAC) Partner States – Burundi, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya. 
 
Lake Victoria is a major population and poverty center in AFR, and a trans-boundary natural asset 
of global importance. The Basin is home to around a third of those below the poverty line in the 
East African Community, living on around a ninth of its land surface.  The Lake supports the 
world’s largest freshwater fishery, with a total annual landed catch value estimated at around US
$0.5 billion, supporting the livelihoods of 3 million people, providing roughly 0.5 million tons of 
fish to local markets and generating US$0.25 billion in export revenues. The establishment of the 
Nile Perch fishery in the 1980s and 1990s provided a resource boom that drew in poor and 
disadvantaged people from the neighboring countries. Large rural poor populations are also 
dependent on the degraded lands in the upper basin, particularly in Burundi, Rwanda and the Kenya 
highlands. In addition, the waters of the Lake and its catchment provide 90% of Uganda’s hydro 
power, most of the hydro power for Rwanda and Burundi, and the water supply to major urban 
centers including Kampala and Entebbe.  Protected areas cover 25% of the Basin’s land area and 
include some of the most renowned wildlife attractions in Africa – Serengeti and Volcanoes 
National Parks. 
 
The Lake Victoria Basin has also become a global example of environmental degradation. 
Historically, the introduction of the Nile Perch was associated with a mass extinction of native fish 
species, but Perch stocks have now themselves declined to probably less than half of their peak 
levels due to increased fishing efforts and other environmental stresses. Environmental degradation 
within the Basin increasingly poses broader threats to livelihoods and welfare. Erosion of soils has 
chronic impacts on agricultural productivity as well as acute impacts where gullies destroy land, 
property and even lives. The flow of sediments and other pollutants into the Basin’s rivers and 
ultimately the Lake reduces the supply of potable water, and causes algal blooms that are 
unpleasant for lakeshore communities and limit the tourism potential of the region. One of the most 
striking indicators of poor ecological health is the rapid colonization of the Lake by water hyacinth. 
Infestations of this invasive floating plant periodically block access to kilometers of lakeshore, 
preventing use of the Lake for transport and fishing, as well as posing serious health and safety 
risks to local inhabitants.  
 
LVEMP aims to tackle the environmental challenges of the Lake Victoria Basin over the long-term 
and basin-wide, to improve the welfare of its inhabitants. It was designed as a regional Series of 
Projects (formerly APL) with three envisioned phases and informed by the studies and lessons 
generated from the original Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP I), 
financed by the GEF and implemented from 1996 to 2005. APL-1 (now SOP-1), covering the three 
riparian states (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda) as well as a regional coordination and policy 
component (through the EAC’s Lake Victoria Basin Commission, LVBC), is due to close at the end 
of FY15, having already received a 2-year extension. APL-2 (SOP-2), covering Rwanda and 
Burundi, started later and is due to close at the end of FY17. APL-3 (SOP-3) was envisaged to 
extend the program beyond the end of the first project of the series. 
 
The Additional Financing of the LVEMP is for implementation of additional or expanded activities 
that scale up the project’s impact, i.e. additional watershed management subprojects in existing 
focal areas, construction of sanitation and sewerage facilities that were designed but not 
implemented under the original project due to funding constraints, and expansion and deepening of 



Page 3 of 6

cleaner production programs. The additional Additional financing Financing represents roughly 
20% of the original project financing, but is expected to increase most of the key quantitative 
results by around 30-40%. Under the Additional Financing Kenya and Tanzania will each receive 
US$10 million IDA credits, and a US$2 million IDA grant for regional activities under LVBC: 
Credit Nos 4530-TZ, 4531-UG, 4532-KE; GEF grant TF-94205, SIDA grant TF-95196). Pending 
donor approval, an additional grant of US$ 0.5 million from the Cooperation in International 
Waters in Africa trust fund is anticipated, of a total Additional Financing amount of US$ 22.5 
million.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The Lake Victoria and its ecosystems support a number of sectors important for economic and 
livelihood development in the Lake Victoria Basin: Fisheries - the Lake fishery contributes to the 
GDP of the riparian countries and provides employment for about 197,000 fishers and 
approximately 600,000 fish traders; Transport - the marine transport provided by the Lake is very 
important for supporting the trade and economic development of the LVB countries; Energy - the 
Lake is the source of hydropower in Uganda generating power exceeding a value of US$350 
million per annum; Water - Approximately five million people living in the major cities and towns 
around the Lake, depend on Lake Victoria for their domestic and industrial water supply.  
 
Governance of the Lake occurs at the regional scale through the East African Community and Lake 
Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC) under the auspices of the Protocol on Sustainable 
Development of the Lake Victoria Basin, and at the national scale by the country governments of 
the LVB through implementation of respective national strategies. Accordingly, the project 
implementation arrangements are based on a two-prong institutional set up provided in the Protocol 
on the Sustainable Development of the LVB, i.e. at the EAC/regional and at national levels. 
 
The Regional Policy Steering Committee (RPSC) - comprising permanent secretaries of various 
line ministries - serves as the EAC coordination committee for LVEMP II (and other regional 
projects in the Basin), and the LVBC serves as the secretariat for the RPSC. National Policy 
Steering Committees (NPSCs) are responsible for the sectoral coordination at the national level and 
for providing operational policy guidance in each country. National Focal Point Ministries 
(NFPMs) in each of the LVB countries serve as the secretariat for the NPSCs. NFPMs are 
accountable for the overall project implementation, which is carried out by National Project 
Coordination Teams in partnership with multiple key ministries and local government authorities.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The objectives of the Project are to contribute to: (i) the improvement of the collaborative 
management of the trans-boundarynatural resources of the LVB among the Partner States; and (ii) 
the improvement of environmental management of targeted pollutionhotspots and selected degraded 
sub-catchments for the benefit of communities who depend on the natural resources of LVB.

III. Project Description
Component Name



Page 4 of 6

Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and fisheries resources
Comments (optional)
Activities under this component will focus on strengthening the existing institutions to improve the 
cooperative management of shared transboundary natural resources of the LVB. Its objectives are 
to: (i) improve the effectiveness of key regional and national institutions through harmonization of 
national policies, legislation, and standards; (ii) develop options for sustainable financing of the 
natural resources management interventions; and (iii) develop regional frameworks for the 
management of key transboundary natural resources – water and fisheries. The focus here is on 
capacity building of the regional, national, and local institutions responsible for coordination, 
research, management of resources, and enforcement of environmental standards.

Component Name
Point source pollution control and prevention
Comments (optional)
The main objective of this component is to reduce environmental stresses within the Lake and 
littoral zone, through the implementation of mitigation and prevention measures. It will finance 
investments aimed at reducing point sources of pollution in priority hotspots, identified during 
LVEMP I. These investments will complement on-going activities supported by other Bank-funded 
projects in water and sanitation. Major activities include (i) rehabilitation and improvement of 
wastewater treatment facilities; (ii) promotion of cleaner production technologies; and (iii) pollution 
risk management and safety of navigation.

Component Name
Watershed management
Comments (optional)
This component seeks to reduce environmental stresses from the Lake basin, through the 
implementation of non-point sources pollution mitigation and prevention measures. The reduction of 
the non-point sources of pollution (sediment loads, nutrients, and agro-chemicals) by scaling up 
successful models of watershed management practices piloted under LVEMP I and other related 
national projects will improve water-use efficiency, and generate positive downstream externalities. 
Watershed management is being implemented through community-driven investments as a means of 
scaling up management efforts, and also building capacity and ownership at the local level for 
watershed management.

Component Name
Project coordination and management
Comments (optional)
This component will provide resources necessary for the effective coordination and communication, 
and monitoring and evaluation of the project activities. At the regional level, these tasks will be 
carried out by the RPCT mainstreamed in the LVBC, while at the national level they will be the 
responsibility of the National Project Coordination Teams (NPCTs). Activities under this 
component are divided into (i) project coordination and communication; and (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 22.50 Total Bank Financing: 22.00
Financing Gap: 0.00



Page 5 of 6

For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 20.00
IDA Grant 2.00
Cooperation in International Waters in Africa 0.50
Total 22.50

V. Implementation
The implementation arrangements for the project will remain as they are, with National Project 
Coordinator Teams under the guidance of their respective ministries in each country, a Regional 
Project Coordination Team under LVBC, and the Regional Policy Steering Committee providing 
overall guidance to the program.     
 
As the scope of investment activities will be the same, there will be no changes in environmental 
category of the project or additional safeguard policies triggered.  The existing safeguards 
documents have been reviewed and remain fully relevant (see Social and Environment Analysis 
below).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC12805

Project Name Burundi Coffee Sector Competitiveness Support Project (P151869)
Region AFRICA
Country Burundi
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%), Agricultural 

extension and research (20%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing 
and forestry (10%), General finance sector (5%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Export development and 
competitiveness (30%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Other 
environment and natural resources management (15%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151869
Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Implementing Agency INTERCAFE
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-Aug-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

31-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

29-May-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. Burundi is a post-conflict, landlocked, small country with an estimated population in 2013 
of nearly 10.20 million increasing at a rate of 3 percent annually. After more than 13 years of 
conflict, Burundi is now showing positive signs of economic recovery. Over the last 5 years, the 
annual GDP growth in Burundi has consistently remained around 4%. Despite these positive signs, 
the country is unlikely to meet the Millennium Development Goals 2015: (a) the human capital base 
is weak due to limited access to social services; (b) a large majority of youths are under-employed 
because of lack of opportunities; (c) less than 3 percent of the population has access to electricity; 
(d) 52 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished; and (e) 67 percent of 
Burundians are living below the poverty line. Poverty is overwhelmingly rural and most of the 

country’s poor are small-scale farmers. These data explain why Burundi finds itself at the bottom of 
the list of countries for most development indicators. According to the Human Development Index, 
Burundi is ranked 178 out of 186 countries . 
 
2. Following substantial improvement in security and peace consolidation, the Government 
focused its resources to expand basic social services in the country and initiated the modernization 
of existing economic infrastructure and institutions. The Government launched also key reforms 
addressing improved governance, public finance management system, business environment and 
investment climate, etc., which led to the country achieving considerable progress towards macro-
economic stabilization. These efforts have been recognized by the World Bank which in its reports 
“Ease of Doing Business”, ranked Burundi as one of the world’s top economic reformers for 
streamlining business and attracting foreign investment. Nonetheless, Burundi has still to address 
major challenges in terms of good governance, vulnerability to external shocks, diversifying the 
economy, and generating productive employment for its largely young population. 
 
3. The Government of Burundi’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 
2012-2015) and the joint International Finance Corporation (IFC)-World Bank Business Plan have 
identified potential growth sectors. The focus is rightly put on modernizing the agricultural sector 
since it accounts for nearly 41 percent of the GDP and about 90 percent of current labor force. 
Burundi’s main traditional export crop - coffee has been identified as a key sub-sector with high 
growth potential which can contribute to achieving the results of the PRSP - Pillar II “Transforming 
Burundi’s economy to generate sustainable, job-creating growth”. Other sub-sectors with potential 
growth identified are tea, cotton and cinchona. Furthermore, as part of it PRSP, the Government 
plans to support corps diversification by promoting nontraditional agricultural exports, including 
horticultural products, essential oils, medicinal plants, avocados, and macadamia nuts.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. Burundi has all of the factors which make agricultural investment essential. The sector 
plays a key role in economic growth, poverty reduction, food security and employment. It 
contributes most to gross domestic product, using 90 per cent of Burundi’s labor force and earning 
90 percent of export revenues - primarily from coffee production, which constitutes the key source 
of income for more than 600,000 rural households (about 30 percent of the population).  Despite the 
country's dependence on the primary sector, agriculture has not been modernized and continues to 
depend essentially on subsistence agriculture (1.2 million rural households) using unreliable and 
inefficient technology. Over the past decade the growth rate of agricultural production (2 percent) 
has been less than the growth rate of the population (3.0 percent); which aggravates the country’s 
food security situation. 
 
5. The farms in Burundi are highly fragmented with an average size of less than 0.5 hectare 
and the pressure on the land is increasing due to demographic pressure . The farming systems are 
determined by weather cycles and organized around multiple crops to reduce risk. A comparison of 
crop yields in the country with those in neighboring regions shows that Burundi’s agriculture faces 
major productivity challenges. For example, over the period last years the growth rate in cereal 
productivity in the East African Community (EAC region) increased by 3.13 percent while it 
declined by 0.08 in Burundi. Various interlinked factors contribute to the low agriculture 
productivity in Burundi, for instance: degradation of natural ecosystems and declining soil fertility, 
low use of improved inputs (quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc.), low use of modern 
technologies, inadequate access to agriculture extension services, poor physical infrastructure 

affecting market access and access to improved inputs, limited access to credit, marketing 
constraints and post-harvest losses among others. With the continued fragmentation and scarcity of 
agricultural land, future growth in agricultural production can only be generated from intensification 
and productivity gains. In addition, only market-oriented agriculture will allow rural households an 
adequate livelihood from their small plots, abundant labor, and relatively ample water resources. 
 
6. Burundi’s agricultural sector policy is articulated in its national agricultural strategy 
document adopted in 2008. The latter is based on the priorities identified in the country’s basic 
strategic documents, primarily Outlook 2025 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). 
Furthermore, with the support of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP), the Government of Burundi put forward a National Agricultural Investment Plan 
(NAIP), covering the period 2012-2017, which was fully integrated with the PRSP II. A top priority 
sub-sector identified within the NAIP for investment is coffee which plays a strategic role in the 
national economy as a source of foreign exchange earnings and incomes for a large number of rural 
households. The Burundi coffee value chain presents considerable potential for growth. Its impact 
extends to several other sectors through backward and forward linkages (inputs, processing, 
transport, financial services, and taxes) and therefore plays a key role in the country for jobs 
creation, food security and poverty reduction. 
 
7. The NAIP main focus are on: (a) the increase in crop and livestock production by raising 
productivity and ensuring optimal management of soil and water resources; and (b) the 
strengthening of human resources capacities of national institutions and farmers organizations. 
Other important elements of the NAIP address common issues such as land tenure and natural 
resources preservation, the development of infrastructure and measures related to agribusiness 
promotion and market access, including an improved investment climate and access to rural finance. 
For the coffee sub-sector, the focus is on increasing productivity associated with actions to promote 
quality, such as rejuvenating orchards, periodic field maintenance, farmers’ organization and 
restructuring and/or modernizing washing facilities through privatization and a niche marketing 
strategy. 
 
8. The NAIP is structured around four major programs as follows: (a) Sustainable growth in 
production and food security; (b) Professional training of farmers and promotion of innovation; (c) 
Development of value chains and agribusiness; and (d) Institution-building for public bodies. The 
NAIP is also promoting partnership between the public and private sectors in implementing its 
programs and achieving its objectives. This proposed project is particularly the type of financing 
which would be shared between the state and private operators, producers and investors. While the 
private sector is encouraged to increase investment in productive, industrial and marketing 
activities, the state needs to establish an environment favorable to the development of the sector. 
Efforts are being undertaken in this direction, for the coffee value chain – private operators are 
encouraged to be involved at several levels, notably at those of export, curing and de-pulping 
stations and roasting. Such initiative should be further promoted and expanded to establish 
sustainable public-private partnerships.  
 
9. The coffee sector: Coffee production is mostly a smallholder based activity with around 122 
million coffee trees and a production area of 70,000 hectares . The species grown is mainly the 
Arabica, though some Robusta is also planted. The average production of coffee cherries is 
estimated at about 164,800 tons and around 20,000 tons of green coffee  - of which about 70-80 
percent are fully washed. Average coffee cherries production per tree is about 1kg which is far 


below the yields of 2.5 to 3.0kg observed in other coffee growing areas; for instance in Asia and 
Latin America. Registered production of green coffee  in Burundi in 1990/91 was 33,912 tons while 
observed figure in 2011/12 was about 15,000 tons. The highest pick was registered in 1994/95 with 
40,985 tons. The cyclical swing of seasons sometimes leaves the country with very limited 
quantities to export (5,673 tons in 2003/4).  
 
10. Despite the current low and declining productivity level of the coffee sector in Burundi, it 
continues to play a vital role in the country’s economy and represents the main industry and export 
product – accounting for up to 80 percent of the foreign currency earnings. During the harvest of 
raw and green coffee, the sector plays also a key role in stimulating the rural economy. The 
associated industry (de-pulping and washing stations) and traders inject an important sum of cash 
into rural areas which increases spending in purchase of goods for rural households, manufactured 
products, payment of social expenses, and reimbursement of credit. Furthermore, the construction of 
washing stations in rural areas led to a modest first stage of industrialization, off-farm jobs for local 
labor during the coffee campaign and, most importantly, the development of rural access roads to 
the washing stations which are also used for other purposes.  
 
11. The coffee industry was one of the priority sectors targeted for deregulation reforms and 
privatization in the structural adjustment program (initiated in 1986) that aimed to limit the state’s 
involvement in the productive sector. Due to the civil war and subsequent recovery challenges, this 
process (sector reform and privatization of state entities: OCIBU, SODECO and washing stations) 
experienced some delays. But it subsequently led to positive developments, among others: (a) the 
establishment of a new regulatory body (ARFIC) and an inter-professional association 
(INTERCAFE); and (b) an effective deregulation of de-pulping and export through the construction 
of new washing stations by private investors and SOGESTALs . 
 
12. Today, the government is eager to complete the process of privatization which consists of a 
3rd phase (some 77 washing stations and a mill firm) – although different actors of the value chain 
have different ideas about how this should be carried out. For instance, coffee farmer associations 
are determined to take part in the privatization and the emergence of these associations adds a 
politico-socio-economic dimension to the on-going reform process. Even if some of the competing 
interest groups are small, their diverse political, regional and even ethnic backgrounds prompt the 
coffee reform to be a central peace-building focus for Burundi. Important to note that a recent 
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) concluded that the earlier privatization (Phases I and 
II) had mostly a positive impact on the incomes and welfare of affected coffee producers. 
 
13. While several steps have been taken toward improving the performance of the Burundi 
coffee sector, it is currently experiencing serious instability and decline which cannot be explained 
by chance or climatic conditions alone. Some of the causes behind this situation: (a) Persistence of 
structural deficiencies, such as inefficiencies in the governance of the value chain. The institutions 
and the actors involved in the value chain are facing several constraints (incomplete reform and 
privatization process, lack of technical and managerial capacity for emerging farmers’ association, 
non-transparent pricing mechanisms, etc.) that hamper their operations and, consequently, limit the 
development of the coffee sector in Burundi; (b) Low productivity due to insufficient technical and 
financial support to farmers. Lack of investments in productivity enhancing technologies following 
the liberalization of the market resulted in low and highly fluctuating productions, poor maintenance 
and degradation of the orchards, low input application as well as pest and disease problems, etc.; (c) 
Limited competitiveness with a decrease in quantity and quality caused by the aging of orchards at 



the farm level (28 percent are more than 30 years old and 62 percent are between 9 and 30 years), 
limited technical know-how moving downstream the chain to support quality improvements 
(milling, tasting, etc.); and inefficient marketing structures for promoting the Burundi brand; and (d) 
Primary production has also not kept pace with the expansion of processing capacity, leading to a 
situation in which all raw materials are competitively sought with little price differentiation. Many 
washing stations have experienced low profitability due to high operational costs (partly related to 
capacity underutilization) and management limitations.  
 
14. Under such circumstances it will be extremely difficult for Burundian coffee producers to 
be able to compete with the world coffee industry (or even maintain their competitiveness at the 
regional level). The resulting economic and social consequences are severe for Burundi. Despite 
these weaknesses, the coffee value chain in Burundi is not entirely without its strengths and 
therefore presents  some advantages which justify transformative investments in reversing current 
trends: (a) climate and altitude to produce specialty Arabica coffee that attracts premium world 
market prices; (b) opening of the sector to private investors; (c) local producers interested and 
experienced in growing coffee; (d) emerging farmer associations and private-led governance 
structures; (e) well-established processing infrastructure - washing stations and dry milling capacity 
to support increased production of high quality coffee; (f) increasing worldwide consumption with 
an average annual growth rate of 1.9 percent during the last 50 years and a high demand for 
specialty coffee in developed markets ; and (g) in term of the macro-economic situation of the 
country, Burundi is heavily depending on  coffee export proceeds that failure is not an option. Also, 
since coffee is a perennial and the land is already tied to it for the lifecycle of the tree, it is not 
readily easy to convert and diversify the production base. 
 
15. Against this background, the proposed World Bank project is supporting the Burundi 
Government in implementing its PRSP II and NAIP’s programs - enhancing the productivity and 
competitiveness of the coffee value chain. The proposed project is aligned with the ECCAC 
regional strategy for the development of the coffee sector.  It builds on ongoing operations by the 
World Bank in the country such as PRODEMA (Agriculture and Livestock Modernization Project) 
and PAZDOC (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project) . It benefits from the coffee sector reforms 
and privatization supported by the World Bank and other development partners (AfD, EU, USAID, 
etc.). It is also complementing on-going operations by IFAD focusing on food security, namely the 
Agricultural Intensification and Value Enhancing Support Project (development of marshlands, 
increase the productivity and yields of rice and other food crops, access to quality inputs and seed, 
etc.), and the Value Chain Development Program (promotion of rice and milk and six other 
secondary value chains).

Relationship to CAS
16. The proposed support project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
Burundi for FY13-16 that aims to support Burundi’s development as an “increasingly stable, 
competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for productive employment and 
improved standards of living”. Within the CAS framework, the proposed project supports the first 
strategic objective of increasing competitiveness to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
17. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase sustainable coffee production and 


enhance coffee quality, for the benefit of smallholders. This will contribute to: (a) improving the 
sector productivity and competitiveness; and (b) the country’s strategic goals of poverty reduction 
and enhanced exports revenues.

Key Results (From PCN)
18. At PDO level, the key results expected from this project are as follow: (a) Increased coffee 
production at the country level at project-end through the combined effect of application of good 
agricultural practices and rejuvenated/renewed plantations; (b) Higher coffee quality demonstrated 
by an increase in the share of coffee sold with price premiums on export; and (c) Enhanced farmers’ 
share of the net FOB price on coffee exports. 
 
19. It is estimated that approximately 200,000 small-scale farmers (from a total of roughly 
600,000 coffee growers at the national level) will directly benefit from the project planned 
activities. These are mostly composed of hillside farmers with less than 1 hectare of land, who 
cultivate an average of 150-250 coffee trees as an integral part of their livelihoods.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
20. Burundi is a small player in international coffee markets and is operating in an environment 
of aggressive competitors. The area where the best results may be realized in terms of the sector 
productivity and competitiveness is not only limited to production increase, but most importantly, 
quality improvement along the value chain and a focus on the lucrative specialty coffee markets. 
Such efforts would certainly allow differentiating the country’s products and also provide a better 
buffer for the inevitable periods of low prices. However, the business principle driving 
improvements needs to be that quality starts at the farm level and can be maintained only through 
proper processing and storage. 
 
21. In this respect, the proposed project will operate through multiple interventions, along 
different segments of the coffee value chain, to address productivity and quality bottlenecks and to 
open new market opportunities to Burundi– the specialty coffee markets.  The proposed project 
would reinforce the private sector role in leading and structuring the sector, namely the coffee 
producers and the industry. More specifically, the following key areas of the value chain will be 
addressed: (a) Governing structure of the value chain and institutional strengthening; (b) increasing 
production and productivity; (c) improving quality and market access. A particular focus would be 
put on greater organization and integration of smallholders into the chain and on more equitable 
sharing of the benefits from improved quality and market access.   
 
22. Component 1 – Institutional strengthening and value chain governance: An essential 
property of the chain is its governance structure, which determines to a considerable extent how 
resources and gains are allocated and flow within the chain. In the case of Burundi, this structure is 
developing but constrained by lack of capacity to implement concerted specific sector policies; 
weak coordination; limited information exchange and non-transparent price mechanisms. The 
project will support streamlining the governance structure of the sector by: (a) reviewing and 
adapting the current intuitional framework to improve its level of effectiveness and efficiency with a 
particular focus on transparency in the decision-making process and on quality and pricing 
mechanism; (b) upgrading the capacities of existing institutions/organizations overseeing the sector; 
and (c) improving the dialogue among the key public and private actors of the chain to arrive at a 


consensus on solving value chain bottlenecks. 
 
23. More specifically, the institutional architecture for coffee sector management that the 
project would support strengthening comprises: (a) INTERCAFE -- a stakeholder-driven 
coordinating body that has the mandate for most sector management decisions; (b) ARFIC-- a 
public regulatory authority that ensures that the basic “rules of the game” for managing the sector 
are adequately defined, transparently implemented, and where necessary, enforced by Government 
authority. This intervention will aim also at upgrading the capacities of ARFIC to provide quality, 
inspection and certification services to the coffee industry. The project will support both the 
modernization of existing labs in line with international standards (and possibly their expansion 
within the producing regions) and developing ARFIC human resources capacities for managing 
regulatory areas and for coffee testing; (c) CNAC-- a coffee grower organization largely represented 
in all coffee growing region; and (d) other stakeholder organizations for each of the main sector 
constituencies, to provide representation into the INTERCAFE’s collective decision making on 
sector management. This architecture is broadly similar to successful agriculture value chain 
management elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa and many other producing countries as well, with 
strong public-private sector participation. 
 
24. The project will also support increased consultations among the chain stakeholders; for 
instance, through regular forums to: (a) discuss the various problems and constraints of the sector 
within a “value chain approach”; (b) elaborate (or update) a comprehensive strategy for the coffee 
sector aiming at the general interest of the sector; (c) find harmonized and shared solutions to the 
various challenges facing the sector; (d) eliminate or minimize potential conflicts among the various 
actors in view of the general and common interest; and eventually (e) coordinating donors, 
government and private sector investments to avoid overlap, scale-up impacts, etc. 
 
25. Furthermore, under this component the project will support the development of a Data Base 
on the sector which would provide reliable data on the number of producers, number of trees, 
production, quality, washing stations performance and other ecological and socio-economic factors. 
This Data Base to be initially placed within ARFIC and linked to INTERCAFE, can be further 
expanded to include a formal GI S module that can capture more of the agro-ecological variables 
such as soil types, water sources and other variables that affect coffee quality. This investment will 
constitute an important tool for the value chain actors in terms of planning, monitoring and 
evaluation of their activities and return on investments. It can also be used as an export promotion 
tool (see component 3 below).  
 
26. Component 2 – Support to increased production and productivity: Under this component the 
project will support investments aimed at increasing production and productivity with a focus on: 
(a) the adoption of good agricultural practices - sustainable land management, planting trees, 
nutrition and fertilizer management, pests and diseases control, pruning, rejuvenation (25 percent of 
existing trees), harvesting, quality assessment and improvement, etc.; (b) improving production 
technology and soil fertility; (c) the dissemination of improved varieties to renew old plantations 
(20 percent of existing trees); (d) supporting specific research topics (coffee under shade, variety 
improvement and germplasm enhancement, etc.); and (e) a support fund to facilitate access to 
inputs. 
 
27. In addition special emphasis will be on: (a) linking coffee growers to national agricultural 
research bodies and extension services (public and private) and promoting a two-way flow of 

information between these entities; (b) expanding the tested models for productivity enhancement 
implemented as part of the PRODEMA project (community based mechanisms); (c) disseminating 
sustainable water and land management (SWLM) best practices and more diversified plantations, 
with fruit trees, inter-cropping with food crops, etc.; and (d) encouraging south-south exchange for 
coffee production, for instance, with coffee growing countries including Rwanda, Ethiopia and 
Colombia. This exchange will aim at various learning programs: production techniques, extension 
methodologies, coffee under shade, etc., and will build on cooperation already established between 
the PAZDOC project (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project – GEF) and Columbia coffee growers. 
 
28. For the implementation of the productivity investments, the proposed project will make use 
of INTERCAFE’s current contractual system provision for extension services and supply of inputs, 
and extend these to a larger share of coffee farmers as well as to coffee-specific agronomic and 
processing research. INTERCAFE has a cess revenue mechanism  already in place to finance such 
activities but, at current levels of national coffee production, the cess revenues only permit activities 
at a modest scale. 
 
29. Component 3 – Support to improved quality and market access: The management of quality 
in the coffee value chain is the most immediate instrument growers can use to improve their 
upgrading opportunities and it is a critical element of the current trend toward coffee differentiation. 
Furthermore, it is specifically vital in Burundi where the existence of “potato taste”, a strong off-
flavor resulting from the interaction between agro-climatic conditions and antestia bug infiltration, 
is endemic . Currently, cherries washing stations have only limited capacity to evaluate their coffee 
and do not have the experience or the cupping infrastructure to evaluate their production. In this 
respect, the project will promote quality enhancement activities along the value chain which would 
require changes in the field, at the washing station and at the dry mill. Applying good agricultural 
practices, flotation of cherries at the washing stations reception, meticulous hand sorting during pre-
drying and several other technical improvements are needed before Burundi can be recognized as a 
reliable supplier of coffee specialty markets. Under this component, the project will build on 
successes of recently closed USAID project in the country  and will in particular support the 
following investments: 
 
Sub-component 3.1- Improving quality: 
 
30. Developing cupping capacity: A main focus of this activity will be on educating all value 
chains actors on quality and cupping and establishing cupping labs in main producing areas.  This 
will be achieved by: (a) selecting a number of “leader” coffee washing stations to serve as an initial 
focus for specialty coffee value chain development and as models for other stations to learn from; 
and (b) the selection of a set of second tier washing stations to serve as “training hubs” aimed at 
maximizing the dissemination of production, processing and marketing best practices that will help 
in improving the quality and market access throughout all coffee producing regions in Burundi. 
 
31. Improving washing stations technical, operational and managerial capacities: Under this 
sub-component, assistance will be provided to the managerial staff of the washing stations to 
develop and implement customized Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs), including infrastructure 
improvement, best practices and Quality Control (QC) systems. The production and processing of 
high quality coffees requires sound technical and business management skills and systems. 
Currently the management (and governance) capacity of most private and cooperatively owned 
washing stations needs improvement. This element is critical to obtaining the highest returns, 

continued access to financing and sustainability. Furthermore, selected strategic supplier 
certification programs offer substantial price premiums to growers but require the implementation 
of detailed and transparent financial reporting systems. In the particular cases of cooperatives where 
the governance can be problematic, it is also important to maintain a fully transparent financial 
management system to ensure cooperative cohesion. 
 
32. For highly performing washing stations, traceability systems from the plantations to the 
destination market may be introduced. Such systems will enable buyers and sellers to track each lot 
from the time it enters the washing station (or even the field) until it is delivered to its final 
destination. This feature is also an essential element that distinguishes specialty coffee production 
from the production of standard grade coffee. The ITC component described below (parag. 34) will 
be integral to the development of the coffee traceability system and to using this system to its full 
potential. 
 
33. Improving existing processing infrastructure to meet environmental concerns: As pulping 
coffee can be the source of significant environmental problems (pollution of water table and the soil 
surrounding the washing stations, etc.), the project proposes integrating environmental mitigation 
measures in existing (and new) washing stations. These investments (water treatment and recycling) 
can lead to substantial cost reduction of production (reduction of water quantities used for de-
pulping) and, most importantly, responsible environmental stewardship is not only a best practice, 
but is an obligation for certification to several preferred supplier programs such as the Neumann 
Kaffee Gruppe (NKG) and the Starbucks’ C.A.F.E. Practices Program. 
 
34. Developing an information technology and communication system specific to the sector: 
Wireless internet access is now available in much of Burundi, presenting an exciting opportunity for 
washing stations to broaden their horizon in terms of technology access, learning opportunities and 
direct communications with buyers. The Data Base described in parag. 25 above can also be 
expanded to track and report on key performance characteristics of all washing stations for purposes 
of monitoring and planning and assessing the impacts of investments in quality improvement. 
Similarly, the Data Base can serve as an important tool for export promotion, accessible to buyers 
interested in visiting and buying Burundi’s coffee. Hot-links to individual washing stations sites will 
allow buyers to download fact sheets, learn about the coffee characteristics, and communicate 
directly with the stations that interest them most. From a basic training point of view, access to the 
internet by washing stations staff will be a powerful tool for the dissemination of training materials 
across the country. Other countries, particularly in Latin America and more recently in Rwanda 
have benefited greatly from the development of information and communications technologies. 
Burundi will be no different in this regard.  
 
Sub-component 3.2- Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand:  
 
35. Burundi must learn to market its coffee to the new consumers and also minimize the risk 
and uncertainties associated with coffee production, processing and marketing. In addition to the 
investments made on increasing production and productivity, profiling of coffee quality for more 
focused marketing, upgrading t he processing infrastructure, etc., this component of the project will 
support investments in: (a) building a recognizable image for Burundi’s coffee, including, a country 
logo, brochures, standardized washing station fact sheets, coffee maps and other information that 
may be useful to coffee markets; (b) developing a reliable coffee industry intelligence and 
forecasting system; (c) establishing direct sales relationships with roasters and buyers; and (d) 


introducing other innovative promotional activities such as buyer tours, certifications strategies, 
competitions such as the “cup of excellence”, and many other features that will place Burundi’s 
coffees in some of the very best markets in the world. These activities will focus on cultivating 
appropriate contacts and potential coffee relationships in North America, Europe, Japan and other 
emerging markets such as China and Russia. 
 
36. This component of the program will require the full coordination of investments and 
activities at multiple levels, including growers, washing stations, mills and other supporting 
institutions. A key player in this process will be INTERCAFE which would be reinforced to take a 
lead role in coordinating these activities and promoting the Burundi coffee brand. 
 
37. International Finance Corporation (IFC): The IFC Advisory Services Department has been 
supporting the 3rd phase of the coffee sector privatization. A main focus of IFC assistance was to 
advice on financing options for the coffee growers to buy shares of washing stations and to develop 
a target list of experienced international investors in the coffee sector who may be interested in the 
opportunity offered by the privatization. Further support will be sought from IFC, in particular for 
developing industry partnership and linkages with potential international specialty coffee buyers. 
 
38. Component 4 – Program coordination, monitoring and knowledge management: This 
component will facilitate: (a) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; 
(b) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient flow of information and support 
to all value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (c) effective contractual 
arrangements with key implementing partners (INTERCAFE, CNAC, ARFIC, etc.) and other 
private sector operators; (d) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial, 
environmental, and social impact of the program; and (e) development of communication activities 
to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories.  
 
39. Inclusion of youth and women: This population already active in the coffee value chain 
(trees maintenance, harvesting, grading, etc.) will be systematically considered in all project’s 
interventions. In line with the PRSP-2 and the National Gender Policy, a special focus will be given 
to promoting increased youth employment (both women and men) in all segments of the value chain 
by involving them in technical and entrepreneurial training programs and other planned 
developments actions. The project will aim at a target of 50 percent of youth and women directly 
benefiting from the project supported activities. 
 
40. Project costs: The indicative cost for the Coffee Competitiveness Support Project is US
$50.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed support would cost about US$45.00 million. It is 
expected that the beneficiaries (INTERCAFE, ARFIC and CNAC) will contribute up to US$5.00 
million. Furthermore, a GEF project is being considered for potential co-financing of selected 
productivity enhancement activities (PAZDOC: Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project - US$ 4.2 
million). Finally, USAID and the French Development Agency (AfD) are preparing parallel 
financing for the sector with a focus on productivity and trade issues. The exact amount for this 
financing is not yet defined, but is expected to be made available in the 2015 fiscal year. 
Coordination with these projects is foreseen to ensure complementarities and cost effectiveness. 
 
41. Categories of expenditures: For all project’s components, there will be various categories of 
expenditures including: (a) civil and rural works – case of upgrading the processing infrastructure 




(CWSs); (b) materials and equipment; (c) technical assistance and studies; (d) training and 
information; (e) support fund; (f) provision of services; and (i) operation and maintenance.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 72.25 Total Bank Financing: 55.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 IDA Grant 55.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 17.25
 Total 72.25


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC21271

Project Name Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project 
(P154447)

Region AFRICA
Country Angola
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Public 

administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (14%), Irrigation a nd 
drainage (9%), Agricultural extension and research (9%), General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (8%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural markets (45%), Rural 
policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154447
Borrower(s) Republic of Angola
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

23-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

29-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Jul-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

03-Dec-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Republic of Angola, with a total population of 24.3 million inhabitants, covers an area of about 
1.25 million km2 and is located on the Atlantic coast of south-western Africa. According to the 
2014 population census, 52 percent of the total population are women and about 38 percent live in 
rural areas.  
 
Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975. This was followed by a civil war that lasted for 
almost 25 years from 1975 to 2002 and ended with a peace agreement in 2002. Angola is one of 
Africa’s resource-rich countries, with a large potential for economic growth based on many mineral 

resources (particularly oil and diamonds) as well as agriculture. 
 
Agriculture contributes to approximately 10 percent of GDP, the industry sector accounts for  60 
percent of GDP and the services to about 30 percent. However, the economy of Angola is 
predominantly oil based.  The oil sector accounts for almost 45 percent of the GDP, 95 percent of 
total export value and 80 percent of government revenues. Oil prices are at a four years low and 
have declined by about 40 percent since June 2014. Currently oil prices are below US$50 per barrel. 
With the declining international oil prices, the government would like to reduce this dependence on 
the oil sector and promote diversification of the economy, including expanding the role of 
agriculture. 
 
Projections for GDP growth made by the government are: 9.7 percent in 2015; 5.9 percent in 2016 
and 5.1 percent in 2017. Growth is mainly driven by the recovery of the oil sector and an increase in 
public investments in the non-oil sectors. This includes, among others, rehabilitation of roads, 
increase in energy production, and development of new irrigation systems to enhance agricultural 
productivity. The average inflation rate is projected to be about 7 percent by end of 2015. While 
macroeconomic prospects in the medium-term are challenging due to declining oil prices, 
macroeconomic performance and commitment to reforms have been favorable. 
 
While reasonable progress has been made toward achievement of the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs), Angola is not likely to meet the MDGs by 2015. Angola ranks low in both the 
human development indicators and business environment indicators. Overall, institutional capacity 
remains weak. There are bureaucratic hurdles and governance challenges that inhibit growth of the 
private sector. 
 
The performance related to social indicators has been mixed. Good progress has been made in 
poverty reduction, primary education and gender equality since 2002. Despite these achievements, 
however, social indicators remain very poor. For example, life expectancy at birth is about 51 years. 
Maternal mortality is 450 out of 100,000 births which is the highest in sub-Sahara Africa. 
Malnutrition is also acute with 30 percent of children less than five years of age suffering from 
stunting and 16 percent are under-weight. 
 
The overall poverty rate has declined from 62 percent in 2001 to about 37 percent in 2009 (about 
nine million people). This is a major achievement. However, there are major regional disparities in 
the poverty rate across provinces as well as between rural and urban sectors. In the rural areas the 
poverty rate is almost 58 percent. On the other hand, the poverty rate in Luanda (the largest city in 
the country) is only about 9 percent. Clearly there is a great need to reduce poverty rates in the rural 
areas. 
 
Angola is estimated to have about 57 million hectares of arable land of which less than 4 million 
hectares are currently under cultivation. Despite enormous potential to increase cropped area and 
crop yields, and diverse agro-climate regions in the country for increasing food production, national 
and household food security continues to depend on imports of various food commodities and this 
cannot be sustained. Angola continues to import a significant share of food consumption, except for 
roots and tubers. For example, the overall output of cereals is currently estimated at 1.9 million MT 
against a total consumption need of 3 million MT. The difference (1.1 million MT or 36 percent of 
the needs) is met through imports. In other words, national food security remains a major 
development issue. 

Global experience suggests that growth in agriculture has much higher potential than in other 
sectors (such as industry) to reduce rural poverty. Inclusive growth in the agricultural sector can 
make a major contribution to diversify the economy, accelerate economic growth, increase food 
security, reduce rural poverty, improve social indicators in the rural areas, and help achieve MDGs. 
The proposed agricultural project envisages a major impulse to the agricultural sector that will not 
only increase productivity and production but will also improve the lives of rural population at 
large, thus providing for structural change and transformation of the agricultural sector in the project 
areas.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
While agriculture accounts for only about 10 percent of the GDP, almost two-thirds of the 
population depend directly or indirectly on agriculture for their income, employment and livelihood. 
About 37 percent of the population is below the poverty line and about 85 percent of the poor are in 
the rural areas and depend on agriculture.  The cropping pattern varies across the agro-climatic 
conditions in the country. However, Central Highlands (Huambo, Bie and Malanje Provinces) 
appear to have a high density of population and a high potential for agricultural production, 
including cassava, maize, beans, potato and horticulture. 
 
Prior to independence, Angola had a long history of exporting agricultural commodities, having 
been once the third largest exporter of coffee in the world. Exportable surpluses, such as coffee and 
maize, were for the most part produced using traditional technologies and few modern inputs. 
During the colonial period (up to 1975), agriculture had a dual structure with a commercial sector of 
about 800,000 ha managed by Portuguese settlers using modern technologies, and a traditional 
sector primarily composed of smallholder family farms cultivating about 3.4 million ha.  
 
After independence, most of the Portuguese settlers left the country and many of the former 
commercial farms and plantations were converted into state farms, which have now been privatized. 
The civil war (1975 to 2002) resulted in a virtual collapse of commercial production as large 
numbers of rural inhabitants either fled or reverted to subsistence agricultural production. 
Infrastructure suffered a great deal with widespread destruction of roads, bridges, irrigation systems 
and warehouses, compounded by the presence of thousands of land mines in the rural areas. 
Although the situation has improved since the end of the civil war with the rehabilitation of main 
roads and bridges, and clearance of mines, agricultural exports are currently negligible. The 
agricultural sector has not yet fully recovered from the de-capitalization experienced during the civil 
war. 
 
With recent developments in the rehabilitation of infrastructure that includes main roads and 
bridges, agricultural production gradually started to increase since 2002.  However, crop yields 
remain very low as compared to other countries in sub-Sahara Africa. According to FAO statistics, 
the average yield in Angola of beans is 0.34 tons/ha compared to 0.6t/ha in the region; groundnuts 
0.38 t/ha compared to 0.88 t/ha in the region and millet 0.24 t/ha compared to 0.7 t/ha in region.  
This implies that there is substantial scope for increasing crop yields and production through 
agricultural modernization and technical change as well as through an increase in cultivated area. 
However, this will require the use of animal traction power, adoption of improved agronomic 
practices, improvements in soil fertility, use of modern agricultural inputs, bringing cropped area 
under irrigation, and disseminating agricultural knowledge to farmers. In addition, there is a 
substantial scope and need to strengthen market linkages, improve commercialization and build 


agro-business facilities through local entrepreneurs.  
 
At present, almost 80 percent of the farmers are smallholders, with weak capacity and limited 
knowledge of improved agricultural practices. Human capital in agricultural education, research and 
extension institutions suffered a great deal during the civil war and have not yet been fully 
strengthened or replaced. The institutional capacity in the agricultural sector, including irrigation 
and agricultural statistics, is extremely weak. The agricultural programs are designed and 
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture at the national level and by the Departments of 
Agriculture at the provincial levels. The capacity of these agencies needs to be strengthened as well. 
 
The Bank-supported Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), approved 
by the Board in July 2008 and implemented over the past years, was designed to increase 
agricultural production through the provision of improved agricultural services and investment 
support to rural smallholder farmers. Activities implemented under the project include: (a) training 
of over 44,000 smallholder farmers in the use of improved agricultural technologies to boost 
production of the major crops targeted by the project (the training was provided by service providers 
recruited under the Project as well as training provided by FAO to over 14,000 producers on family 
farms through Farmers’ Field Schools ); (b) training of more than 60 technicians; and (c) provision 
of financial support to over 14,000 smallholder beneficiaries through financing of around 280 sub-
projects ; and (d) capacity building for staff from the Agrarian Development Institute (ADI) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture at targeted municipalities. 
 
In addition to the provision of capacity building, MOSAP contributed to: (i) an increase in 
agricultural production; and (ii) the adoption of improved technologies in the project areas.  The 
crop index during the 2013/14 season was 64 percent against an overall project target of 10 percent.  
The major crops supported under MOSAP were: maize, beans, cassava, and Irish potatoes. About 
66 percent of smallholder famers have adopted an improved technology promoted by the project 
against a project target of 30 percent. 
 
As indicated earlier, with the exception of cassava, the average yield of major crops cultivated in 
Angola, including maize, beans, Irish potatoes, is still extremely low, even compared to yields in 
other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. There is a large potential for increasing crop yields and 
agricultural production in the country. There are (at least) three major reasons justifying increasing 
public and private investments in the agriculture sector:  
 
(i) To ensure institutional continuity and scaling up of the on-going but limited support to 
smallholder farmers in Angola. As indicated, MOSAP has been critical in promoting agriculture 
recovery following the end of the civil war, strengthening institutions, and bringing formerly 
displaced agricultural producers back to agriculture in the project areas. 
(ii) To improve economic diversification. Angola possesses large and well-endowed natural 
resources including land and water. Almost two-thirds of the Angolans earn their livelihood from 
agriculture, a sector that could become one of the engines of economic growth and source of 
productive rural employment, provided capacity building and investments in public infrastructure 
and private assets take place. Unless investments are made to lay the foundations for future 
agricultural growth, national economic growth and diversification (which are critical in light of 
declining international oil prices), income, employment and foreign exchange earnings/savings will 
be seriously constrained.  
 


(iii) To ensure sustainable use of natural resources.  Despite the low levels of economic activity, 
the country already faces various pressures on its natural resources, such as wastage of water and 
overuse of pastures and subsequent soil erosion (largely attributable to population pressures; 
desertification); and deforestation of tropical rain forest in response to both international demand for 
tropical timber and to domestic fuel use. Investments in an efficient use of water for irrigation and 
promotion of soil conservation techniques, including erosion control and enhancement of soil 
fertility, and natural resource management, will ensure a sustainable use of soil and water and will, 
over time, contribute towards mainstreaming climate smart agricultural practices.  
 
The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP) 
intends to scale-up activities being implemented under MOSAP and will also finance critical  new 
activities, as per government’s medium and long-term agriculture programs. MOSAP is scheduled 
to close on December 31, 2015, i.e. in eleven months.  The implementation of the new project is 
expected to start on January 1, 2016.  Given the popularity of MOSAP in the project areas as well as 
with agencies dealing with agriculture, government indicated preference for keeping the name of 
MOSAP and calls this project MOSAP-2.

Relationship to CAS
The Bank CPS for FY13-16 aims at (i) deepening diversification for inclusive growth; (ii) 
enhancing the quality of decentralization for services delivery; and (iii) building human resources 
capacity. The CPS recognizes the role of agriculture and the need to increase agriculture 
productivity and competitiveness to reduce rural poverty and promote growth. The proposed 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project is a critical instrument to 
contribute to achieving the CPS objectives

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project Development Objective is to increase smallholder agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
21. The proposed project is expected to provide assistance to about 200,000 smallholder 
farmers in three provinces. The key results expected from the proposed project are: (i) to increase 
yields of selected crops, including cassava, maize, beans and Irish potatoes to the average yield 
levels prevailing in sub-Saharan Africa; (ii) to increase production of selected crops; and (iii) to 
increase the share of crop production that is marketed. In addition to these key results indicators, the 
results framework will also measure intermediate performance indicators for each of the 
components that will be developed during project preparation. These indicators will include the 
percentage of farmers who benefit from training and apply their knowledge; the average yields of 
major crops supported by the project; the percentage of the agriculture produce marketed by the 
smallholder farmers in addition to other indicators that will be discussed and agreed upon during 
project preparation. 
  
22. The strategy to achieve key results under the proposed project is to build upon the outcomes 
achieved under the on-going MOSAP and support smallholder farmers to increase agricultural 
productivity, production and market linkages that generate self-sustaining agricultural growth over a 
larger project area, as compared to MOSAP.  This will be achieved by: (a) building on potential 
synergies with on-going agricultural programs; (b) maximizing opportunities for quick-win results 



by focusing on farmers that received training under MOSAP or other programs and have applied 
their knowledge); (c) strengthening the knowledge and skills of smallholder farmers and their 
associations as well as of agricultural extension staff and agricultural services providers;  (d) re-
capitalizing productive agricultural systems and infrastructures, including irrigated agriculture; (e) 
providing access to demand-driven agricultural services and agricultural markets; and (f) promoting 
rural entrepreneurship in agri-business development. As far as possible, investments will be based 
on a flexible, participatory and demand-driven approach that promotes enhancement in productivity, 
commercialization and sustainability of agricultural activities.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project is designed to be climate smart, gender and jobs responsive and nutrition 
sensitive. The project is consistent with the main agriculture development programs in the country. 
Angola tends to experience seasonal rain variability and sometimes even long periods of drought 
that affect agricultural production. The proposed project will promote appropriate adaptation 
practices, including irrigated agriculture, to reduce such production losses. The project will support 
the participation of women in different project components, including farmers associations, 
production, marketing and training. The project will have a positive impact on employment and job 
creation in the rural areas by contributing to increased agricultural production, marketing, agri-
business and value addition as well as increased demand for agricultural inputs and services.  
Finally, since the project will promote the production of beans and vegetables, it is likely to have a 
positive impact on the food security and nutrition of rural households.  
 
The proposed project is a follow up project to the on-going MOSAP.  While broadly similar to the 
original MOSAP project, the new project differs in the following important aspects. First, it is larger 
in scope in terms of absolute funding and number of beneficiaries. Second, it includes a sub-
component to support the development of small-scale irrigated agriculture. Third, in addition to 
food crops (maize, cassava, beans and Irish potatoes), it will emphasize the production of high value 
crops, particularly horticulture. Fourth, it will further strengthen commercialization of agriculture, 
including market linkages, contract farming and agri-business development.  
 
The SADCP project area would cover the whole country for capacity building and institutional 
development activities. However, investment would be limited to the same provinces of Bie, 
Huambo and Malanje but with more coverage to municipalities. MOSAP was limited to three 
provinces covering 12 municipalities and only 50,000 beneficiaries. The proposed project would 
significantly expand the number of municipalities and communes covered under MOSAP and cover 
about 200,000 smallholder beneficiaries.  Besides the high potential for agricultural production, the 
selected provinces also meet the following criteria: 
 
• Well-endowed with resources, in particular land and water. Smallholder farming systems 
are already sustainable and profitable. Smallholder activities in these areas, before the civil war, 
included producing a wide range of crops, including most cereals and high value products such as 
vegetables (notably potatoes and onions). These areas appear to have high agricultural potential. 
 
• High concentration of rural population. The three provinces have around 52 percent of the 
population that is considered rural, as compared to 38 percent nationally. Overall, the three 
provinces account for about 24 percent of the rural population in Angola (2014 Population Census). 

• Proximity to potential markets and possibility of benefiting from the rehabilitated road 
network and railways. Hopefully, this will facilitate the strengthening of market linkages and 
commercialization. 
 
The target groups of the project will be smallholders in the selected provinces with a potential to 
increase agricultural production and commercialization. The potential project beneficiaries will be d 
ivided into the following three categories: (i) Group 1 of 1,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to 
benefit from irrigated agriculture, production and marketing activities (primarily horticulture) with a 
possibility for contract farming; (ii) Group 2 of 49,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to benefit from 
production and marketing activities related to food crops and horticulture; and (iii) Group 3 of 
150,000 beneficiaries that are likely to benefit from capacity building, production and marketing 
related to key food crops. Specialized capacity development training may also be provided to 
beneficiaries in Groups 1 and 2 that may have also benefitted from capacity development under 
MOSAP. 
 
The proposed project will have three components: Component 1 - Capacity Building and 
Institutional Development; Component 2- Support for Agricultural Investment; and Component 3- 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The proposed project is expected to be 
implemented over a period of five years from January 2016 through December 2020. The total cost 
will be US$125 million, of which US$20 million will be contribution by the Government of Angola 
and US$5 million equivalent will be in-kind contribution by the beneficiaries. A 100 million IBRD 
loan will constitute the remainder of the total cost. Overall, the project is expected to support about 
200,000 beneficiaries (members of about 6,500 farmer associations) with approximately 300,000 ha 
cropped land (on an average, 1.5 ha per beneficiary and with a range of about 0.50 ha to 2.5 ha per 
beneficiary). 
 
 
Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development (US$30 million) 
 
As under MOSAP, this component would focus on strengthening national, provincial and municipal 
institutions, develop technical capacity and introduce participatory processes to accelerate the 
decentralized agricultural development.  This component will also aim to strengthen the technical 
and managerial skills of participants and institutions involved in agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas. This component entails the following four  sub-components:  
 
a. Formation and strengthening of Farmers’ associations, which would include organizational 
and managerial capacities, and technical skills related to modern agricultural technologies and 
agronomic practices, agricultural production, marketing, investment and entrepreneurship. Training 
of vulnerable groups (e.g. female-headed households) will be given special attention. This will also 
include training of farmers through farmers’ field schools (FFSs), as is being done under MOSAP. 
 
b. Institutional strengthening of local, provincial and national units of the Ministry of 
agriculture (MINAG) to ensure that these institutions can better play their respective roles in the 
sector.  This sub-component would include support for strengthening institutional capacity in 
agricultural extension services (including linkage with research), agricultural research service, small 
scale irrigation, agricultural marketing and agricultural statistics. In addition, the capacity of 
MINAG staff will be enhanced to prepare and implement appropriate agricultural programs and 


policies. There will also be support for strengthening market information systems, linked to farmers’ 
and traders associations. Finally, the project will also support linkages with research programs 
relevant to agriculture that are being undertaken by the Ministry of Science and Technology.  
 
c. To strengthen agricultural research capacity and global knowledge about the latest 
technologies related to selected crops relevant to Angola, support to specific agricultural research 
will also be provided. Possible collaboration with both the International Institute for Tropical 
Agriculture (IITA) and the Brazilian Corporation of Agricultural Research (EMBRAPA) will be 
developed/further strengthened to address agricultural research and disease management issues that 
are critical for existing (cassava, maize and beans) and emerging crops (soybean) in Angola. As part 
of the CGIAR, IITA is responsible for carrying out research related to cassava, maize and beans in 
Africa. EMBRAPA has been working closely with Angola in building agricultural research 
capacity, including breeding for disease and pest resistance, in the context of integrated disease and 
pest management. 
 
d. Strengthening capacities of private and NGO agricultural service providers, especially those 
working closely with the smallholder farmers. Among other activities, this would include support 
for smallholder farmer groups or associations to prepare investment proposals for various sub-
projects for funding under the project as well as support for managerial and business capacities of 
new and existing agri-business entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 2. Support for Agricultural Investment  (US$55 million) 
 
This component supports investments in agriculture assets, both of a public as well as a private 
goods nature, with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, competiveness and market linkages 
of farmer beneficiaries (groups and individuals). The smallholder farmer beneficiaries will be re 
quired to make a small in-kind contribution (of at least 10 percent) to the investments that they 
receive based on criteria to be established during preparation. The investment component will, in 
the first year, consider farmer associations that received training under MOSAP. This component 
consists of the following sub-components:  
 
(a) Support for the Development of Small Scale Irrigation 
 
This sub-component will deal with the rehabilitation of existing and the development of new small 
scale irrigation systems. The Central Highlands, particularly comprising large parts of the provinces 
of Malanje, Huambo and Bie, have excellent conditions and water resources for development of 
small scale irrigated agriculture. Productive soils and water resources are abundant. Topographical 
conditions make it possible to develop irrigation by gravity. Gravity irrigation is particularly 
favorable for the development of small scale irrigated agriculture for smallholders. Some 
smallholder communities have already created and managed gravity irrigation schemes.  With their 
own resources (mainly labor and local materials) they derive water from small streams by 
(temporary) weirs to a network of unlined earthen canals for irrigation. The management and 
operation of these systems requires limited financial resources (the scarcest resources of 
smallholders). However, the efficiency and productivity of these systems will be improved by 
simple and cost-effective measures such as the construction of permanent weirs, the tubing and 
lining of canal stretches with infiltration losses, construction of culverts to cross roads and (natural) 
drainage streams etc.  
 

(b) Support for Agricultural Production Investments 
 
This sub-component will support investments in farm assets. In order to access matching grants for 
investment sub-projects, farmer associations have to submit project proposals. This sub-component 
will assist eligible participants in the preparation of detailed proposals that will allow an informed 
decision about their feasibility from technical, economic, financial, social and environmental 
perspectives. The potential funding proposals (list will be finalized during preparation) will consider 
dealing with any activity that will increase crop productivity and production. Few examples are 
draft animals, simple tools and agricultural equipment, soil fertility/quality improvement, soil 
conservation, seeds of improved crop varieties, fertilizers and integrated pest and disease 
management. In addition, matching grants will also be provided to individual enterprises in the rural 
areas that will provide critical agricultural services to smallholders in the project areas.  
 
A review and evaluation of exist ing schemes will be carried out as part of the project preparation to 
help determine what kind of support might be needed and appropriate.  This assessment will also 
include on-going experiences and scope for the provision of rural financial services in Angola that 
are currently being provided by local and international NGOs. The main goal of this component is 
sustainable increase in agricultural production for the smallholders. 
 
(c) Support for Value Addition and Marketing Infrastructure  
 
This sub-component will support investments related to market linkages and commercialization, 
including value addition, post-harvest management and marketing activities for key crops and 
horticulture. The critical issues that need to be addressed are packaging, storage, small-scale 
processing, and marketing infrastructure and even contract farming. The main focus will be on 
value addition, reduction of post-harvest losses and market linkages. All sub-projects requesting 
financing under this sub-component will prepare a project proposal and a business plan that will go 
through a complete appraisal process to determine the economic feasibility and sustainability. 
Specific list of sub-projects that will be supported under this sub-component will be identified 
during preparation of the proposed project. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million) 
 
This component deals with coordination and monitoring and implementation of the project and 
consists of two sub-components: 
 
a. Project Management: 
The purpose of this sub-component is to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, on time 
and in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project 
Coordinator and a small team of ex perts located at the national, and provincial or municipal levels. 
The final arrangements for project management will incorporate the lessons learned under MOSAP. 
  
b. Project Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established that will be responsible for 
collecting and processing appropriate information to verify the output, effect and eventually the 
impact of project activities over time. Baseline information will also be collected at the beginning of 
the project.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 20.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 70.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.00
 Total 95.00


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA22127

Project Name MA-Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project (P150930)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Morocco
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (3%), Irrigation and drainage 

(80%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (1 
7%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Water resource 
management (33%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P150930
Borrower(s) Kingdom of Morocco
Implementing Agency DIAEA
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 25-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

27-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

Appraisal was carried out from March 17 to 25.

I. Project Context
Country Context
Morocco has been on a steady path of growth in the past decades, which has proved relatively 
resilient in the face of the recent global economic slowdown. Growth averaged 4.8 percent over 
2001-12 compared to 2.8 percent in the 1990s, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita 
doubled from 2001 to 2012 reaching US$2,951, unemployment declined from 13.6 percent in 2000 
to 9 percent in 2012, and absolute poverty decreased from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 8.8 percent in 
2008. 
 
The Arab Spring that has swept the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region in early 2011 
spurred a peaceful political transformation in Morocco. Morocco had engaged on a wide-ranging 
reform program, with the adoption of a new constitution through a popular referendum on July 1, 
2011. The new constitution lays the foundation for extended regionalization as a democratic and 
decentralized system of governance. It also contributes to improving the status of women through 
the adoption of the principle of gender equality and through provisions on increasing the 

participation of women in decision-making bodies. In November 2011, parliamentary elections 
followed the promulgation of the constitution, leading to the formation of a four-party coalition 
government that has embraced the constitution's principles and called for more social solidarity and 
inclusion.  
 
Inequality, poverty, and vulnerability remain important challenges in Morocco. A quarter of the 
population is still economically vulnerable (near-poverty). There are persistent disparities as 70 
percent of poverty is still rural, and most development indicators in rural areas lag behind urban 
areas, largely as a result of difficult geography, deteriorating infrastructure, poor access to basic 
services, and limited capital investments to improve labor value added and hence returns to self-
employment and contract labor. Ten percent of Morocco’s 13.4 million rural residents lived below 
the poverty line in 2011. Rural poverty exacerbates gender disparity with relatively higher illiteracy 
and primary school dropout rates for rural women, and higher infant and maternal mortality. 
 
Morocco has engaged in a dynamic process towards strengthening economic opportunities and 
social inclusion. Several high profile development programs (e.g. the second phase of the National 
Human Development Initiative, INDH) and new sectoral strategies in the areas of education, 
employment, and youth have been initiated. Nonetheless, additional efforts are needed to support 
the country-led reforms. The movements associated with the political transition and constitutional 
changes generate pressure on the Moroccan State for credible and faster reforms, notably in the 
areas of job creation and improvement of the quality of public services delivered.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is central to Morocco’s economy, as evidenced by the strong correlation among GDP 
and agriculture GDP. Over the last agricultural campaign, thanks to favorable weather, the sector 
represented 15.6 percent of GDP, contributing the most to the country’s overall growth. The 20 
percent increase in agricultural production allowed Morocco’s GDP to jump from 2.7 percent in 
2012 to 4.4 percent in 2013. The agricultural sector represents a critical element in the country’s 
demographic and socio-economic situation, generating 40 percent of the jobs nationwide, mostly in 
rural areas where the majority of the poor live. The sector is largely composed of small farmers 
mostly dedicated to low-value agriculture, but also counts a limited group of dynamic and well 
performing large farmers with state-of-the-art technologies and well integrated into the national and 
international markets. The sector exhibits great gender disparities. Women’s work is typically 
unpaid (in 2003-04, 58 percent of cases; in 2008, 91 percent), or it is seasonal and unstable when 
remunerated (59 percent of cases in 2003-04; 84 percent in 2008). 
 
Irrigation increases both the level and stability of incomes in rural areas. Despite representing only 
16 percent of the cultivated land, irrigated agriculture contributes to about half of the agriculture 
GDP, 75 percent of agricultural exports, and 15 percent of overall merchandise exports. The 
country has 1.46 million ha of permanently irrigated land, 682,600 ha of which are part of nine 
Large Scale Irrigation (LSI) perimeters operated by nine public agricultural development agencies 
(ORMVA). ORMVAs are autonomous agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Maritime Fisheries (MAPM), with the responsibility of constructing new irrigation 
schemes, rehabilitating and modernizing existing ones, ensuring Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) of irrigation and drainage facilities, and providing extension services to farmers. The 
remaining area is shared between small and medium scale traditional irrigation schemes managed 
by Water Users Associations (WUA, 334,000 ha) and private irrigation (441,000 ha). Morocco is 



among the first countries with experience in irrigation Public-Private Partnership (PPP). In 2004, it 
launched the first successful irrigation PPP in the world, in the citrus production perimeter of 
Guerdane. Other PPP are at various stages of preparation (Azemmour Bir Jdid, Dar Khrofa, 
Chtouka). 
 
The ability of irrigated agriculture to continue to drive shared prosperity in Morocco is threatened 
by increasing water scarcity. Reduced rainfall, increased rainfall variability, reduced run off, 
groundwater depletion, and degradation of water resources have reached alarming levels. Annual 
renewable water resources total 22 billion m3, corresponding to 730 m3/inhabitant, which is below 
the United Nations’ threshold for indicating water stress (1,000 m3/inhabitant). The water deficit is 
estimated at around 2 billion m3. Climate change is expected to worsen this situation. Impacts of 
climate change are already visible in Morocco: the proportion of dry years increased by four times 
and surface water availability decreased by 35 percent between the period 1947-1976 and 
1977-2006. Water scarcity impacts irrigated agriculture in different ways: 
• In private irrigation, which largely relies on groundwater, reduced and more variable 
rainfall translates into groundwater overexploitation. The majority of the wells are neither 
registered nor monitored, and improvement in water pumping technologies and butane subsidy 
facilitate overextraction. Decreasing groundwater levels have a specific equity dimension, 
impacting at first smallholders with less capacity for drilling and pumping deeper.  
• In LSI perimeters, which rely on surface water, water scarcity translates into reduced 
volumes allocated to farmers and limits summer crops production. While agriculture remains the 
primary user of surface water, accounting for about 85 percent of the withdrawals, severe 
restrictions in irrigation have been common in the last 15 years. LSI perimeters in the Oum er Rbia 
river basin received, on average, only 60 percent of the water volumes they were designed for. 
These volumes were consistently lower than the water allocation stated in the Regional Masterplans 
for Integrated Water Resources Management (PDAIRE). Wherever possible, farmers in LSI 
perimeters have been making up for this shortfall by complementing water allocated by the 
ORMVAs with groundwater, bearing the extra pumping costs and further aggravating groundwater 
depletion.  
Farmers in LSI perimeters face structural constraints that limit the productive use of the scarce 
water resource. These include among others: collective water management, rigid water distribution 
rules, frequent shut-downs, unequal access to water, and land tenure issues. All of these constraints 
lock farmers in LSI perimeters into a low-risk and low return equilibrium in which they carry out 
low input, extensive farming focused on low value crops, and avoid more capital intensive 
strategies which allow for high value products and higher returns but bear higher risks in case of 
water deficiencies. 
 
LSI perimeters suffer from aging irrigation networks and poor Operation and Maintenance (O&M). 
The ORMVAs have limited budget to improve this situation. Recovery rates in Morocco are 
amongst the best in MENA, varying between 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 percent 
(2010). In some LSI perimeters, water tariffs are insufficient to cover the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs, and even more so the amortization costs, translating into the need for 
subsidies from the Government. Tariffs in LSI perimeters vary between 0.27 and 0.77DH/m3 
depending on the perimeters and the associated energy bill, compared to 1.30 to 1.80DH/m3 in 
perimeters managed through PPP. While there was an increase in O&M budget since 2009 (average 
2001-08: Tadla DH14.6 M, Doukkala: DH18.6 M; average 2009-13: Tadla DH31.1 M, Doukkala 
DH36.8 M), the allocation remains insufficient to meet the needs. Cost recovery rates in Morocco 
are amongst the highest in MENA, varying between, 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 

 percent. While the recovery of water bills should be improved in the LSI perimeters were 
the most important arrears are generated, this increase would not be sufficient to meet the financial 
needs of the ORMVAs. Consequently, a plan to increase water tariffs in LSI perimeters was laid out 
in 2011, but it sparked protests by farmers, which led the Government of Morocco (GoM) to 
postpone the measure. A political economy analysis of the irrigation sector reform, revealed that 
there is typically no capacity to pay problem, and that the main reason for farmers’ opposition was 
the lack of direct improvements in service quality associated with tariff increase. 
 
The GoM is putting in place incentives, investments, and institutional reforms to ensure greater 
returns at the farm and overall economy levels in light of increasingly restricted water resource. 
This is done through two synergic strategies: 
• The Morocco Green Plan (PMV) aims to double the agriculture sector’s value-added and 
create 1.5 million jobs by 2020, thus transforming the sector into a stable source of growth, 
competitiveness, and broad-based economic development. In addition to its transversal institutional 
and policy reforms, the PMV comprises two Pillars reflecting the dualistic nature of Moroccan 
agriculture: Pillar I targets commercial farmers and their integration into the national and 
international markets, while Pillar II targets small farmers mainly in marginal areas. Under both 
pillars, technology and organizational support is provided to implement an agri-food chain 
approach linking farmers to market. The Agricultural Development Fund (FDA), the GoM’s 
principal agricultural subsidy instrument, has been reformed and support measures aligned with the 
strategic directions of the PMV. Since PMV’s launch in 2008, production has increased by 45 
percent, agricultural exports have risen by 18 percent, and 77,000 permanent jobs have been 
created. 
• The National Plan for Saving Water in Irrigation (PNEEI) promotes more productive water 
use by introducing efficient irrigation technologies (mainly drip irrigation) on 555,000 ha of the 
country’s irrigated land by 2020, of which 335,000 ha in private farms and 220,000 ha in LSI 
perimeters. This process is supported though the FDA, with up to 100 percent subsidy for the 
adoption of drip and microsprinkler irrigation, and up to 70 percent subsidy for sprinkler irrigation. 
Since PNEEI’s launch in 2008, the adoption of drip irrigation has been proceeding at a fast pace in 
privately developed irrigation areas, with over 200,000 ha completed (60 percent of the 2020 
target). In LSI perimeters, conversion is ongoing on 57,000 ha only, due to the need for prior 
investments in the irrigation networks. The figure is expected to increase steadily in the coming 
future, considering that pre-feasibility studies in LSI perimeters have been completed for 100,000 
ha. While impacts remain to be observed, field experiments in Tadla demonstrated that agricultural 
water productivity (defined as value of produce per unit of water used) could be doubled by 
switching from the traditional surface irrigation to improved water management under drip 
irrigation. 
 
The Large Scale Irrigation Modernization project is fully aligned with the comprehensive reform 
process of Morocco. The project supports the ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala and Gharb in 
providing farmers located in the LSI perimeters with an improved water service. This means 
individual access (rather than collective), on-demand (rather than on rotation), reliable (with faster 
re-establishment of the service in case of shut-downs), and equitable (in terms of flow and pressure 
across the irrigation network). Targeted farmers will be freed up of some structural constraints and 
have the opportunity to improve their farming choices, adopting improved irrigation technologies 
(mainly drip irrigation), which are more efficient in the use of the scarce water resource and better 
suited for high-value crops.


II. Proposed Development Objectives
The project development objectives are: (i) for targeted ORMVAs, to provide an improved water 
service to farmers, and (ii) for targeted farmers, to have better access to improved irrigation 
technologies.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improving the irrigation network infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will construct pressurized irrigation networks to replace existing gravity networks and 
renovate existing pressurized irrigation networks. Under adequate management, the networks’ 
design will allow providing farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical 
requirements of improved irrigation technologies. Activities include: (i) studies; (ii) technical 
assistance to monitor construction works; (iii) upgrading irrigation canals and constructing 
reservoirs; (iv) constructing feeder pipes and rehabilitating pumping stations; (v) constructing 
filtration stations; (vi) constructing distribution piped networks, or rehabilitating and extending 
existing distribution piped networks; and (vii) installing outlets and associated devices.

Component Name
Component 2: Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies
Comments (optional)
Component 2 will strengthen farmers’ knowledge of and access to improved irrigation technologies, 
to allow them taking advantage of the improved water service provided by the ORMVAs. Farmers 
will become familiar with the advantages of the improved irrigation technologies, and will have 
easier access to financing opportunities to adopt them. Once the improved irrigation technologies is 
in place, farmers will receive irrigation advisory services, and their capacity to access, use, and 
maintain the irrigation systems will be strengthened. i Farmers will also develop better knowledge 
of their groundwater, where appropriate.

Component Name
Component 3: Supporting implementing agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and 
implementation of the project
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity of the ORMVAs in operating and 
maintaining the irrigation networks, to ensure that new and improved networks are managed so to 
provide farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical requirements of improved 
irrigation technologies. Component 3 will also support implementing the project. Component 3 
activities will include: (i) technical assistance to improve O&M of the irrigation network; (ii) 
training, technical assistance, computer equipment, and associated tools for project management; 
and (iii) implementation of the EMP; (iv) provision of equipment and infrastructure rehabilitation 
for DIAEA and ORMVAs.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00


International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
Total 150.00

V. Implementation
The project will have five implementation entities. The ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala, and 
Gharb will implement most of the activities. The Department of Irrigation and Rural Infrastructure 
(DIAEA) of the MAPM will implement one activity under Component 3 and will be responsible for 
overall project coordination, management, and reporting. 
 
The DIAEA and the ORMVAs are both experienced in managing World Bank-funded projects, the 
Oum er Rbia basin irrigated agriculture modernization project (PROMER, 2010-2016) being the 
most recent. Each ORMVA targeted by the project manages a LSI perimeter covering about 100,000 
ha. They have good technical and managerial capacity to implement large irrigation development 
and modernization projects. Training and technical assistance will be provided as needed.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA19698

Project Name Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)
Region AFRICA
Country Ethiopia
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Irrigation 

and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), 
Ag ro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource 
management (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support 
(10%), Gender ( 10%), Nutrition and food security (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148591
Borrower(s) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 07-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 09-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

09-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-Mar-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is land-locked and located in the Horn of Africa, with an 
area of 1.1 million km2. Its bio-physical environment includes a variety of ecosystems, with 
significant differences in climate, soil properties, vegetation types, and agricultural potential, 
biodiversity and water resources. Ethiopia is a country of many nations, nationalities and peoples, 
with a total population of 91.7 million (2012).  Only 17 percent of the population lives in urban 
centres, the great majority of them in Addis Ababa. At a current annual growth rate of 2.6 percent, 
Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025, and is projected by the UN to be 
among the world’s ten largest countries by 2050. Ethiopia is vulnerable to terms of trade shocks 
from international food and fuel prices, and to large domestic weather-related shocks as 
demonstrated by the 2011/12 East Africa drought. 
 
Ethiopia has a federal, democratic government system, established in the early 1990s, with nine 
autonomous states (‘regions’) and two chartered cities. Decentralization of governance to the 

regional and district (woreda) levels has been actively pursued since 2003. The Ethiopian People’s 
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has been in power in Ethiopia since 1991. EPRDF 
comprises four regionally-based parties from the four major regions (Amhara, Oromia, Southern 
Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (SNNPR), and Tigray). The long-serving Prime Minister, Meles 
Zenawi, (from Tigray) died in August 2012 and was succeeded by Hailemariam Desalegn (from 
SNNPR) who has pursued largely the same policies. The next national elections are scheduled for 
2015. 
 
Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth over the past decade. Economic growth averaged 
10.7 percent per year in 2003/04 to 2011/12, compared to the regional average of 5.0 percent. 
Growth reflected a mix of factors, including agricultural modernization, the development of new 
export sectors, strong global commodity demand, and government-led development investments. 
Private consumption and public investment have driven demand side growth, with the latter 
assuming an increasingly important role in recent years. On the supply side, growth was driven by 
an expansion of the services and agricultural sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was 
relatively modest. Recently, annual growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high 
single-digit levels. Growth in the export of goods has also moderated in recent years and a decline 
was observed in 2012/13 for the first time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in 
recent years and, while inflation is currently much lower, keeping it down remains a major 
objective for monetary policy. 
 
Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress on social and 
human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$470  is 
substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the ten lowest worldwide. 
Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United 
Nations Development Program (UNDP). High economic growth, however, has helped reduce 
poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been lifted out of 
poverty, and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 
2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11  (using a poverty line of close to US$1.25/day). However, 
because of high population growth, the absolute number of poor (about 25 million) has remained 
unchanged over the past fifteen years. Ethiopia is among the countries that have made the fastest 
progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and HDI ranking over the past decade. It 
is on track to achieve the MDGs for gender parity in education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and 
malaria. Good progress has been made in universal primary education, although the MDG target 
may not be met. Reduction of maternal mortality remains a key challenge. 
 
GoE is currently implementing its ambitious Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP; 
2010/11-2014/15), which sets a long-term goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2025, 
with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the plan period. To achieve the GTP 
goals and objectives, GoE has followed a “developmental state” model with a strong role for the 
government in many aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and 
agriculture as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms 
GoE’s commitment to human development. Development partners have programs that are broadly 
aligned with GTP priorities. 
 
The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) builds on the progress 
achieved by Ethiopia in recent years and aims to help GoE address structural transformation and 
assist in the implementation of the GTP. The CPS framework includes two pillars. Pillar One, 


“Fostering competitiveness and employment”, aims to support Ethiopia in achieving: (i) a stable 
macroeconomic environment; (ii) increased competitiveness and productivity; (iii) increased and 
improved delivery of infrastructure; and (iv) enhanced regional integration.  Pillar Two, “Enhancing 
resilience and reducing vulnerabilities”, aims to support Ethiopia in improving the delivery of social 
services and developing a comprehensive approach to social protection and risk management. Good 
governance and state building form the foundation of the CPS. In line with the GTP, gender and 
climate change have been included as cross-cutting issues to strengthen their mainstreaming across 
the portfolio. The programs of IFC and MIGA are well aligned with the CPS framework, 
contributing mainly to the strategic objectives under Pillar One.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in the Ethiopian economy and an important 
source of economic growth. Although there is an on-going structural transformation in the 
Ethiopian economy, predominantly from agriculture to services and manufacturing, agriculture still 
comprises 45 percent of total output and continues to dominate employment (78 percent). The 
sector is also a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports. Despite 
its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Over the past 15 years 
the average rate of growth has been around seven percent per year according to official statistics. 
Sources of growth have come from an increased area under cultivation and from increased 
productivity, the latter driven by large public investment in the sector, including agricultural 
extension, rural roads, and advances in public policy such as improvements in land tenure security. 
In addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth is correlated with 
poverty reduction, for smallholder farmers and also through positive impacts on non-farm rural 
economies. 
 
Although Ethiopia has a trend of negative overall balance of trade, the country has consistently had 
a positive balance of trade in the agriculture sector. The agriculture imports per capita and exports 
per capita stood at $13.28 and $18.27 respectively in 2011. The top three agriculture exports have 
been coffee, oil seeds and pulses while the largest imports have been cereals, edible oils and sugar. 
In spite of the positive trade balances in the sector, marketing (including intra-regional trade) in the 
sector is constrained by mixed and often unfavorable policies for input and output markets and poor 
infrastructure leading to high transportation costs. There remains considerable potential for both 
increased exports from the sector and further import substitution, especially for cereals 
(predominantly wheat) and sugar.   
 
The further growth of the agriculture sector is expected to feature prominently in the second phase 
of the GTP (GTP-II), currently under preparation.  Maintaining the current growth rate in the sector 
will be challenging as recent gains from land expansion may be exhausted, and further increases 
will need to come from increased agricultural productivity. Progress requires both investment and 
policy reform.  The general thrust on policy reform is to pursue agricultural transformation by 
increasing private sector investment and value added in the country to increase the value of exports. 
In 2012, the Government agreed a G8 New Alliance framework for Ethiopia with a number of 
commitments for policy actions to facilitate the expansion of private investment.  Under this 
framework, the Government intends to focus its efforts in particular on: i) increasing stability and 
transparency in trade policy; ii) improving incentives for the private sector investment; iii) 
developing and implementing a transparent land tenure policy; and iv) developing and 
implementing domestic seed policies that encourage increased private sector involvement in this 

area. To support the transformation agenda, the Government established the Agricultural 
Transformation Agency (ATA) in 2011 to support the Ministry of Agriculture to advance policy 
and build capacity.  Notable achievements include the new Agricultural Cooperatives Development 
Strategy and the passing of the Seeds Proclamation. 
 
The Government’s agricultural development strategy focuses on both encouraging large scale 
investment in commercial agriculture and support to smallholder farmers, who in 2012/13 
contributed 96 percent of the total agricultural production according to official statistics. To 
increase agricultural productivity of smallholders and their transformation to commercial farmers 
requires a strengthening and focusing of support services and infrastructure, and greater private 
investment to support input and output value chains.  To drive this transformation, the Government 
is moving towards focused support to specific commercialization clusters targeting areas with the 
highest potential for the production of commodities for which Ethiopia has a comparative 
advantage and can stimulate agro-processing and value addition.   
 
Despite the large investment into public agricultural services, especially into extension, which has 
seen a rapid rise in the number of extension workers and beneficiaries served year on year, there are 
capacity weaknesses which continue to inhibit the identification and dissemination of technologies 
to support increased productivity.  Strengthening research and extension linkages, further expansion 
and capacity of the extension service and enhancing farmer access to inputs are required to support 
investments in extension workers.  Improving agriculture research has been prioritized in GTP and 
the same is expected in GTP II because of the pivotal role it plays to improve agricultural 
productivity and production and recognizing that in recent years it has been underfunded.  Animal 
health and production services also suffer from capacity limitations and low outreach, leading to 
low productivity and quality across a range of animal products.  
 
Access to and application of agricultural inputs is a decisive factor to improve agricultural 
productivity and production.  In addition to improved seeds, animal breeds and fertilizers, there is 
considerable opportunity to promote the use of machinery for production and post-harvest 
activities.  Innovations such as row planters for teff have had a considerable impact on productivity. 
However, input markets in Ethiopia are typically overly dependent on cooperative unions and the 
agro-dealer market is small and underdeveloped.  While cooperatives can play an important role in 
linking smallholder farmers to input and output markets, they are often hampered by weak 
management and facilities, and currently only handle a small percentage of agricultural output.  
There is potential for strengthening cooperatives while also enabling greater private engagement in 
both input and output markets.  
 
Output marketing system and infrastructure in Ethiopia are dominated by traditional, informal 
exchanges. For a large part of the country, this means trading with limited infrastructure. There are 
few market structures, storage, loading and unloading facilities, quality checking and banking 
services in or around most of the market centers. This has resulted in the cost of trading being very 
high due to cumbersome conditions for transaction, low product qualities and post-harvest losses.  
Value chains (other than for coffee which has a relatively efficient market structures) are therefore 
characterized by an absence of market participants, market inefficiencies and limited value addition. 
With increasing agricultural surpluses, rapid urbanization and increased opportunities for agro-
industrial investment, there are gaps in the current functioning in a number of value chains which 
are prioritized under the commercialization cluster approach to achieving transformation.  
 


Agricultural water development is crucial to improve smallholders’ livelihood and income in 
Ethiopia, since irrigation can help farmers increase their crop production, increase crop varieties, 
and lengthen their agricultural seasons. From a very low base, over the next five years there are 
targets to increase the total area of irrigated land from the current 640,000 hectares (about 4 percent 
of currently cultivated land) to about 1.8 million hectares. Small Scale Irrigation (SSI) and Rain 
Water Harvesting (RWH) will account for about two-thirds of this expansion, as these technologies 
require lower capital and technical investments and they are possible on small plain areas. Beyond 
the next five years, plans are to reach the full irrigable potential of the country of over 5 million 
hectares. Household irrigation as well as medium- and large-scale schemes will be an important 
strategy to achieve this goal, in combination with exploring and developing groundwater potential, 
especially given that an estimated 85 percent of Ethiopia’s total surface water irrigation potential is 
estimated to be in large-scale schemes.  
 
Future agricultural growth needs t o be sensitive to gender.  On average, female farm managers in 
Ethiopia produce 23 percent less (in terms of gross value of output) per hectare than their male 
counterparts. Differences in both the levels of productive factors used and the returns that these 
factors generate drive this gender gap. Future inclusive agricultural growth should consider: (i) the 
promotion of labor-saving technologies for women; (ii) the provision of relevant information to 
female farmers, customized to the needs of female farmers; and (iii) the easing of the time burden 
of household responsibilities, by providing services to reduce the time that female farmers need to 
perform household duties to enable them to devote more time to productive farm activities. Recent 
research demonstrates the potential of women to contribute to agricultural growth and improve 
outcomes, including improved nutrition.   
 
In Ethiopia, forty percent of children under the age of five suffer from stunting as a consequence of 
chronic and cyclical malnutrition. The National Nutrition Program (NNP) was revised in 2013 to 
strategically address the nutrition problem in the country to include initiatives that have emerged 
since the 2008 NNP, including taking into account the multisectoral and multidimensional nature of 
nutrition and the linkages among key implementing sectors, one being agriculture.  This program, 
endorsed by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health and another eight line Ministers, 
includes a strategic objective to strengthen implementation of nutrition sensitive interventions in the 
agriculture sector. The initiatives focus on improving the consumption of diversified diets at the 
household level through: (i) diversification of crop, fruits and livestock production; (ii) promotion 
of appropriate technologies for food production and processing through the handling, preparation 
and preservation for food diversification to ensure nutritious food utilization;  (iii) building the 
capacity of Development Agents (DAs) at community level and agriculture program managers at all 
levels to implement nutrition sensitive agriculture;  (iv) supporting local complementary food 
production and creating economic opportunities for women through development groups and 
cooperatives; and, (v) supporting agricultural research centers to develop seeds of high nutritional 
value.  Thus, it calls for aligning the agricultural growth programs to improve nutritional status. 
 
With the limits of bringing uncultivated land under production being met, the likelihood of climatic 
variability and the potential degradation arising from more intensive production practices increases, 
and thus there is an urgent need for agriculture to conserve resources and reduce degradation. In 
recent years, considerable amount of work in natural resource conservation and development work 
has been undertaken. In 2013/14 alone, the communities undertook natural resources conservations 
work on 20.15 million hectares of land throughout the country, according to official statistics.  This 
current momentum of community mobilization in natural resource conservation by pursuing 




activities such as slope stabilization, watershed approaches to water management and reduction of 
tillage should be sustained to make the sector more resilient and sustainable. 
 
The opportunities for inclusive and sustainable growth in the sector are strong as is the 
Government’s commitment to achieving ambitious growth and transformation targets.  The 
Agricultural Sector Policy and Investment Framework (PIF), 2010 – 2020, provides an investment 
framework to align the investment and policy priorities with higher level goals to transform the 
sector and is designed to operationalize the CAADP Compact signed by the Government and its 
development partners. Under the PIF, there have been concerted efforts to collaborate and partner 
on investments and the Agricultural Growth Project (AGP I – P113032) was a clear output of this. 
The first phase of the program was financed to around US$350 million, including US$150 million 
from IDA, US$50 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), a US
$50 million Multi-donor Trust Fund with contributions from the Netherlands, Canada and Spain, 
and parallel financing from USAID and Italy.  Currently, AGPI operates at  kebele levels (the 
lowest administrative unit) in 96 woredas of the four regions of Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR and 
Tigray and has provided support for improved public agricultural service provision, technology 
transfer, improved market access and marketing, infrastructure (household and small-scale 
irrigation, feeder roads and market centers) and capacity building.  The project further explicitly 
aims to increase the participation of women and youth in the sector.  The proposed project therefore 
aims to build on AGP1, to scale up the geographical extent, consolidate the investments, and meet 
the emerging challenges of the sector outlines above. 
 
Under AGPI, the project has been operating in 4 regions (Amhara, Oromia, SNNP and Tigray), 96 
woredas and 2,423 kebeles, targeting 1.57 million direct beneficiaries.  The AGP2 project would 
cover 157 woredas, which would include all woredas targeted under AGP1 plus an additional 61. 
The woredas are distributed among the following regions: Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR, Tigray, 
Benshangul-Gumuz, Gambella, Harari and Dire Dawa Administrative Council. The expansion into 
the new regions and Dire Dawa would be on a limited scale, with two woredas in each of 
Benshangul-Gumuz and Gambella, and one in each of Harari and Dire Dawa.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization 
of small holder farmers targeted by the project.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Agricultural Public Support Services.
Comments (optional)
To increase access to public agricultural services for smallholder farmers, the project will support 
the strengthening of public services delivery, including for agricultural extension services;  animal 
production and animal health services; crop production and plant health services; natural resource 
management services; soil fertility management services; and agricultural mechanization.

Component Name
Agricultural Research
Comments (optional)
To increase the supply of demand driven agricultural technologies which directly link to the other 
components, the project will support technology adaptation and generation and the release of 


technologies to the agricultural extension system; pre-extension demonstration and participatory 
research for recommended agricultural technologies; and source technology production, including 
the production of breeder and pre-basic seeds for major crop varieties.

Component Name
Small-scale Irrigation
Comments (optional)
To increase the access to and efficient utilization of irrigation water of small holder farmers, the 
project will support the increased availability of irrigated water through: i) the rehabilitation, 
upgrading and/or improvement of existing Small-scale Irrigation Schemes; ii) establishment of new 
SSI systems integrated with access roads where necessary; and iii) household irrigation systems. 
The project would also support improved water management services through establishing and/or 
strengthening Irrigation Water Users Organizations and the introduction of improved irrigation 
agricultural management.

Component Name
Agricultural Marketing and Value Chains
Comments (optional)
To commercialize small holder farmers through market access and efficiency of input and output 
markets, the project would support: the promotion and distribution of agricultural inputs, 
specifically seed multiplication and distribution; the strengthening of formal and informal farmer 
organizations, including formal farmer organizations and informal, commercially oriented farmer 
groups; the strengthening of selected livestock and crop value chains; and market infrastructure 
development and management.

Component Name
Project Management, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
To ensure project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a 
consistent and effective approach to capacity development, the project would support: project 
management and coordination; monitoring, evaluation and learning; and the Capacity Building 
Support Facility.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 581.80 Total Bank Financing: 350.00
Financing Gap: 216.20
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 15.60
International Development Association (IDA) 350.00
Total 365.60

V. Implementation
The AGP 2 will build on institutional arrangements and implementation mechanisms established for 
th AGPI.  As in the first phase, the implementation of the project will rely on existing GoE 
structures, with the exception of parallel funding through the USAID and Canadian DFATD that 
will be channeled through specific implementation arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture will 
have the overall responsibility of the coordination and implementation of the project. To fulfill its 


bilities, the MoA will use - or will establish in the new targeted regions - the institutional 
mechanisms already established for AGP 1 at Federal, Regional, and Woreda levels, i.e: (i) the 
Steering Committees (SCs), (ii) the Technical Committees (TCs), and (iii) the Project’s 
Coordination Units (CUs). The existing composition of these Committees will be reviewed in order 
to include new implementing agencies such as the Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research 
(EIAR). At the Zonal level, the Zonal Agriculture Office (ZAO) will provide technical support, 
extension services and M&E to the group of woredas under its authority. The ZAOs will coordinate 
with the Woreda Offices of Agriculture (WOA). 
 
Implementation of the project will be decentralized. Federal implementing agencies will provide 
guidance and support to regions, spearhead most institutional capacity building activities and 
undertake monitoring, evaluation and communication activities. At regional and woreda levels, the 
Bureaus/Offices of Agriculture will assume primary responsibility for execution of the project.  
Implementation of AGP at the regional level will also be supported by relevant service providers 
and institutions.  
 
The annual planning process will follow a two-pronged approach associating: (i) a demand-driven 
approach based on the Community Level Participatory Planning (CLPP) approach adopted for AGP-
I in which communities are assuming primary responsibility for identifying and executing the 
community-based investment of the project, and (ii) a strategic-based approach in which 
investments are pre-identified through the Kebele, Woreda and Regional development plan or 
through specific feasibility studies, and implemented in close collaboration with the community 
after a consultation process. At the woreda and kebele levels, the implementation of the project 
would be undertaken jointly by Woreda Office of Agriculture through the Woreda Development 
Committee (WDC), the Kebele Development Committee (KDC), and the communities. The WDC 
and the KDC will be guided by their respective SCs and TCs.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖





































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Rural Community Finance
Project



Republic of Liberia

Rural Community Finance Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agencies: Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit (TASU) and
Technical Assistance and Supervision Company
(TASC), and Central Bank of Liberia (CBL)

Total project cost: US$10.86 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 4.01 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.38 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per year

Contribution of borrower: US$0.54 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.39 million including US$3.2 million frombeneficiaries, US$1.1 million from RCFIs and US$0.09
million from CBL

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Rural Community Finance Project as
contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Rural Community Finance Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of its civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of Ebola
virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity and
impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a Least
Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies heavily on
foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in 20142 and,
according to the 2014 Human Development Index, increased by 68.2 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. With a 2013 Human Development Index score of 0.412,
Liberia ranked 175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be less than 14 years old.
Poverty is widespread in Liberia, and is particularly acute in rural areas. An
estimated 51 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily
concentrated, and a high percentage lack access to basic infrastructure and social
services, with poor road conditions leaving many areas inaccessible. Approximately
55 per cent of rural Liberian households are food insecure.3

3. The agricultural sector is the primary source of livelihood for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. There are also
cash-crop plantations including rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil and sugar cane.
Although agriculture is the largest contributor of GDP, small-scale farmers are
among the poorest in the country. Liberia has signed the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) Compact, committing to the Maputo
Protocol goal of 10 per cent national budget expenditure on agriculture by 2017
(the current level is 3 per cent of the national budget). As a result of low
agricultural production and productivity, Liberia imports between 50 per cent and
60 per cent of its staple food requirements, leaving the country vulnerable to price
fluctuations in global markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for
Liberia for the period 2011-2015 is aligned with the CAADP and national policies,
especially the Liberia Agriculture Sector Investment Program. Three
IFAD-supported projects are currently contributing to the RB-COSOP: (i) the
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project; (ii) the Smallholder Tree Crop

1 Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries list for 2014, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
2 World Bank World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas Method (Current US$).
3 Liberia Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey, June 2013.



2

Revitalization and Support Project; and (iii) the support to the Farmers’ Union
Network.

5. As the Liberia RB-COSOP reached its midway point, its performance and relevance
were reviewed to identify the way forward for future IFAD support under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation system. The findings of the 2013 review
revealed that the strategic objectives under the RB-COSOP continue to be relevant,
with the provision that the transition from an emergency situation to a development
approach is realized. The needs and priorities of smallholder farmers and their
organizations are changing. Their growing interest in investing in agriculture and in
other microenterprises and small business is generating greater demand for credit
and will necessitate better access to rural finance. This demand has been
recognized in government efforts to promote growth in the local economy and
reduce poverty in the long term. The Government’s interest in building the rural
finance sector has been mirrored by the CBL. With the current RB-COSOP set to
end in 2015, the new RB-COSOP will require a stronger focus on rural finance.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Project area. The project will facilitate the creation of new rural community

finance institutions (RCFIs) in selected areas throughout the country. RCFI locations
will be identified through feasibility studies and criteria including the degree of
commitment by host communities, absence of banking facilities and viability. CBL’s
strategic goals and objectives will also be taken into account. Priority will be given
to locations with significant business potential, including central towns with high
demand for financial services. The project area will also include all locations with
existing RCFIs.

7. Although the project will be nationwide in scope (excluding urban Montserrado
county), its coverage may initially be divided into implementation clusters. At the
district or county level, the following criteria will be used to identify suitable
communities: (i) social, poverty and demographic indicators for identifying
vulnerable communities with high potential; (ii) complementarities with ongoing
and planned initiatives; (iii) the potential for commercial activity, including the
production of cocoa and coffee, and value addition; (iv) the potential for poverty
reduction and employment creation; (v) the potential for mobilization of shares and
savings; and (vi) demand for financial services, particularly among low-income
groups.

8. Target group. The primary target group will be the economically active rural
population: petty traders, smallholder farmers, food processors, local transporters,
craftsmen, artisans and ex-combatants. Special attention will be given to reaching
women and youth, and small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women. As a project
designed to improve access to rural finance, targeting will be inclusive: by virtue of
the fact that the RCFIs will be community-owned, access to the financial services
will be open to the entire community. The project will directly target 24,000
shareholders, at least 50 per cent of them women, and 25 per cent of them young
men and women.

9. The proposed project will complement ongoing initiatives through partnerships to
maximize the impact on the target group. This includes partnerships with farmers’
organizations supported by existing projects that show interest in financial services.

B. Project development objective
10. The overall development goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty and

household food insecurity on a sustainable basis by facilitating access to finance for
at least 24,000 rural individuals and their families. The project’s development
objective is to improve access to rural financial services on a sustainable basis,



3

enabling the development of the rural sector. This project development objective
will be assessed through three indicators, namely that at least: (i) 20 per cent of
the adult rural population (over 16 years) in the project area uses the financial
services of RCFIs supported by the project; (ii) 50 per cent of RCFI shareholders
have received at least one loan; and (iii) 75 per cent of RCFIs supported by the
project achieve 100 per cent operational self-sufficiency (OSS) by the project end.

C. Components/outcomes
11. This five-year project will aim to enhance access to sustainable and affordable rural

financial services in Liberia. The three main outcomes of the project are that: (i)
RCFIs deliver demand-driven and efficient financial services to their clients; (ii)
professional and efficient technical support and supervision services are provided to
RCFIs by an apex body – the Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit/Technical
Assistance and Supervision Company (TASU/TASC)4 and; (iii) a more conducive
regulatory and supervisory environment promotes the rural financial sector. The
project will comprise three components: (i) Rural financial services; (ii) Enabling
environment for rural finance; and (iii) Project management and coordination.

12. Rural financial services. This component includes three subcomponents:
(i) direct support in the creation of 10 RCFIs and extended support to nine existing
RCFIs with support from CBL and a commercial bank; (ii) creation of a TASU/TASC
within CBL to implement the subcomponent 1.1 and support RCFIs; and (iii) a
country-specific grant to mitigate the impacts of the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Given negative impacts of Ebola virus disease on household incomes, earning
capacity, financial and other reserves, and saving capacity, IFAD will support the
recovery of existing RCFIs and the establishment of new ones with US$0.5 million.

13. Enabling environment for rural finance. This component will provide technical
assistance to CBL for developing a sound regulatory framework for deposit-taking
and credit-only financial institutions. There will be a focus on rationalizing Liberia’s
the regulatory environment, including policies and reporting formats for RCFIs,
microfinance institutions (MFIs) and credit unions. This will be achieved in an open
manner that ensures stakeholder participation.

14. Project management and coordination. Component 3, comprising
project-related coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, financial
management and procurement oversight, will be undertaken by the programme
implementation unit (PIU) operating under the supervision of the programme
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture. The PMU is responsible
for the coordination and harmonization of all donor-funded agricultural projects.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The institutional design of the project is simple: the existence of a centralized PIU

for all Ministry of Agriculture projects supported by IFAD makes it possible to
coordinate the rural finance activities assigned to TASU/TASC and CBL. The main
institutional responsibilities comprise: (i) implementation of all grass-roots activities
under component 1 by TASU/TASC; (ii) implementation of component 2 activities,
which are related to CBL’s core mandate, by CBL; (iii) PIU implementation of all
activities related to its mandate (see paragraph 19); and (iv) guidance on major
issues, which will be provided by a project steering committee (PSC).

4 The TASU will be established within the Central Bank of Liberia and will develop over time until
deemed sufficiently strong for transformation into an independent company (TASC), providing services
to member institutions in exchange for a fee.




4

16. TASU/TASC and CBL will share responsibility for implementation. This complies with
the international consensus that central banks’ project interventions should be
limited to activities clearly related to their primary mandates. In this case,
regulation and supervision of financial institutions fall under the mandate of CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will be signed by the PIU, TASU/TASC and CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will also be signed by TASU/TASC and each affiliated
RCFI.

B. Organizational framework
17. The project will operate under the guidance of a PSC composed of representatives

from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning,
and CBL. The PSC will provide project oversight, approve all manuals and revisions,
approve the annual workplan and budget before its submission to IFAD, receive
draft annual reports and decide on major issues. According to PIU implementation
guidelines, all sector-specific projects must have their own PSC with the necessary
technical requirements and expertise.

18. The PMU was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and is
affiliated with that ministry’s Department of Planning and Development . The PMU is
a shared unit in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in the agricultural
sector. The PMU is responsible for overall coordination of activities and information
exchange among partners, ministries and other stakeholders, and for ensuring
synergy among the project implementation units of the various donors.

19. Within the PMU, the IFAD PIU in Monrovia is responsible for the implementation of
all IFAD-funded projects in Liberia related to agriculture. The mandate of the PIU
comprises: project accounting, withdrawals, consolidating annual workplans and
budgets, preparing annual reports, corresponding with government authorities on
issues related to the financing agreement (excluding technical implementation),
documentation, procurement, submitting reports to IFAD and other agencies, M&E,
supervision of support and midterm review (MTR) missions, impact assessment and
end-of-project evaluation.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. A system to integrate planning, M&E, and knowledge management will be
developed at start-up to: (i) provide stakeholders with the data required to steer
implementation; (ii) provide the Ministry of Agriculture and other stakeholders with
information on progress in order to measure the project’s success in increasing
access to finance and other indicators; (iii) support coordination and synergies with
other development projects; (iv) monitor the project’s success in building
participatory processes that ensure the full involvement of rural poor people;
(v) provide participating communities and RCFIs with regular feedback and
analytics; and (vi) provide information on the achievement of RB-COSOP targets.
The PIU will manage this system in collaboration with partners.

B. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. Liberia’s Corruption Perceptions Index score has decreased slightly from
41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and to 37 in 2014. According to the latest IMF Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment conducted in 2012, Liberia’s
Government has made significant improvements since the 2007 assessment, but
the overall state of the public financial management remains somewhat weak. As
part of the project design, a financial management assessment of the PIU
responsible for implementing existing IFAD projects was undertaken. The
assessment found that the existing PIU’s financial management arrangements and
capacity are adequate to meet IFAD requirements. However, since the financial




5

management arrangements of the main implementing partner TASU/TASC are not
yet in place, the initial risk rating was determined to be medium.

22. Financial management. The main responsibility for the project’s financial
management will rest with the PIU. The PIU will maintain a full set of accounts
according to IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted accounting
standards. The PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project
financial statements according to accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual or equivalent guideline to be approved by the Fund.

23. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts in United States dollars
held by CBL – one for the IFAD loan and one for the IFAD grant. In addition, two
operating accounts in United States dollars in a commercial bank acceptable to
IFAD will receive funds from the designated accounts. There will also be an
operating account to receive government counterpart funds. Once the IFAD
financing has entered into force, IFAD will make an initial deposit into the
designated accounts equal to the requirements of six months of implementation
(authorized allocation). IFAD financing will be disbursed following certified
withdrawal applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures, which
will be specified in the letter to the borrower.

24. Procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out according to national
procedures as long as they comply with IFAD guidelines. By default, the project will
utilize the procurement committee established within the Ministry of Agriculture’s
PIU.

25. Audit arrangements. The PIU will appoint independent auditors acceptable to
IFAD under terms of reference cleared by IFAD and in line with IFAD’s guidelines for
project audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project together with a management letter on audit observations of internal
controls shall be submitted to the Fund within six months of each fiscal year end.

D. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions whenever needed, will be organized with the
participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, CBL, TASU/TASC, RCFIs and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be
conducted as general inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and
lessons learned, and to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact.
Missions will be an integral part of the knowledge management cycle, with mission
members supporting project and implementing agencies’ staff.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including price and physical

contingencies, are estimated at US$10,860,000; contingencies account for
3 per cent of these costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$3,006,000 (28 per cent). Taxes represent US$404,000. The total base cost is
US$10,426,000 while price and other contingencies account for US$434,000.
Significant contributions will be made by beneficiary communities (purchase of
shares), RCFIs (contributions to operating costs of RCFIs and TASU/TASC) and CBL
(staff time). The total costs by component and subcomponent are summarized by
financier in table 1 below.

28. The base cost of component 1 – Rural financial services – represents an investment
of US$9.7 million (93 per cent of the total base cost) while component 2 – Enabling
environment for rural finance, accounts for US$313,000 (3 per cent of the total





6

base cost). Project management and coordination under component 3 account for
4 per cent of the base cost, or US$417,000.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.  Rural financial
services

i. RCFIs 239 3.3 2 693 36.8 - - 1 139 15.6 - - 3 240 44.3 7 310 72.2

ii. TASC 114 4.9 2 108 91.1 - - - - 92 4.0 - - 2 313 22.9
iii. Grant for

economic
recovery
after
Ebola virus
disease 8 1.7 - - 490 98.3 - - - - - - 498 4.9

Subtotal 361 3.6 4 800 47.4 490 4.8 1 139 11.3 92 0.9 3 240 32.0 10 121 93.2
2.  Enabling

environment for
rural finance
i  Technical

assistance
to CBL 5 1.8 277 98.2 - - - - - - - - 364 2.6

3.  Project
management
and coordination 31 6.7 426 93.3 - - - - - - - - 591 4.2

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.5 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed by the Government, IFAD, CBL, RCFIs and their clients.

IFAD will finance 55 per cent of the project costs through a loan on highly
concessional terms to the Government of US$5.5 million and a grant of
US$0.49 million. The RCFI contribution to operating costs is estimated at
US$1.1 million (11 per cent) and the shareholders’ contribution to share capital is
estimated at US$3.2 million (30 per cent). For the first 30 months, CBL will house
the TASU/TASC and provide a manager, with a total cost of US$0.09 million
(1 per cent). The Government’s contribution will be in the form of waived taxes and
duties on imported and local goods and services as per standard regulations for
IFAD funding (US$0.4 million, representing 4 per cent of the total cost). Total cost
financing arrangements by category of expenses are summarized in the table 2
below.




7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total Foreign (Excl.
Duties

and
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % exch. taxes) taxes

I. Investment
costs

A. Consulting
services - - 467 95.3 23 4.7 - - - - - - 521 3.7 490 - -

B. Workshops
and training 129 6.8 1 667 87.6 108 5.7 - - - - - - 2 494 17.9 190 1 585 127

C. Works 39 5.6 667 94.4 - - - - - - - - 1 020 7.3 106 565 35
D. Vehicles

equipment
and material 112 14.2 611 77.5 66 8.4 - - - - - - 1 036 7.4 568 110 110

E. Grant - - - - 140 100 - - - - - - 140 1 - 140 -
F. RCFI

capitalization - - - - - - - - - - 3 240 100 4 210 30.1 - 3 240 -
G. Rural

finance
facility - - 111 100 - - - - - - - - 111 1.1 - 111 -

Subtotal I 280 3.8 3 522 47.7 336 4.6 - - - - 3 240 43.9 7 378 67.9 1 354 5 751 273
II. Recurrent

costs

A. Salaries - - 1 222 48.0 124 4.9 1 139 44.7 61 2.4 - - 2 546 23.4 1 273 1 273 -
B. Operating

costs 120 12.8 756 80.8 29 3.1 - - 31 3.3 - - 935 8.6 468 354 114

Subtotal II 120 3.5 1 978 56.8 153 4.4 1 139 32.7 92 2.6 - - 3 482 32.1 1 741 1 627 114

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.7 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100 3 095 7 379 387

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project will generate a wide range of direct benefits for: (i) approximately

24,000 shareholders and users, and their household members; (ii) RCFIs; and
(iii) the economies of the communities where RCFIs will be located. At the macro
level, the project will bring informal financial transactions into the formal sector and
make decentralized rural financial institutions more viable. The Government will
benefit from additional tax revenues payable by the RCFIs. The entire country will
benefit from a strengthened network of financial institutions, through which
remittances and transfers can be made from within and outside the country. Finally,
the country will benefit from higher confidence in the financial sector, especially in
rural areas, as a result of the improved regulatory framework and supervisory
systems under the guidance of the CBL. Other macro-level benefits are not
quantifiable using classical methods of economic and financial analysis, such as
increased deposits in formal financial institutions, higher confidence in the formal
financial sector and a larger network for transfers and payments.

31. Total project benefits are expected to increase from US$50,050 in year 1, to
US$2.71 million in year 5, and will remain at approximately US$2.8 million during
years 7-15. The economic analysis shows that the project will generate an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 17 per cent over a 15-year period, with a net
present value of US$5.5 million. Given that many of its benefits are not
quantifiable, the actual ERR will likely be higher. Sensitivity analysis shows that in
the event of adverse factors, the ERR is relatively robust with regard to higher
costs, lower benefits and time lags.

32. The highest contribution to the ERR derives from investments made by borrowers
from RCFIs. The number of investments is constrained by the number of RCFIs
created. The number of RCFIs that can be created through the project is likewise





8

constrained by the funding available for financial and technical support. There is a
potential to increase the number of new RCFIs beyond the 10 for which funding is
available. If additional funds are provided, the ERR will be higher than the projected
17 per cent.

D. Sustainability
33. The project will support the creation of 10 new RCFIs and consolidate the nine

existing ones. The detailed projections, which are based on conservative
assumptions, show that the new RCFIs will break even in years 3 or 4 without
project support, and in years 1, 2 or 3 with project support. Two years are needed
to mobilize a sufficient number of shareholders and depositors, an adequate volume
of shares and deposits, and to disburse a sufficient number of loans with good
repayment performance. The learning curves for administrative procedures (in the
first three months) and loan management (in months six to twelve) are expected to
be steep. The sustainability of access to financial services will also improve as
RCFIs mature since they are likely to attract more customers over time. This will
create additional benefits for the economy.

34. The projections for this project compare well with the results of the Rural Finance
and Community Improvement Programme, a similar initiative in neighbouring
Sierra Leone that is also based on the Rural Community Finance Project concept.
Out of the 51 financial service associations created, 41 (or 80 per cent) had an OSS
of 100 per cent at project end. Out of 17 newly created community banks, 14 (82
per cent) had an OSS of 100 per cent at project end.

35. The projections for TASC show that this apex body of RCFIs will be able to generate
income from audit services and from fee-based support services. The resulting
income will cover related operating expenses in a progressive manner, from
0 per cent in year 1 to 26 per cent in year 5. This result will largely depend on the
quality of services, which in turn depends on the volume of shares and deposits,
and the number of RCFIs included in the TASC. If the number of RCFIs increases,
the sustainability of TASC will improve accordingly. However, this depends on the
availability of funding.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
36. The main risks related to project implementation include: (i) competition from

subsidized credit programmes; (ii) caps on interest rates; (iii) a lack of interest
from local communities; (iv) the reluctance of CBL to delegate supervision authority
to TASC; and (v) weak cooperation from the microfinance sector in efforts to
improve regulatory frameworks. Adequate risk mitigation measures have been
introduced, and the residual risk ratings after risk mitigation are rated as low or
moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. The project design is aligned with IFAD’s: (i) Strategic Framework 2011-2015;

(ii) Policy on Targeting Policy (2006); (iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance Policy; (v) Private-Sector Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support;
(viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010); (ix) Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy (2012); and (x) Environmental and Social Assessment
Procedures.

B. Alignment and harmonization
38. Strategy for financial inclusion. With its 2009 Liberian Strategy for Financial

Inclusion (2009-2013), the Government aims to create an inclusive financial
environment by enabling open access to financial services. The overall objective of
inclusive finance is to establish viable microfinance providers that facilitate




9

micro-entrepreneurs’ sustained access to a diverse range of financial services. In
order to enhance sustainability, efficiency, outreach and good governance, financial
service providers will receive assistance from various actors, including CBL. The
strategy for financial inclusion will work at three levels: (i) establishing sustainable
microfinance providers at the micro level; (ii) building a supportive infrastructure at
the intermediate level; and (iii) creating an enabling policy and regulatory
environment at the macro level.

39. CBL has recently begun drafting the new Liberian Strategy for Financial Inclusion
2014-2018. Its vision is to build a sustainable financial sector that provides access
to and enhances the use of a wide range of affordable financial services in Liberia.
Its objectives are to: deliver financial services; enhance access to finance,
particularly credit; integrate the informal sector into the formal economy; improve
the environment for small and medium-sized enterprises; enhance financial
literacy; and improve consumer protection. These objectives have been
consolidated in a plan of action, which places the responsibility for establishing
RCFIs with CBL, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and one
commercial bank.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. Several of the approaches adopted by this project are innovative: the creation of a

new type of financial institution in Liberia builds on the experience of several other
West African countries. Other innovations include the creation of an apex body to
support RCFIs, the biometric identification of shareholders in order to offer new
products at reduced costs, and the emulation of indigenous rural finance practices.
The project is in itself part of IFAD’s scaling-up process in West Africa following the
Rural Finance and Community Improvement Project in Sierra Leone. Upon the
successful trial of the implementation model, it will be possible to increase the
number of RCFIs beyond those created in Liberia through this project.

D. Policy engagement
41. Liberia’s microfinance sector does not have the clear regulations needed for its

development. One project component (under CBL supervision) is exclusively aimed
at developing a new legal framework for this sector and training actors on the new
regulations and reporting formats.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix 1.

43. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




10

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to four million ten thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 4,010,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Liberia in an amount equivalent to three hundred fifty-eight thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 358,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)


Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the


Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.




Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Madagascar
for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II
(AD2M-II)


Republic of Madagascar

Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: Ministry of Agriculture

Borrower: Republic of Madagascar

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$56.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 24.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$34.4 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) Trust Fund grant:

SDR 4.2 million (equivalent to approximately
US$6.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace
period of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per
cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$7.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: 100 per cent loan

Contribution of borrower: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.8

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Madagascar for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan to the to the Republic of Madagascar for
the Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The agricultural sector is the backbone of Madagascar’s national economy,

accounting for 30 per cent of GDP (2009),1 generating 30 to 40 per cent of exports,
and employing 80 per cent of Malagasy families on approximately 2.5 million family
farms. The three subsectors – agriculture, livestock and fisheries – are key to
reducing poverty and enhancing food security; they support 75 per cent of the
country’s population, accounting for 86 per cent of all jobs and 60 per cent of youth
employment. Rice production is the leading economic activity, generating the
income of approximately 10 million inhabitants. Rice is grown by 86 per cent of
households, covering 40 per cent of cropland in use and accounting for 37 per cent
of agricultural cash income.

2. With an annual average growth rate of 1.5 per cent, sector performance remains
weak and is among the major causes of rural poverty. Other causes include
fragmented production, low productivity, rural insecurity, overuse of natural
resources, vulnerability to natural hazards such as cyclones, droughts and floods,
and limited access to economic and commercial opportunities due to isolation,
aging infrastructure and difficulty accessing agricultural markets and rural finance.

3. The 2009-2013 crisis had negative socioeconomic impacts, resulting in increased
poverty and, in particular, extreme poverty. The effects of the crisis were
exacerbated by the suspension of foreign aid, which represented half of the
country's overall budget. Five years of transition and political instability led to a
decline in agricultural productivity, further aggravated in 2012 and 2013 by the
locust infestation, which destroyed as much as 50 per cent of food crops, and
severe drought, which impacted negatively on agricultural production in most
regions. In 2012, the national poverty line2 was, at US$0.67 per person per day,
significantly below the international threshold of US$2. According to the 2015-2019
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the poverty rate
remains high, with 71.5 per cent of people living below the poverty line in 2012.

4. In 2010, 35 per cent of Malagasy households were food insecure, against 25 per
cent in 2005. Acute malnutrition affects 8.6 per cent of children under 5 years of
age, of whom 1.4 per cent are affected severely. Madagascar is among the four
countries in the world with the highest prevalence of chronic malnutrition (47.3
per cent) and ranks fifteenth in terms of the number of children affected (2 million).

1 Source: Economist Intelligence Unit, Country report, December 2009.
2 According to the National Institute for Statistics (INSTAT 2013).



EB 2015/115/R.8

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with Government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The proposed second phase of the Project to Support Development in the Menabe
and Melaky Regions (AD2M) is justified on three grounds: (i) macroeconomic
considerations; (ii) sector-specific considerations; and (iii) as a tool for achieving
development goals.

6. With regard to the performance of AD2M, agro-economic opportunities and
potential, as yet undeveloped. Key actions include: (i) scaling up good practices;
and (ii) consolidating project benefits through financial allocations under the
2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle. Phase II satisfies all
of the criteria required to receive financing from IFAD.

7. Given the risks posed by unpredictable rainfall patterns to the production systems
and populations of Menabe and Melaky, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) Trust Fund will support AD2M Phase II (AD2M-II) by
implementing a strategy focused on the governance of climate risks, and provide
added value to the resilience and adaptation activities to be developed during the
second phase.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. AD2M-II will target the same geographical area as the first phase of the project,

namely the Menabe and Melaky regions, due to: (i) the existence of significant
agro-economic potential yet to be developed; (ii) the weak coverage of communes3
in these regions during the first phase of the project; and (iii) the desired
economies of scale in terms of approach and project costs. The scope of the project
will be broadened, from 19 to 44 communes, in 7 districts (see appendix II).

9. The target group will be as follows: (i) 35,000 new direct beneficiary households
belonging to one of the three categories of family farm; and (ii) 22,000 households
that already benefited from the first phase and will benefit further from cross-
cutting consolidation activities. A total of 57,000 households will benefit from the
activities to be implemented under the project, comprising small agricultural
producers and rural promoters of economic initiatives operating within the
production poles and the communes linked to them. The number of beneficiaries is
estimated at 342,000, or 58 per cent of the total population (approximately
586,000 people) living in the 44 project area communes.

B. Project development objectives
10. The objectives of AD2M-II are consistent with those of the 2015-2019 country

strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). The overall objective is to sustainably
improve incomes and food security in the productive areas of Menabe and Melaky.
Its specific objectives are to: (i) scale up effective and climate change resilient
family farm production systems; and (ii) enhance producers’ access to
remunerative markets in priority value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The updated technical components of the project comprise: (i) the promotion of

effective and climate change resilient production systems; and (ii) support for
access to markets and economic opportunities.

12. The major outcomes expected are improved water management and water balance
on plots through the redevelopment of 9,120 hectares of hydro-agricultural
schemes and the development of 6,470 hectares of new land, which will result, in
the 44 communes of the project area, in accelerated uptake of various improved
and resilient practices and significant increase in yields and production.

3 Phase I of AD2M covered 19 out of the 88 communes in the two regions.



EB 2015/115/R.8

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

13. In terms of land tenure security, the expected results are the establishment of
long-term land tenure administrative authorities and structures at the commune or
inter-communal level (20 land offices, a land tenure information and resource
centre, etc.) and safeguards for the land rights of small agricultural producers, so
as to increase investment and improve production methods, yields and incomes.

14. Expected outcomes in terms of input supply and small agricultural equipment
include the production of 250 tons of seed by new seed multiplier famers through
viable businesses integrated into regional and national seed networks, as well as
the provision of effective inputs and equipment to meet the needs of family farms.

15. In terms of marketing, 48 producers’ groups will be organized in order to negotiate
and fulfill production contracts, and 30 per cent of production will be sold on the
basis of written or oral contracts.

16. In terms of rural finance, eight new operational credit unions will be established
and 8,800 people will benefit from credits, including at least 1,000 from credit with
training, 3,200 for shared village granaries, and 4,000 for productive credit.

17. Farmers’ organizations will be operational and provide members with services they
could not obtain individually, especially in collective input supply.

18. Nutrition education sites and family vegetable gardens will be established, helping
at least 1,000 vulnerable farming families with children under 5 years of age to
access a more balanced diet.

19. Four hundred microprojects targeting the most vulnerable households involved in
the management of natural resources and communal village land will be
implemented, scaling collective actions to combat deforestation and environmental
degradation to the village community level so as to foster participatory natural
resource management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The adoption of the so-called “production poles” approach, in widespread use since
the AD2M midterm review, is fully justified in the project area. These should evolve
into “agricultural development poles”, which will form the centrepiece of the second
phase. This approach will comprise the concentration4 of productive investments,
support to agricultural services and efforts to enhance market access focused in
priority areas. It is in line with the project rationale as fine-tuned during the first
phase, incorporating the development of productive infrastructure and the
expansion of arable land, promoting more effective and market-oriented
smallholder farming as well as the organization of producers. Efforts to build the
resilience of cropping systems to climate change must be strengthened in the
second phase. The approach will remain participatory and inclusive.

21. The ASAP grant financing will be used to consolidate the agricultural resilience
benefits of AD2M and to provide the missing link in all poles by securing long-term
investments. The ASAP financing will support in particular production- and
productivity-building activities that are most likely to withstand the impacts of
climate change over the long term while generating immediate socio-economic
benefits.

B. Organizational framework
22. The project will remain under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture as the lead

implementing agency. The bodies responsible for the coordination and guidance of
the project will remain the same: (i) the National Steering Committee (NSC), which
will ensure project alignment with national strategies; and (ii) the regional
orientation and monitoring committees, which will ensure in particular the

4 This in the context of a large and isolated project area with high potential, taking into account limited financial resources.



EB 2015/115/R.8

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

alignment of annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) with the regional priorities in
Menabe and Melaky. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) will continue
coordination and management, and its staff will be strengthened to take account of
the constraints of expansion into new communes (isolation, poles, etc.). The
performance of both project staff and staff of locally-based partner NGOs will be
evaluated annually against the functions and objectives as set out in the AWPB.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. The PMU will consolidate AWPBs, prepared in accordance with established standards
and on time. It will be responsible for project implementation and for organizing
and administering the meetings of the regional orientation and monitoring
committees and the NSC. The AWPB will be approved by the NSC and transmitted
to IFAD for approval before the first disbursements are made from the ASAP grant
and IFAD loan.

24. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will comprise: i) continuous
systematic internal monitoring, not only to track the implementation of activities
planned in the AWPB but primarily to ensure the attainment of various outcomes
contained in the new project logical framework. A climate change adaptation
specialist with expertise in geographic information system (GIS) and participatory
farmers’ field schools will be recruited (with ASAP financing) to serve as a key
resource throughout the project. Participatory mapping activities involving farmers’
field schools will provide system inputs. The baseline survey for the second phase
of the project will also serve as the impact survey for the evaluation of the first
phase.

25. An M&E plan will be developed to improve the coordination and implementation of
activities. The project M&E manual will be revised to reflect the new provisions and
various improvements to be made to M&E. Monitoring will be participatory so as to
facilitate the transfer and building of development self-management capacities
among the population.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures developed

during the first phase will be reviewed and updated. Existing procedures will remain
in place, to be supplemented where necessary. The financial management and
accounting of the project will respect the existing rules and practices applicable to
all IFAD-financed project in Madagascar. The existing accounting software will be
updated and accounting staff will undergo training. Aspects relating to financial
management and flow of funds are detailed in appendix 7 of the project design
report, “Financial management and disbursement systems”.

27. During the second phase, the procurement procedures will be identical to those
already used by AD2M, respecting the applicable rules and general provisions in
this area in Madagascar and IFAD.

E. Supervision
28. The East and Southern Africa Division of IFAD will directly supervise the project.

IFAD and the Government of Madagascar will jointly conduct a midterm review at
the end of the third year. The supervision plan is provided in appendix 6 of the
project design report.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total project cost, including material and financial contingencies, for the

2016-2022 period is estimated at US$56.7 million.

30. Component 1: Promotion of effective and climate change resilient production
systems, will cost approximately US$40.8 million (72 per cent of the total project



EB 2015/115/R.8

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost); component 2: Support for access to markets and economic opportunities, will
cost US$7.0 million (12 per cent); and the coordination, management and
monitoring and evaluation system will cost US$8.9 million (16 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Promotion of effective and climate change

resilient production systems 20.2 5.8 7.5 1.2 6.1 40.8
2. Support for access to markets and

economic opportunities 6.1 1.0 7.0
3. Project management and monitoring and

evaluation 8.1 0.2 0.5 8.9
Total 34.4 6.0 7.5 1.2 7.6 56.7

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$34.4 million (60.7 per cent);

(ii) an ASAP grant of US$6 million (10.6 per cent); (iii) OFID cofinancing of
US$7.5 million (13.2 per cent); (iv) a Government of Madagascar contribution of
US$7.7 million (13.5 per cent); and (v) a beneficiary contribution of US$1.2 million
(2 per cent).

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Consultations 9.9 87.7 0.7 6.6 - - - - 0.7 5.8 11.3
2. Construction 11.3 42.0 7.7 6.5 7.5 27.9 1.2 4.3 5.2 19.3 26.9
3. Equipment and

materials 5.2 62.6 1.7 20.3 - - - 1.4 17.1 8.3
4. Training 2.6 60.5 1.7 39.5 - - - 0 4.3
5. Salaries/allowances 4.0 95.7 0.1 3.3 - - - - 0.04 0.9 4.2
6. Operating costs 1.4 80.0 - - - - - 0.30 20.0 1.7

Total 34.4 60.7 6.0 10.6 7.5 13.2 1.2 2.0 7.7 13.5 56.7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. Based on projections, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project will

be 14.75 per cent. This EIRR, which is well above the opportunity cost of capital
(8.2 per cent), is satisfactory given that some additional benefits have not been
taken into account, including those generated by support activities (construction,
equipment, training) and those deriving from technical assistance, training,
information and awareness-raising support. Furthermore, the benefits of improving
land tenure security have not been fully reflected since they are difficult to
quantify; these include investments linked to local land tenure plans, socio-land
tenure analysis, land tenure mediation for the allocation of new plots;
strengthening land offices, partner capacities and training on offer; reducing
transaction costs by improving access to financial services and technology; and
improving living standards, hygiene and nutrition among the project target group.

33. In conclusion, the EIRR is robust with respect to changes in costs or benefits, and
remains satisfactory given that it does not take a number of direct and indirect
benefits into account. The sensitivity analysis, calculated over an extended
economic lifecycle of 20 years, assesses the risks that may constrain AD2M-II
implementation as a result of adverse changes in economic or financial conditions,
including increased prices. Under conditions favourable to the project, such as
increased benefits or reduced costs, the EIRR would further exceed the base rate of
14.75 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.8

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Sustainability
34. From the outset of AD2M-II, the PMU will develop an exit strategy, which it will

implement, transferring responsibilities to project-supported structures, including
communes and farmers’ organizations. The sustainability of the strategy depends
on the assumption of responsibility by producers. The sustainability of land tenure
security will be guaranteed by its inclusion in a proactive national policy and by the
institutionalization, at all territorial levels, of decentralized structures and specific
implementation modalities. It will remain, nonetheless, dependent on the
sustainability of such structures, especially land offices. The sustainability of
hydro-agricultural developments will depend primarily on the management and
maintenance of irrigation networks. The simple gravity model chosen for irrigation
networks takes into account the weak technical capacity of the management
structure, which relies primarily on users through water users’ associations; such
associations should be involved in the project from the outset, strengthened,
supported and ultimately transferred responsibility for managing irrigation
schemes.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. The major risks relate to governance, the severity of the climate, the destructive

effects of climate change on social and production capital of small producers, locust
infestation and physical insecurity, especially cattle rustling. Administrative and
financial management risks are considered low, relating primarily to the lack of an
operational internal audit system for IFAD projects in Madagascar. A detailed table
of risks and mitigation measures is presented in chapter III, F and in appendix 4 of
the project design report.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. AD2M-II project design is aligned with IFAD’s mandate and Strategic Framework
2011-2015. Project activities are aligned with IFAD’s Madagascar COSOP
2015-2019, in particular strategic objective 1: the widespread adoption of effective
and climate change resilient production systems.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The AD2M-II objectives are aligned with: (i) the General Government Policy,

adopted in May 2014; (ii) the 2015-2019 National Development Plan; (iii) the
2015-2025 Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Sectoral Programme, based on the
priorities and commitments agreed upon by the main sector stakeholders under the
National Pact, which marked Madagascar’s official accession to the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme; and (iv) the National Policy to Combat
Climate Change. The AD2M-II objectives are consistent with the 2015-2019 UNDAF
objectives, since the project will contribute substantively to the five pillars of
economic and social development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. The first phase of the project resulted in the adoption of numerous innovations in

the project area. The results have been satisfactory and the following innovations
will be scaled up during the second phase: i) farmers’ field schools; ii)
agro-ecological techniques recently introduced and popularized by the project
through farmers’ field schools; iii) off-season growing for vulnerable smallholders
with no irrigated land; and iv) the taxation, identification and certification combined
operation approach in project-supported land offices.

39. The learning process will continue, in particular by capitalizing on experiences and
instituting systematic exchanges with other rural development stakeholders,
especially projects financed by IFAD and other technical and financial partners
(such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency Central Highlands Rice
Productivity Improvement Project and the World Bank Emergency Food Security



EB 2015/115/R.8

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and Social Protection Project). The project will benefit from knowledge built in
similar areas by other successful projects in the country: i) access to markets and
marketing (the Rural Income Promotion Programme and the Support Porgramme
for Rural Microenterprises and Regional Economies); and ii) agricultural advisory
services and the strengthening of professional organizations.

40. Climate change adaptation is also among the key themes. The ASAP financing will
help strengthen activities aimed at building farmers’ resilience to the effects of
climate change: hydro-agricultural development, including spate-irrigated areas,
reforestation, agro-ecology and natural resource management approaches in
general. Project implementation will thus provide the knowledge base and solid
expertise to replicate and expand the application of alternative activities to build
resilience to climate change.

Policy engagementD.
41. AD2M-II is anchored in the economy and the institutional environment at the

communal and regional levels. It promotes decentralization and the organization of
stakeholders at the local level so as to ensure the sustainability of investments. The
project incorporates activities relating to policy consultation, capacity-building,
farmers’ organizations, land tenure security, rural finance and knowledge
management.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Madagascar and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix 1.
session.

43. The Republic of Madagascar is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
Republic of Madagascar in an amount equivalent to twenty-four million five
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 24,500,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Madagascar through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme in
an amount equivalent to four million two hundred thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 4,200,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya
and proposed grant under the country-specific
grants window to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the Kenya
Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)

Republic of Kenya

Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Kenya

Recipient: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)

Executing agency: State Department of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries

Total KCEP-CRAL cost: US$118.0 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 43.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$61.8 million)

Amount of Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 7.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Amount of IFAD grant to FAO: US$2.0 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier: European Union

Amount of cofinancing: European Union: EUR 9.5 million (equivalent to
US$11.7 million)

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$1.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: Beneficiaries: US$29.1 million
Financial institutions: US$1.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Kenya and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL), as contained in
paragraph 51.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya and
grant under the country-specific window to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
Country and rural development and poverty contextA.

1. Socio-economic background. Kenya has a total land area of 582,646 km2 and
an estimated population of 43 million people. High fertility combined with declining
mortality has contributed to a population growth rate estimated at 2.6 per cent.
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) make up more than 80 per cent of the
country’s land mass and are home to approximately 36 per cent of its population.
The remaining 64 per cent of the population lives in medium- and high-potential
areas in the central and western parts of the country, where the population density
is up to ten times the national average of 69 people/km2. In October 2014, Kenya
became a low-middle-income country. Despite uncertainties in the period leading
up to elections, rising insecurity and erratic weather, growth is expected to
continue in the next five years at an annual average of 5.9 per cent, facilitated by
ongoing infrastructure development. However, the challenges of poverty and
income inequality remain.

2. Agriculture and smallholder farming. The agriculture sector is the backbone of
Kenya’s economy, employing 70 per cent of the rural population and accounting for
65 per cent of export earnings. However, its share of GDP has declined from nearly
40 per cent in the 1970s to 25.3 per cent in 2013. Production of industrial and food
crops and horticulture accounts for 82 per cent of agricultural GDP and 94 per cent
of export earnings from agriculture. The remaining three subsectors of agriculture
– livestock, fisheries and forestry – account for the remaining 18 per cent of
agricultural GDP and 8 per cent of export earnings from agriculture, with significant
potential for added growth.

3. Rural poverty. The poverty rate in Kenya dropped from 52.2 per cent in 1997 to
45.2 per cent in 2009,1 and the Human Development Report 2013 ranked the
country 145th of 186 rated, with a human development index of 0.519.2 Over
75 per cent of Kenya’s population lives in rural areas, where, in 2009, poverty was
estimated at 50 per cent of the population. ASALs have the lowest development
indicators and the highest incidence of poverty in the country.

1 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey (KIHBS), 2005/06; Exploring Kenya’s Inequality (Kenya National Bureau of
Statistics and Society for International Development, 2013).
2 Human Development Report 2013 (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2013), p. 146.



EB 2015/114/R.9

2

4. Food security and nutrition. Food security remains a major challenge for the
Government of Kenya. According to the Global Hunger Index,3 Kenya remains a
food-insecure country despite a slight reduction in hunger. Approximately 10
million Kenyans suffer from chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition.

5. Vulnerability to climate change. According to the Stockholm Environment
Institute,4 if climate change in Kenya is not addressed, the economic costs of its
impact are estimated at 3 per cent of GDP per year by 2030, and could reach
5 per cent by 2050. The agriculture sector, which contributes over 25 per cent of
annual GDP, is particularly affected by changing climatic conditions. Nearly
98 per cent of crop production is rainfed,5 and almost 50 per cent of animal
production occurs in ASALs. The increased incidence of drought and unreliable
rainfall are expected to significantly affect the sector.

Rationale and alignment with government priorities andB.
RB-COSOP

6. Programme rationale. Kenya is a food-deficit country that imports up to
20 per cent of its annual cereal requirements. Improvement in cereal production,
including maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, is constrained by the
limited adoption of improved crop technologies and practices. ASALs are an
important producing area: they account for 30 per cent of cereal production and
54 per cent of pulses produced in the country. Semi-arid areas have a comparative
advantage in the production of pulses, accounting for 99 per cent of the production
of pigeon pea, 95 per cent of green gram, 93 per cent of cowpea and 60 per cent
of millet. Semi-arid areas are also central to the production of sorghum, accounting
for 48 per cent of the total. In addition, 37 per cent of beans and 26 per cent of
maize are produced in semi-arid lands.

7. Alignment with government priorities and IFAD RB-COSOP. The KCEP-CRAL
is consistent with the country’s agriculture-sector development strategy 2010-
2020. The strategy’s main objectives are to achieve an agricultural growth rate of
7 per cent per year and reduce food insecurity by 30 per cent by promoting
innovative, commercially oriented and climate-smart modern agriculture. The
programme is also aligned with IFAD’s results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 2013-2018, which recognizes that Kenya’s
food requirements go beyond increased food production in high- and medium-
potential areas, and calls for increased production in ASALs. Finally, IFAD’s support
in ASALs is guided by its Climate Change Strategy and Environment and Natural
Resource Management Policy. IFAD will mobilize resources from its Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to assist smallholders in improving
their livelihoods and becoming more resilient to climate change in the fragile ASAL
ecosystem.

II. Programme description
Programme area and target groupA.

8. Programme area. The programme area covers eight semi-arid counties in the
eastern and coastal regions of Kenya, with a combined population of over 5 million
people: Embu, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, Machakos, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale and
Kilifi. These counties were included based on: (i) agroecological suitability and
production potential of maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, which are
important to Kenya’s food security; (ii) incidence of poverty; (iii) vulnerability to
climate change; (iv) geographical concentration to maximize impact; and
(v) presence of similar development programmes (to avoid duplication). Within
these counties, 25 subcounties will be selected at start-up using the same criteria.

3 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2014.
4 Stockholm Environment Institute, 2009.
5 World Resources Institute et al., 2007.



EB 2015/114/R.9

3

9. Target group. The KCEP-CRAL will reach 100,000 smallholder farmers whose
livelihoods depend on maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, including:

(a) 60,000 food-insecure smallholder farmers, who will be supported in
graduating from recurring food insecurity and climate vulnerability to food
security and then to market-oriented commercial farming; and

(b) 40,000 smallholder subsistence farmers, who will be supported in graduating
into commercial farming.

10. Of these 100,000 smallholder farmers, the programme aims to sustainably lift
80,000 out of poverty (80 per cent of targeted farmers). There will be a special
focus on woman-headed households and on youth, given the constraints they face
in accessing agricultural services and inputs. The programme will also empower
county governments and communities to manage their natural resources more
sustainably and consensually, and will build their resilience to climate change
through community investments. A secondary target group will consist of
stakeholders along agricultural value chains – such as agro-dealers, private
extension services, buyers, processors and lead farmers providing support services
to smallholders – and who will facilitate smallholder access to enhanced agricultural
services.

Programme development objectiveB.
11. The overall development goal of the KCEP-CRAL is to reduce rural poverty and food

insecurity among smallholders in Kenya’s ASALs by developing their economic
potential, while improving their natural resource management capacity and
resilience to climate change in an increasingly fragile ecosystem. This goal will be
pursued through: (i) graduation of smallholder farmers to commercially oriented,
climate-resilient agricultural practices through improvements in productivity, post-
production management practices and market linkages for targeted value chains;
and (ii) empowerment of county governments and communities to sustainably and
consensually manage their natural resources and build resilience to climate change.

Components/outcomesC.
12. Programme components. The KCEP-CRAL is structured around three technical

components, supported by programme management:

13. Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management. Through an e-voucher
platform giving smallholder farmers access to improved agricultural inputs and
technologies, the programme will enhance farmers’ productivity with a view to
commercialization. Activities in this component will support farmers in establishing
productive and climate-resilient crop enterprises suited to ASALs, and in improving
productivity through the adoption of good agricultural practices, such as
conservation agriculture and associated water conservation practices. The
programme will also support targeted counties in planning adaptation strategies,
adopting sustainable natural resource management practices and building
resilience to climate change.

14. Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages. The
programme aims to support farmers in capitalizing on productivity gains by
promoting improved on-farm grain handling and management, access to storage,
and warehouse receipt systems. These activities are expected to increase
smallholders’ access to markets and build their capacity to sell their produce at
more favourable prices.

15. Component 3. Financial services. This component is designed to: link farmers
to financial services in order to boost yields and income for reinvestment in their
farming businesses; and build the capacity of value-chain stakeholders, including
youth, to profitably engage in the provision of agricultural services.



EB 2015/114/R.9

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

16. The KCEP-CRAL is an expansion to ASALs of the Kenya Cereal Enhancement
Programme (KCEP), which began in April 2014 through a partnership involving the
Government, the European Union and IFAD. Its programme approach is based on
an expanded strategic partnership of the Government, the European Union and the
United Nations Rome-based agencies (RBAs): IFAD, FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). This partnership builds on each partners’ comparative
advantage in supporting farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to market-
oriented farming.

17. Within the partnership, WFP will provide support to food- and nutrition-insecure
farmers. With this support, households can gradually build productive assets and
acquire agricultural production and risk management skills to meet basic food
needs. IFAD will support subsistence farmers in graduating to market-oriented
farming by addressing constraints on production, post-harvest management,
processing and marketing. Through the ASAP Trust Fund, IFAD will also support
farmers’ investments in improved natural resource management and resilience to
climate change. Throughout this process, FAO will support farmer groups and
county governments in adopting good agricultural practices, including conservation
agriculture, while the European Union will sustain the achievement of programme
objectives by providing additional funding for implementation through IFAD and
FAO.

18. The programme approach encompasses an innovative public/private partnership
with financial institutions that aims to expand access to financial services as
beneficiaries graduate from subsidized support to market-oriented farming. Natural
resource management and climate change adaptation are mainstreamed in each
component to ensure that programme interventions are sustainable and improve
the resilience of targeted smallholders. Finally, while the programme will support
targeted households in meeting their cereal needs and in producing a surplus for
markets, WFP will support the transfer of good nutrition practices to households
through its protracted relief and recovery operation.

B. Organizational framework
19. Implementation framework. The lead agency for programme implementation is

the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. This agency will be responsible
for coordinating programme implementation, supported by a programme
coordination unit (PCU) for IFAD-funded activities, and liaising with FAO and WFP
focal points for activities carried out by these agencies. A steering committee
chaired by the Principal Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture will be set
up at the national level to provide oversight and strategic guidance of
implementation. To operationalize the RBA partnership, an RBA technical
coordination group will comprise the PCU coordinator and FAO and WFP
representatives. The group will be responsible for annual planning, budgeting,
mobilizing RBA contributions to the programme and identifying opportunities for
collaboration with other donor-funded activities in target counties.

20. Grant to FAO for capacity-building of county structures. At the local level,
programme implementation will be aligned to Kenya’s devolution framework, with
the counties as primary implementers. Given the limited capacity of newly set up
county government structures, IFAD will provide FAO with a grant to build the
capacity of county agricultural offices to plan, execute and monitor agricultural
services and investments within the County Integrated Development Plan:

(i) A dedicated RBA implementation support team in each target county will
plan, execute and monitor agricultural services in the context of the KCEP-
CRAL. Each county’s support team will be composed of a lead technical



EB 2015/114/R.9

5

support officer and a national United Nations volunteer – both with an
agribusiness and programme management background. These experts will
work with FAO and WFP programme officers, and with the National Drought
Management Authority coordinator at the county level.

(ii) Capacity-building of county agricultural offices will strengthen the outreach of
agricultural extension agents in delivering agricultural services to farmers.
This includes training packages and cost provisions for agricultural services to
farmers in the context of programme implementation.

21. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with WFP to define roles and
responsibilities in programme execution. The agreement between the European
Union and IFAD will be revised to reflect the European Union’s increased KCEP
contribution to cover the CRAL window. The Union has also entered into a
contribution agreement with FAO to disseminate good agricultural practices,
including conservation agriculture, in the framework of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Programme planning. Programme planning will follow a bottom-up and gender-
and-youth sensitive approach at the county level. Throughout the programme’s
seven-year implementation period, the PCU will support counties in sensitizing and
mobilizing stakeholders, and in requesting support. Eligible farmer and county
requests for programme support will be included in the KCEP-CRAL annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B), which will conform to the Government’s planning
cycle. For community-level investments, participatory rural appraisals will be
carried out to facilitate the formation of community-based organizations, which will
oversee implementation. Planning at the county level will be reflected in the County
Integrated Development Plan.

23. Monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. The programme’s
development goals will be monitored by a robust system, which will be aligned with
Kenya’s National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System and in compliance
with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). RIMS is capable of
measuring results in terms of climate-change resilience, natural resource
management and the graduation of smallholders.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. To ensure effective financial oversight, a programme

finance team will be set up at the lead national agency. In addition, there will be an
accountant in each of the three regions covered by the programme. At the county
level, an accountant from the National Treasury will be responsible for programme
financial management.

25. Internal controls. To complement government mechanisms, the following
internal controls will be instituted: (i) the PCU finance/administration manager will
be an agent (non-transacting) on all programme county and regional bank
accounts; (ii) at the county level, the national treasury accountant will be a
signatory to the programme bank account, together with the designated county
programme coordinator; and (iii) budget control will be supported through the
programme accounting software and the use of commitment ledgers (sometimes
called vote books) at the county level.

26. Accounting systems, policies and procedures. An off-the-shelf accounting
package with the ability to generate expenditure trends by component, category,
and activities in United States dollars, euro and Kenyan shillings will be used.
Development of programme uniform coding (chart of accounts) will be a joint effort
by the PCU finance team, those responsible for monitoring and evaluation, and
technical officers.



EB 2015/114/R.9

6

27. Financial reporting and monitoring will be conducted in accordance with
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards on a cash basis. In addition to
annual audited financial statements, IFAD will require semi-annual interim financial
reports.

28. The grant to FAO will be disbursed based on AWP/Bs. In addition, FAO will submit
statements of expenditure with respect to the use of at least 75 per cent of the
immediately preceding advance (and 100 per cent of previous advances). FAO will
provide regular reports to IFAD, including six-month unaudited financial reports,
and will submit a copy of FAO audited financial statements that cover any part of
the grant proceeds within six months following the official publication of FAO’s
audited statements.

29. Procurement. With the enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Assets Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, Kenya has
established a sound legal framework for public procurement with clear hierarchical
distinctions. The legal and regulatory framework of the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Assets Act will be used in programme procurement. KCEP-CRAL
procurement provisions will build on the Ministerial Tender Committee of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Items common across more than
one county will be procured nationally in bulk; contract award decisions will be
made by that committee. For activities such as spot road improvements and
construction of storage facilities that cannot be bulked and procured nationally, the
KCEP-CRAL will rely on the County Service Delivery Coordinating Unit Tender
Committee, as the legal authority to approve contract awards, and on the County
Governments Procurement Regulations.

E. Supervision
30. The programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the lead agency, with the

participation of FAO, WFP and the European Union. One supervision mission and
one follow-up mission will be conducted each year to review the programme
approach and its effectiveness. Special attention will be given to reviewing the
effectiveness of the RBA partnership in the graduation of farmers.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs of the KCEP-CRAL are

estimated at US$118.0 million, including physical and price contingencies.
Programme investments by component are:

 Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management accounts for
US$11.1 million, representing 9.4 per cent of total base costs.

 Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages accounts
for US$8.8 million, representing 7.5 per cent of total base costs;

 Component 3. Financial services, including the e-voucher scheme, accounts
for US$77.7 million, representing 65.8 per cent of total base costs; and

 Programme management accounts for US$11.7 million, representing
9.9 per cent of total base costs.

32. In addition, preparatory activities and implementation support at the county level
accounts for US$8.7 million (7.4 per cent of total base costs).



EB 2015/114/R.9

7

Table 1
Components by Financiers

(US$ '000) GoK
IFAD
Loan

ASAP
Grant

IFAD
Grant EU add-on

Financial
Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

462 5 124 - 2 000 1 134 - - 8 719

Adoption of  improved f arming practices including GAP and CA 24 - - - 1 086 - - 1 110
Community-based sustainable NRM and adaptation to Climate
Change - - 10 000 - - - - 10 000

24 - 10 000 - 1 086 - - 11 109

Strengthening of  f armer organizations and post-harvest
management 282 3 360 - - - - 173 3 815
Market Linkages and value addition 37 3 361 - - - - 1 579 4 977

320 6 721 - - - - 1 752 8 793

E-voucher platf orm f or productivity enhancement - 37 237 - - 7 142 1 860 26 212 72 451
Value Chain Financing 246 3 295 - - 543 - 1 172 5 255

246 40 532 - - 7 685 1 860 27 384 77 706
500 9 400 - - 1 781 - - 11 680

Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

A. Capacity building for clim ate-resilient productivity
enhancem ent and NRM

Preparatory activities/ Implementation Support and Capacity-
building at county-level
Com ponents

E. Programme Management
Subtotal

C. Financial Services
Subtotal

Subtotal
B. Post-Production Managem ent and Market Linkages

Notes: GAP - good agricultural practice CA- conservation agriculture

Table 2
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Financial
(US$ '000) GoK IFAD Loan ASAP Grant IFAD Grant EU add-on Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works 231 4 119 - - - - 983 5 334
B. Vehicles 214 905 - 187 291 - - 1 597
C. Equipments & Materials 274 2 544 521 61 606 - 390 4 395
D. Consultancies 316 3 939 2 754 1 475 - 66 8 550
E. Trainings 516 4 657 3 125 - - 1 030 71 9 399
F. Grants and Subsidies - 36 299 3 600 - 7 111 829 27 626 75 465

Total Investm ent Costs 1 551 52 463 10 000 248 9 482 1 860 29 136 104 739
II. Recurrent Costs

A. Salaries and Allow ances - 6 671 - 1 752 1 427 - - 9 850
B. Operating Costs - 2 642 - - 777 - - 3 419

Total Recurrent Costs - 9 313 - 1 752 2 204 - - 13 269
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

B. Programme financing
33. The total costs of the KCEP-CRAL window will be financed by the Government, an

IFAD loan, an ASAP grant, an IFAD grant under the country-specific window to
FAO, a European Union contribution through IFAD, financial institutions and
beneficiaries as follows:

 The Government will finance taxes and duties valued at US$1.5 million
(representing 1.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

 The IFAD loan to the Republic of Kenya, estimated at US$61.8 million
(52.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window), will finance start-up activities,
capacity-building of farmer organizations, post-harvest management
activities, market linkage and value chain strengthening, and programme
management costs.

 The ASAP grant, estimated at US$10.0 million (8.5 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window), will finance mainstreaming of natural resource management
and climate resilience throughout the programme.

 The IFAD grant to FAO, estimated at US$2.0 million (1.7 per cent of the
KCEP-CRAL window), will be dedicated to capacity-building and the costs



EB 2015/114/R.9

8

incurred by county agriculture offices delivering agricultural services to
farming communities.

 The European Union additional contribution through IFAD is valued at
US$11.7 million, corresponding to EUR 9.5 million (9.9 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window).

 Finally, the contribution of financial institutions to the programme’s e-voucher
scheme and related financial services is estimated at US$1.9 million
(1.6 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window). The beneficiary contribution is
assessed at US$29.1 million (24.7 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Overall, the KCEP and its CRAL window will support 140,000 smallholder farmers in

attaining food security and graduating into market-oriented commercial farming.
Through the CRAL window, 100,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya’s ASALs have
been targeted. The KCEP-CRAL will provide opportunities for increased returns on
smallholder agricultural production and marketing, with direct benefits including:

 Increased yields from improved agricultural technologies – including
conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices – and strengthened
extension systems;

 Increased climate resilience through adapted varieties and technologies,
better climate information and community resilience investments;

 Increased quality of marketable produce from post-harvest management,
training and access to equipment;

 Higher prices as a result of aggregation from village storage facilities and
other grain-bulking structures;

 Labour-saving technologies such as the use of herbicides (compared with
conventional weeding) and minimum tillage/direct seeding;

 Value addition through demonstrations of novel processing opportunities and
facilitation of linkages between business owners and financial institutions;

 Efficiency gains as a result of road spot improvements; and

 Incremental tax revenues generated for the central Government and county
governments from increased volumes of taxable production.

35. Economic analysis shows that the programme has the potential to generate an
economic rate of return of 15 per cent over a 20-year period. Benefits will accrue
to a range of stakeholders across many value chains, making the entire investment
even more viable and spreading its impact across the entire nation through
increased employment and tax revenues. Thus the actual economic rate of return
will likely be higher than the 15 per cent reported. Sensitivity analysis concluded
that the programme’s economic rate of return is relatively stable. It is estimated at
8.3 per cent if costs increase by 10 per cent, and at 13.3 per cent if benefits
decrease by 10 per cent.

D. Sustainability
36. The sustainability of programme investments and development results will be

ensured by:

 Mainstreaming natural resource management and climate-change adaptation;

 Promoting conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices;

 Empowering county governments and communities for sustainable natural
resource management and resilience to climate change;



EB 2015/114/R.9

9

 Building the capacity of stakeholders; and

 The e-voucher scheme and inclusive financial services.

37. At the institutional level, financial services, managed by financial institutions, will
be provided to stakeholders through a public/private partnership. This will enable
these institutions to expand their client base while they contribute to the
sustainable financial inclusion of ASAL smallholders. Investments by financial
institutions as programme partners are good indications of financial sustainability.
The relationship established between financial institutions and programme
beneficiaries will endure beyond the programme’s lifespan as these institutions
continue to provide beneficiaries with improved financial services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Risks Mitigation measures
Droughts or floods affect expression of
demand among target communities.

 Mainstream resilience packages in
programme activities

Climate-related risks hinder attainment
of programme objectives.

 Strengthen community-based resilience
systemsMainstream climate resilience in
programmes, plans and policies

Weather variability and crop failure
discourage financial providers from
participating in the programme.

 Assess feasibility of crop insurance
schemes. Strengthen climate information
services and climate-based extension
messages for smallholders

Low penetration of financial service
providers and cultural beliefs hinder
participation by target groups.

 Raise awareness
 Link target groups to contract farming and

outgrower schemes

Capacity of devolved structures to
manage implementation of activities is
weak.

 Embed capacity-building and
implementation support to county
structures for the programme’s
implementation organizational framework
and activities

 Empower county-level authorities with
resources for close monitoring,
supervision, timely updates and feedback

RBA coordination for mobilizing technical
and financial contributions to the
programme is weak.

 Embed RBA joint technical coordination
mechanisms at national and county levels
in the programme organizational
framework

Technical capacity for operationalizing
programme strategies and executing
programme activities is weak.

 Provide counties (PCU) with operational
strategies and technical tools for
programme execution under each
component

 Carry out activities requiring specific
technical competences through specialized
partners or service providers in
collaboration with counties. Identify
partners with specialized expertise for
each component

Exchange rate fluctuates  Conduct regular multi-currency monitoring
and reporting of programme costs

Fiduciary risks: Kenya’s Transparency
International 2014 Corruption
Perceptions Index was 2.5, which is an

 Specify external audit terms of reference,
conduct rolling internal audits, utilize off-
the-shelf accounting software and



EB 2015/114/R.9

10

Risks Mitigation measures
indication of high risk. disaggregate reporting by category,

component and financier

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The programme responds directly to the following objectives of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015: improved natural resources and the economic asset base;
improved access to services; capacity-building of rural people to manage profitable
and sustainable enterprises; opportunities for women and youth; sustainable
natural resource management; and adaptation to climate change.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. Support to developing the economic potential of ASALs is a priority in Kenya’s

Constitution and Vision 2030. The main goal is to fast-track their sustainable
development by increasing investment and ensuring that the use of resources is
reconciled with the realities of people’s lives. The National Policy for the
Development of ASALs recognizes that sorghum and millet are the most suitable
cereals for the environment, while maize continues to be cultivated by most
smallholder farmers as the primary cereal of choice.

40. The KCEP-CRAL is fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for ASALs and
harmonizes the efforts of major development partners – the Government, the
European Union and RBAs – in support of agricultural and rural development. In
line with national policies, the programme approach is adapted to the socio-
economic and biophysical characteristics of ASALs: (i) frequent drought; (ii) low
and unreliable rainfall; (iii) high vulnerability to climate change; (iv) fragile
ecosystems; and (v) high food insecurity and poverty.

41. The programme is also fully integrated into Kenya’s development partner
frameworks for agricultural and rural development. It directly contributes to
advancing the development results agreed by the Government and the United
Nations in Kenya under Kenya’s United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2014-2018: strategic result 1 – inclusive and sustainable economic
growth; and strategic result 2 – environmental sustainability, land management
and human security. It will also generate knowledge products on food security,
approaches to graduation of smallholders to commercial farming, and climate
resilience in semi-arid areas. These products will be disseminated in development
partner working groups such as the Agricultural and Rural Development Donor
Group and the ASALs Donor Group, in order to inform policies and programming for
ASALs.

42. The programme’s organizational framework for implementation is aligned with
national systems. At the local level, programme implementation and RBA
coordination will be aligned with Kenya’s devolution framework. Counties will be
the primary implementers of the programme using community-based approaches.
Given the capacity gaps faced by the newly established county structures, the
programme’s organizational framework includes dedicated implementation support
to the counties for programme execution, coordination of RBA contributions and
the promotion of synergies with other donor-funded initiatives.



EB 2015/114/R.9

11

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The programme incorporates innovative features such as:

 A partnership involving the Government, the three RBAs and the European
Union to steer farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to commercial
farming, with a focus on good agricultural practices, natural resource
management and resilience;

 A partnership with Equity Bank to set up an electronic platform combining
debit cards with e-vouchers to support smallholder access to new
technologies and financial services;

 Weather-based crop insurance, which will be piloted in the programme areas;

 Technical packages that introduce farmers to innovative combinations of
adapted inputs and practices for managing natural resources, which have
been tested by the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization.

44. Moreover, the KCEP-CRAL will promote business models, including new business
partnerships between smallholders and buyers, governance structures and financial
mechanisms for storage and processing facilities. The innovative features described
above, if successfully implemented, will generate significant knowledge and the
potential for replication and scaling up in Kenya and the region. Monitoring and
knowledge management will thus be important in assessing and comparing
performance, learning from experience and documenting achievements and good
practices.

Policy engagementD.
45. The programme will generate lessons learned, good practices and innovations that

inform policy dialogue on agricultural development in semi-arid areas. Specific
areas of interest include: (i) adapted technical packages; (ii) inclusive business
models for farmers’ access to services and markets; (iii) innovative financial
instruments; (iv) approaches for graduating smallholder farmers from food
insecurity to commercial agriculture; and (v) increasing resilience to climate
change and natural resource management. Special attention will be given to
documenting the impact of synergies among the Government, RBAs, the European
Union and the private sector – each of which brings comparative advantages to
addressing complex agricultural and rural development challenges in ASALs.

46. Capitalizing on these synergies, as mentioned previously, the programme will
generate knowledge products on food security, graduation approaches, commercial
farming and resilience in semi-arid areas that will inform policy and programming
in ASALs.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
47. A financing agreement between the Republic of Kenya and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

48. A grant agreement between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
grant under the country-specific window to FAO.

49. The Republic of Kenya is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD
and from IFAD’s Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund,
acting through IFAD in its capacity as trustee of the trust fund.

50. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/114/R.9

12

VII. Recommendation
51. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Kenya in an amount equivalent to forty-three million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 43,850,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund grant to the Republic of Kenya
in an amount equivalent to seven million one hundred thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 7,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant not exceeding two
million United States dollars (US$2,000,000) to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project
(TCEP)

Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$30.73 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 9.48 million (equivalent to approximately
US$13 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.28 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$1.86 million

Contribution of beneficiaries/private
sector:

US$2.31 million

Cofinancier/financing gap: US$9.06 million

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project, as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for
the Tree Crops Extension Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of the civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity
and impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a
Least Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies
heavily on foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in
20142 and, according to the 2014 Human Development Index (HDI), increased by
68.2 per cent from 2000 to 2013. With a 2013 HDI value of 0.412, Liberia ranked
175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million,
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be under 14 years of age.
The agriculture sector is the primary source of livelihoods for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. Liberia signed
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) compact
and has thus committed to the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security
and of a 10 per cent budget expenditure on agriculture, though it currently commits
only 3 per cent.

3. The tree crop sector was traditionally one of Liberia’s biggest employment sectors
and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. Primary cash crops included
cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber. During the Liberian civil war, the tree crop
sector was devastated and many farmers displaced from their land. The abandoned
farms and plantations degenerated into forest and their associated support
structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished, while exports
dropped to near-zero levels. Rehabilitation and growth in the tree crop sector can
do much to increase farmers’ incomes, revive the rural economy and contribute to
consolidating peace. This section focuses on the rationale and underlying
development hypothesis for IFAD involvement. It briefly explains how the project’s
development objective contributes to specific objectives of the Government of
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the CAADP and to the relevant
objectives of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP). Moreover, it shows how the project links with ongoing IFAD
projects/grants (e.g. synergies/complementarities) and with the activities and
policies of other international agencies (harmonization) and major stakeholders.
Similarly, the country's forest, soil and water resources require effective and
sustainable management practices to improve agricultural productivity and
increased resilience in the face of climate change.

1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, list of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries for 2014.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas method (current US$).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government is prioritizing both structural investments for long-term economic
growth and the post-Ebola recovery process. The Liberia RB-COSOP reached its
midterm in 2013, and was reviewed to identify the way forward for IFAD support
under the 2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle and
beyond. Overall, the midterm review revealed that strategic objectives under the
RB-COSOP were still relevant, but the transition from emergency to development
approach should be acknowledged more, which justifies a stronger focus on support
to the cocoa subsector.

5. The proposed Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP) is part of the Government’s
strategy to promote export-oriented growth, with deep engagement by private
stakeholders in the cocoa value chain. Liberia became a member of the International
Cocoa Organization (ICCO), and IFAD contributed to its first membership fees. The
TCEP is aligned with government policies, in particular: (a) the Agenda for
Transformation (AfT), which was launched in 2012; (b) the Cocoa Export Strategy
2014-2018, 3 which is a blueprint for increased competitiveness of Liberian cocoa in
the global market; (c) the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan (2015-2017);
(d) the new Land Rights Act, to be enacted in 2015; (e) the restructuring process of
the Liberia Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Act, which will
regulate the cocoa subsector; and (f) the National Adaptation Programme of Action
for climate change resilience.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The TCEP will intervene in approximately eight statutory districts in Nimba County.

This geographical expansion will complement the ongoing Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project (STCRSP) in Lofa County.

7. The TCEP will benefit 11,000 stakeholders of the cocoa value chain, including:
(i) 8,000 cocoa smallholder members of kuu groups4 and farmer field schools
(FFS); (ii) approximately 2,400 additional farmers, who will benefit from the
rehabilitation of roads, input supply and market linkages; and (iii) 600 people
through job creation along the value chain. To select the 8,000 cocoa smallholders,
the TCEP will combine a self-targeting approach with tools to ensure inclusiveness.
Priority will be given to women, youth (18-35) and survivors of the Ebola outbreak.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall development goal of the TCEP is “to improve the livelihoods and climate

change resilience of rural households in Nimba County". The development objective
is to improve the incomes and climate change resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in the county.

9. Some key impact and outcome indicators are: (i) 8,000 smallholder farmers have
increased the quantity of cocoa sold; (ii) 4,000 smallholder farmers have increased
their resilience to climate change; (iii) gross sales of cocoa per farm have increased
from US$178 in year 1 (Y1) to US$1,718 in Y6; (iv) at least 90 per cent of cocoa is
paid as grade 1 and receives 75 per cent of the ICCO reference price in Y6;
(v) 200 kilometres (km) of roads made passable all year round by end-Y3; and
(vi) 9,800 tonnes of cocoa sold through cooperatives and private-sector partners
(PSPs).

3 Developed with the support of the International Trade Centre.
4 Kuu is a traditional community-based cooperative work group that carries out brushing and cleaning of agricultural plots.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
10. Component A: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. Basic revitalization and

replanting will take place in Y1-Y4 and will follow these phases: 1,000 hectares (ha)
in Y1, 2,500 in Y2, 3,000 in Y3 and 3,500 in Y4. Starting in Y2, 2,000 ha will be
targeted for replanting. Value chain linkage development, and greater focus on crop
husbandry and post-harvest handling, will be undertaken in Y1-Y6. Establishment
and operation of a seed station in Nimba County will also be supported to
guarantee the availability of improved planting material for farmers, village
nurseries and privately owned nurseries. Diversification of cocoa farms with banana
and plantain will be pursued for food security, climate resilience and smoothing of
cash flow, while simultaneously increasing the role of women in the farm economy.

11. Component B: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Approximately
200 km of farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated in Nimba County, using the
implementation methodology developed under the STCRSP. Regarding
maintenance, the TCEP will have a three-pronged approach: (i) capacity-building in
road maintenance; (ii) improvement of the road maintenance strategy, including
development of a financing mechanism; and (iii) transition financing of
maintenance on a cash-for-work basis.

12. Component C: Service provision for value chain development. This
component aims to: (i) strengthen the capacity of farmers’ cooperatives at the
district level; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and
Cooperative Development Agency (CDA) at decentralized levels; (iii) ensure that
climate change adaptation is mainstreamed in the technical support systems for
value chain development; and (iv) monitor deforestation in the tree crop sector.
The main innovation under the TCEP is the use of a long-term growth path for
institutional capacity-building of cooperatives.

13. Component D: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The
objective of this component is to ensure effective, efficient operational planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. Approaches and manuals developed under the STCRSP will be updated, and
STCRSP implementation arrangements harmonized with those of the TCEP. The
TCEP will build on the existing expertise and human resources of the STCRSP.
Moreover, the project will adopt a value chain approach to link cocoa farmers,
organized at the grass-roots level in kuu groups and FFS, with cooperatives and
PSPs.

15. Cocoa revitalization of farms will take place in Y1-Y4. Rehabilitation of roads will
take place in Y2 and Y3 and preparatory works will start in Y1. Finally, with regard
to the provision of services for value chain development, the approach to enhancing
the institutional capacity of cooperatives will be less supply-driven and more
bottom-up, while also clearly defining the responsibilities of the cooperatives in
their partnerships with the project and with grass-roots groups. Previous mapping
and capacity assessments of farmers’ cooperatives in Liberia have lacked sufficient
discrimination on which to base the selection for project inclusion.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. MOA is designated as lead project agency for the TCEP. It will have overall

responsibility for implementation and will ensure linkages to other relevant
ministries and agencies. MOA will also work closely with the CDA and LACRA.

17. The national steering committee (NSC) of the STCRSP will also serve the TCEP. The
NSC will orient the project strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact,



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value
chain stakeholders. The programme management unit (PMU) will be the secretariat
of the NSC.

18. The PMU, which is anchored in the Planning and Development Department of MOA,
is in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in agriculture. Within the
PMU, coordination, management and M&E of the TCEP will be the responsibility of
the project implementation unit (PIU) in Monrovia, which has responsibility for all
IFAD-funded projects in Liberia. The IFAD-PIU will ensure day-to-day management
of the TCEP. In addition, the TCEP will establish a county PIU in Sanniquellie, Nimba
County.

19. The main implementing partners of the TCEP will be: (a) selected cooperatives
engaging in business agreements with the kuu groups and FFS; (b) at least two
PSPs, who will engage in procurement plans with the project and the cooperatives;
(c) the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI); and (d) other specialized
service providers, including national and international consulting firms,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), commercial financial institutions and
others.

20. At the county level, the TCEP will liaise with the decentralized functions of MOA and
CDA. The county agricultural coordinator (CAC) and district agricultural officers
(DAOs) will monitor implementation of components A and C. The county resident
engineer (CRE) will liaise with the project on implementation and monitoring of
component B. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with the project to
define roles and responsibilities.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. Planning. The Monrovia PIU will consolidate an annual workplan and budget
(AWP/B) for each project year, on the basis of proposals from the county PIU. The
AWP/B will include: (i) a detailed description of planned project activities for the
coming project year, and the sources and uses of the related funds; (ii) an
18-month procurement plan for items to be procured with IFAD financing; and
(iii) indicators and associated targets extracted from the logical framework. The
draft AWP/B will be submitted to the NSC for clearance and then to IFAD for
comments and final non-objection.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The logical framework of the TCEP will form the basis
for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts of the project. The results of the
TCEP will then feed into the MOA subsector contribution to the national AfT M&E
system. The TCEP M&E system will take targeting of women and youth into account
– as a minimum, disaggregating data by gender and age. Moreover, indicators will
be developed to measure the results of specific activities targeting the most
vulnerable segments of the target population.

23. Baseline data will be collected prior to project implementation to ensure that results
are closely monitored to continuously improve the outreach, relevance and
effectiveness of interventions. To this end, in June 2015 SCOPEinsight5 carried out
an assessment of 15 cocoa cooperatives in Nimba and Bong counties in order to
diagnose capacity to enable the project to better tailor training curricula to the
specific needs identified. This exercise will be repeated in TCEP Y3 and Y6. In
addition, the PMU has contacted CARI to conduct a mapping exercise of
cocoa/coffee farms in Nimba County with which the project will potentially work.6

5 SCOPEinsight is an independent rating agency based in the Netherlands that assesses the business potential of
farmer organizations in agriculture, dairy, forestry and aquaculture in developing countries.

6 MOA/PMU is exploring other partnerships that could support the implementation of M&E activities under TCEP
(i.e. young professionals, the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), and county
community colleges).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Finally, the TCEP will apply IFAD standard reporting procedures during
implementation.

24. M&E will be undertaken at multiple levels and by multiple stakeholders to support
effective implementation. Indicators have been developed during project design and
will be further refined as project activities become more detailed.

25. Forest cover and deforestation risks will be monitored in TCEP target areas through
a geo-information service (under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme [ASAP] grant).

26. Knowledge management plays a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda, and
the knowledge management strategy of IFAD-supported projects in Liberia will be
strengthened beginning with the TCEP. An action plan will be developed at start up.
This plan will outline activities to be undertaken, as well as roles and responsibilities
of project staff and implementing partners, to ensure the collection of high-quality
data, in-depth analysis, and creation of knowledge products for evidence-based
decision-making and to contribute to policy dialogue on the cocoa subsector.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
27. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. The Corruption Perceptions Index score for Liberia has slightly
deteriorated from 41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and 37 in 2014. According to the latest
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, conducted in 2012, the
Government has made significant improvements since the last assessment (2007),
but the overall state of public financial management remains moderately weak.

28. Responsibility for financial management of the project will rest with the PIU that is
responsible for implementing other ongoing IFAD projects. As part of the project
design process, a financial management assessment was undertaken. Financial
management arrangements and the capacity of the PIU were assessed as mostly
adequate to meet IFAD requirements; thus initial risk is considered medium. The
PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project financial
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual to be approved by the Fund.

29. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts (in United States
dollars) opened in the Central Bank of Liberia, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the ASAP grant. IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified
further in the letter to the borrower.

30. Audit arrangements. The borrower, through the PIU, will appoint independent
auditors acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD, and in line
with the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial
statement for the entire project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six months
of the end of the fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
31. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions when needed, will be organized with the participation
of MOA, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, CDA, LACRA,
cooperatives and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be conducted as general
inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and lessons learned, and
to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact. Missions will be an
integral part of the knowledge management cycle.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
32. Total project costs over six years, including contingencies, taxes and duties, are

estimated at US$30.73 million. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS
allocation of US$13 million for Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as
well as US$4.5 million in ASAP grant funding for climate change resilience activities.
The Government will finance taxes and duties on imported goods and the value
added tax (VAT) for a total of US$1.86 million. PSPs are expected to provide credit
of at least US$0.96 million. This amount includes PSP investments in the marketing
chain, as well as working capital that could be provided to cooperatives to buy
cocoa. The contribution of farmers totals US$1.35 million and consists of a
40 per cent contribution of own labour to the revitalization and replanting of cocoa
plantations and management of village nurseries, as well as to solar dryers. A
financing gap of US$9.06 million remains.

33. The ASAP grant will be used to finance: (a) in-country production of high-quality,
climate-adapted and disease-free planting material (seeds and grafting), including
through international partnerships; (b) promotion of farming practices that serve as
a buffer against increased climate pressures (higher shade, more-intensive plant
management including grafting and pruning, and income diversification through
various tree crops); (c) corresponding training of technicians and farmers;
(d) provision of solar dryers and training in their use; (e) participatory land-use
planning and monitoring based on satellite imagery, to ensure that increased
profitability of the tree crop sector and improved road access to remote areas do
not lead to deforestation; and (f) institutional capacity-building, policy dialogue and
knowledge management in the field of climate change resilience.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015

PBAS
Financing

gap
IFAD grant

(ASAP) Government

Private-
sector

partners Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
A. Revitalization of

cocoa plantations 3.49 34.8 0.16 1.6 3.43 34.2 0.64 6.4 0.96 9.6 1.35 13.5 10.03 32.6
B. Rehabilitation and

maintenance of
roads 0.64 6.3 8.9 87.1 - - 0.68 6.6 - - - - 10.22 33.3

C. Service provision for
value chain
development 4.62 76.0 - - 1.07 17.6 0.39 6.3 - - - - 6.08 19.8

D. Project coordination,
monitoring and
evaluation 4.25 96.5 - - - - 0.15 3.5 - - - - 4.4 14.3

Total 13 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS allocation of US$13 million for

Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as well as US$4.5 million in ASAP
grant funding for climate change resilience activities. The financing gap of
US$9.06 million – mainly to finance rehabilitation of roads (component B) – could
be financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 allocation (modalities to be confirmed). The
Government and IFAD will explore further cofinancing opportunities.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

8
/R

ev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015 PBAS Financing gap

IFAD grant
(ASAP) Government

Private-sector
partners Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment cost 9.3 35.1 9.0 34.1 4.1 15.4 1.78 6.6 0.96 3.7 1.35 5.1 26.49 85.8
A. Works 99 1.1 8.5 90.9 99 1.1 0.7 7.0 - - - - 9.4 30.5
B. Goods, services

and inputs 2.1 49.7 0.1 2.5 0.6 13.8 0.3 7.0 - - 1.15 27.0 4.3 14.0
C. Vehicles 0.8 84.9 - - 0.07 8.1 0.07 7.0 - - - - 0.9 3.1
D. Equipment and

materials 1.1 24.6 0.04 0.9 1.9 42.0 0.3 7.0 0.96 21.2 0.2 4.3 4.5 14.8
E. Consultancies 1.9 67.8 - - 0.7 25.7 0.2 6.5 - - - - 2.8 9.3
F. Training 2.6 82.3 0.04 1.1 0.3 10.2 0.2 6.4 - - - - 3.1 10.1
G. Workshops 0.1 81.8 0.02 11.2 - - 0.009 7.0 - - - - 0.1 0.4
H. Services 0.5 45.4 0.3 24.5 0.3 30.2 - - - - - - 1.1 3.7

II. Recurrent costs 3.7 86.0 0.06 1.2 0.4 9.9 0. 08 2.8 - - - - 4.24 14.2
A. Salaries and

allowances * 2.5 95.2 - - 0.1 4.8 - - - - - - 2.6 8.5
B. Operational

costs 1.2 72.2 0.06 3.1 0.3 17.7 0. 08 7.0 - - - - 1.64 5.6

Total 13.0 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100
*

Institutional capacity in Liberia is very weak and few service providers are available. Hence the required expertise needs to be internalized in the project. About 44 per cent of recurrent costs are
for staff salaries at the centralized level; 16 per cent for allowances to conduct field visits; 10 per cent for support to decentralized functions of MOA, CDA and young professionals; 9 per cent for
staff salaries at the local level; 8 per cent for salaries of staff tree crop experts; and the remainder for equipment and vehicles.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. Project benefits. The TCEP will have 11,000 beneficiaries: 8,000 cocoa

smallholder farmers, 2,400 additional farmers (who will benefit from spillover
effects) and approximately 600 people through job creation along the value chain.
Considering an average household size of 5.9 in the project area, this adds up to
64,900 household members. The project is expected to lead to increases in cocoa
production, marketing and exports as a result of: (a) revitalization of abandoned
plantations; (b) replanting of new trees on existing plantations; (c) higher yields at
the smallholder level, owing to improved production practices promoted through
dedicated extension systems; and (d) higher quality of cocoa as a result of
improved post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of component B, the
rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads will procure access to markets, reduce time
and costs to reach local markets and limit the post-harvest losses caused by bad
transportation conditions. Regarding component C, the strengthening of
cooperatives will contribute to increasing their bargaining power in price-setting
when negotiating with buyers. It will also contribute to delivery of quality services
to cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability of the approach, in particular,
dissemination of improved planting material, extension services, and access to
inputs and to output markets.

36. Financial analysis. The four financial models developed to simulate interventions
of the TCEP are based on information collected by the ongoing STCRSP and the
TCEP design team in April and July 2015. The financial crop models capture:
(i) increases in cocoa yield; (ii) increases in quality; and (iii) increases in prices for
higher quality, as well as better bargaining power for farmers. The yield
assumptions are based on information from other projects in Liberia and the region.
Cocoa price assumptions are based on World Bank price information and
projections (constant 2015 prices). Assumptions regarding grades are based on the
experiences of ongoing projects.

37. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) of 37.2 per cent over
20 years is profitable from an economic standpoint and generates a total of
US$108.8 million in the same period (social discount factor: 4.3 per cent). The
sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to: (i) increases in costs due to a
combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates; (ii) lower
adoption rates due to a limited outreach of extension services; and (iii) increases in
project costs due to higher prices of service providers, road construction and
inputs.

D. Sustainability
38. It is proposed to classify the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks

– category B – in view of: targeting of existing plantations and rehabilitation of
existing roads; safeguards against indirect deforestation; measures against
environmental risks of the application of agrochemicals; and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) note has been prepared. In terms of climate risks, a
preliminary classification of moderate climate risk is proposed at this stage.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks and mitigation measures to be adopted are: (i) weak governance

and institutional capacities – the TCEP will adopt direct contracting procedures,
follow IFAD procurement guidelines, and strengthen training and control systems
related to financial management; (ii) weak cooperatives and market linkages – kuu
groups and FFS will enhance the capacity and bargaining power of farmers. Market
linkages will be established through PSPs and cooperatives. The TCEP will also
provide institutional support to cooperatives; (iii) increased disease pressure will be
mitigated through the setting up and training of pesticide application teams in



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

cooperatives and FFS, as well as through promoting the use of shade from trees
and diversification of farming systems; (iv) deforestation – interventions will be
restricted to existing farms; forest conservation agreements and participatory land-
use monitoring will contribute to controlling deforestation risk; (v) increased use of
pesticides and fertilizer – the fertilizer application promoted will be in doses too low
to cause environmental harm; biopesticides will be applied through specially set up,
trained and equipped spraying teams, thereby reducing the risk of inappropriate
use; (vi) insufficient planting material and/or not adapted to specific needs – a
collection station will be set up for screening and multiplication of seed and bud
woods for grafting; (vii) low quality of cocoa – solar dryers will be introduced for
individual farmers and at the cooperative level. LACRA will be involved in quality
control.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

40. The design of the TCEP is compliant with the relevant IFAD policies, including the
IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting – Reaching the Rural Poor,
and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
41. The Cocoa Export Strategy 2014-2018 is a blueprint for the increased

competiveness of Liberian cocoa in the global market. On the basis of an in-depth
diagnostic, the strategy proposes 15 structural interventions in the cocoa value
chain, of which at least eight will be addressed by the TCEP. These structural
interventions aim to: (i) speed up efforts to rehabilitate cocoa farms abandoned
during the civil war and better organize farm operations; (ii) improve land
management practices, aligned with Global Good Agricultural Practice
(GLOBALG.A.P.) and good management practice standards, especially at the
smallholder and cooperative level; (iii) increase availability of inputs by developing
a locally manufactured input supply chain, and by improving access to imported
inputs; (iv) use high-quality saplings/seedlings through collaboration with research
institutes in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and the United Kingdom, among other countries;
(v) increase levels of mechanization, leading to increased capabilities of sector
stakeholders for transformation and processing; (vi) better train local buying
agents engaging in best practices and ensure that they are maintained at the
farmgate level; (vii) increase support to women cross-border traders and other
women’s groups and actors active in the sector through mentoring, training in
improved negotiation skills, technical support and access to efficient grievance
mechanisms; and (viii) develop in-market support/national promotion branding.

Innovations and scaling upC.
42. Several approaches adopted by the TCEP are innovative: (a) organization of

farmers at the grass-roots level to enhance their bargaining power; (b) integration
of climate change resilience and related institutional capacity-building; (c) greater
focus on the supply chain for new genetic cocoa material; (d) added attention to
the post-harvest aspects and quality of cocoa; (e) extra emphasis on service
delivery by cooperatives to their members; (f) the combination of basic
revitalization of plantations with enhanced revitalization and replanting;
(g) additional focus on measures to include women and promote their access to
benefits; and (h) use of a long-term growth path for institutional capacity-building
of cooperatives, combined with a more-systematic approach and institutional
auditing.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

10

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Policy engagementD.
43. ASAP grant. Within the ambit of the new LACRA Act (once enacted) and the United

Nations Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Programme
(UN-REDD) policy development in Liberia – and in collaboration with other
development partners – the TCEP will support a national round-table on climate-
friendly cocoa and the potential expansion of cocoa production towards wetter
counties as part of a countrywide climate change adaptation strategy. Other items
that could be discussed are: (a) switching to farmgate pricing with a prescribed
minimum; (b) stimulating the cocoa sector through quality premiums and enforced
minimum standards; and (c) bilateral agreements with Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire on
technical exchanges, exchange of germplasm, multiplication strategies, control of
diseases and child labour issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to nine million four hundred
and eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 9,480,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme to the Republic of Liberia
in an amount equivalent to three million two hundred and eighty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,280,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s Report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Niger for the Family Farming Development
Programme (ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and
Zinder Regions

Republic of Niger

Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Niger

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$207.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with an
annual service fee of three quarters of a point (0.75%)
per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP):

SDR 9,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$13.0 million)

Cofinanciers: OFID, Italian Cooperation, GEF, ongoing IFAD projects

Amounts and terms of cofinancing: OFID: US$6.0 million (loan)

Italian Cooperation: US$28.2 million (loan)

GEF: US$8.0 million (grant), to be confirmed

Ongoing IFAD projects: US$10.5 million (loan)

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$33.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$11.1 million

Funding gap US$48.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Niger for the Family Farming Development Programme
(ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Niger for the
Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Niger, a landlocked country with a territory of 1,267,000 km², is counted among

the world’s least developed and low-income food-deficit countries. Approximately
80 per cent of its estimated population of 17.13 million lives in rural areas, with
more than 60 per cent inhabiting three regions: Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder. The
latest Human Development Index ranks Niger in last place at 186th, with
75.9 per cent of its population living on less than US$2 per day.

2. In a natural environment marked by an arid climate with little rainfall and high
temperatures, the agricultural sector accounted for nearly 45.2 per cent of the
country’s GDP in 2010, exhibiting higher growth than the rest of the economy
during the period. Agriculture is Niger’s main source of export earnings after
mining.

3. Agriculture in Niger is based primarily on small-scale family farms, which vary in
size according to region and combine rainfed crops with irrigated crops. Irrigated
cropping is increasing and accounts for 30 per cent of agricultural production and
90 per cent of sector exports.

4. The major agricultural constraints are climate-based, economic and technical, not
to mention organizational. Access to the factors of production (inputs, equipment),
advisory assistance, rural financing and markets is still limited. Forecasting models
are projecting a significant drop in cereal yields if nothing is done to better adapt
the country's production systems to climate change.

5. Despite these sectoral constraints, opportunities to boost agro-sylvo-pastoral
productivity and to promote farming exist. Cereal and horticultural crop yields could
be substantially increased with the use of improved cropping techniques, better
seed, the introduction of animal-drawn ploughing, the dissemination of innovations
and better irrigation techniques. These significant increases in yield could enable
rural families to produce enough for household consumption and the sale of
surplus, while at the same time improving their resilience to climate change.

6. Niger has policies for development and support of the various sectors of the
economy, especially the agricultural sector. These policies include the Sustainable
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDCI), Vision 2035, the Economic
and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2012-2015 and the 3N Initiative (I3N) for
food and nutrition security and sustainable agricultural development. With support
from its technical and financial partners, the Government of Niger drafted its
National Nutrition Policy and its National Food and Nutrition Security Policy, revised
in 2011, placing particular emphasis on interventions to guarantee the population
sufficient, varied and quality food.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
Results-Based COSOP

7. ProDAF was conceived in a global context in which 2014 was declared the
International Year of Family Farming, aimed at restoring the central position of
family farming in the agricultural, environmental and social policies of national
action programmes. IFAD operations in Niger implemented under the country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2018 are in line with and
contribute to meeting the aims of national development policies and their
objectives, actions, and strategies. The strategic coherence between I3N and IFAD
operations in Niger derives from the lessons learned from 11 projects implemented
over the past 30 years and the experiences of the Government and other technical
and financial partners with whom IFAD implements its interventions.

8. With the object of providing the Government of Niger with substantial coordinated
support in the implementation of its agricultural policies, IFAD established
operational and financial partnerships by working in close collaboration with the
Belgian Fund for Food Security (FBSA), Italian Cooperation/DGCS, Spanish
Cooperation/AECID, the World Food Programme (WFP), the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and
by making overtures to private funds (SINERGI) and the banking sector (BAGRI,
ASUSU, etc.).

9. IFAD has built its strategy in Niger on family farming adapted to a context of
structural risks and potential external shocks. This model is capable of tackling the
challenges of improving population food and nutrition security and fostering poverty
reduction, economic growth, sustainable rural development and resilience to
climate change.

10. Family farming remains highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with its
negative impact on population food and nutrition security. Forecasting models are
projecting a significant reduction in yields if no action is taken to adapt the
country's production systems to climate change. The programme focuses on
increasing the resilience of the family farming model by stressing sustainability at
the economic, social, environmental and climate level. The rationale for including
ASAP funding in ProDAF is the need to guarantee the sustainability of the targeted
production systems by ensuring their resilience to climate change. Likewise, the
rationale for the ProDAF intervention is the vulnerability of its target populations.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
11. ProDAF will be implemented in IFAD’s area of concentration in Niger, identified by

COSOP 2013-2018 as the south-central corridor of the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder
regions. The population directly targeted by the programme will be that of the
economic development poles, with the population of bordering areas indirectly
benefitting from the dynamic generated by programme activities. Some 2,030,000
people – or 290,000 households – are involved in agro-sylvo-pastoral activities.
ProDAF will focus particularly on 240,000 family farms.

12. Three types of family farms have been identified and targeted: (i) highly vulnerable
family farms; (ii) moderately vulnerable family farms; and (iii) family farms with
little vulnerability. The programme also targets two demographic groups: women
and young people. Among the latter, special attention will be paid to young women
particularly affected by early marriage. Women and young people must respectively
represent at least 30 per cent of the beneficiaries of all programme activities.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme’s general objective is to help sustainably guarantee food and

nutrition security and rural households’ resilience to crises in the Maradi, Tahoua



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

3

and Zinder regions. The development objective is to sustainably increase the
income of 240,000 family farms, their resilience to external shocks, including
climate change, and their access to local, urban and regional markets in the three
regions.

C. Components/outcomes
14. In order to meet the development objective, the programme is built on three

components: (i) strengthening sustainable family farming; (ii) improving access to
markets; and (iii) programme management and coordination, monitoring and
evaluation, and knowledge management.

15. Component 1: Strengthening sustainable family farming. This component is
geared to sustainably boosting the productivity of family farms.

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Structured, productive farms resilient to climate risks.
Interventions will be carried out in 22 watersheds in the programme area. These
activities will consist of: (i) recovering 16,000 ha of degraded land; (ii) stabilizing
dunes around watersheds in a 2,000 ha area; (iii) creating 2,500 ha of sylvo-
pastoral space; and (iv) planting hedgerows on 400 ha of land. To make better use
of the available water resources, the programme will: (i) build/rehabilitate
139 dams in series to recover approximately 700 ha of land for irrigation; (ii) build
seven multipurpose mini-dams; and (iii) create four ponds. The programme will
furnish equipment for 6,800 ha of small-scale irrigation and get it up and running.
Thus, the programme will generate a total of 7,500 ha of irrigated land.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building for rural dwellers. These activities are
designed to strengthen the institutions and organizations that provide assistance to
family farms: rural civil society organizations (farmers’ organizations, CRA/RECA),
decentralized technical services and the territorial authorities (communes, regional
boards). The programme anticipates a 30 per cent increase in current yields in
eight years through two complementary outreach mechanisms: 805 farmer field
schools and agricultural advisory assistance. These mechanisms will benefit
240,000 growers and cover some 190,000 ha.

18. The programme anticipates a 40 per cent increase in the yield of the principal
irrigated crops. It will take advantage of the mechanism of horticultural field
schools (CEPM), with 945 CEPM providing support to 30,000 growers on an
estimated 7,500 ha of vegetable farms.

19. In order to improve small-animal husbandry and poultry farming, the programme
will include three intervention measures: (i) the creation of six new private
veterinary services in the vicinity; (ii) advisory assistance in poultry farming and
small-animal husbandry, with the introduction of 210 innovations in small-animal
husbandry, benefitting 15,750 households; and (iii) the distribution of animals to
reconstitute the livestock capital of 13,500 non-resilient two-person households
(women and young people).

20. RECA and the CRAs will remain favoured ProDAF partners. Through operational
partnerships with the agricultural world (that is, the rural farming community of the
three intervention regions), the following will be actively involved in project
implementation: FUCAP and FUFO in Tahoua; FUMA Gaskiya, Sa’a and Albishirinku
Manoma in Maradi; FUBI and CSAOCP in Zinder; as well as the regional branches of
FCMN-Niya. The Chamber of commerce, industry, and handicrafts of Niger (CCIAN)
and connections with bordering countries (Niger-Nigeria Chamber of Commerce)
will be strategic priorities.

21. Subcomponent 1.3: Women’s leadership and the improvement of nutrition
security. These activities are geared to sustainably improving the nutritional status
of rural households and reducing chronic malnutrition among the most vulnerable
groups through the creation of 1,350 women’s groups under the Mata Masu Dubara
Programme. This programme will set up 90 new women-operated granaries for food



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

4

security and 4,500 home gardens for nutritional support and provide 5,500
households with farming tool kits. In all, these activities will benefit the 12,500
most vulnerable households. Nutrition awareness activities will touch roughly
100,000 households through the nutritional monitoring of children under 5 and
cooking demonstrations.

22. Component 2: Access to markets. This component is designed to improve the
access of family farms to markets through the construction/rehabilitation of rural
infrastructure.

23. Subcomponent 2.1: Structures for access to marketing platforms. A
semi-wholesale market will be built in nine new economic development poles, and
18 supplementary satellite hubs have been identified. The programme will
rehabilitate/build 850 km of rural roads. Routine and periodic maintenance of these
roads will be performed by independent road maintenance teams in cooperation
with the management of the semi-wholesale market, the Community Advisory
Assistance Directorate, the Ministry of Equipment and the Autonomous Road
Maintenance Financing Fund.

24. Subcomponent 2.2: Modes of infrastructure management and the financing
of economic operators. The programme will include the creation of management
structures for all commercial rural infrastructure created or rehabilitated and
provide the requisite assistance. The social engineering process will include the
implementation of a cooperation framework (Hadin Gwiwa in Hausa) involving all
economic operators at the site. A local cooperatives union will be responsible for
managing each satellite hub. The programme will also provide assistance to the
promoters of farming activities or collaborate with agricultural activities leading to
profitable sales-oriented ventures. This support will be provided through the
creation of a cost-sharing financial mechanism.

25. Subcomponent 2.3: Regional trade integration. The programme will work to
facilitate cross-border trade, increase knowledge about cross-border trade
constraints and propose and test solutions with economic operators. The activities
will be carried out in partnership with the Nigeria-Niger Joint Commission for
Cooperation, as well as consular trade offices, economic operators and professional
organizations.

26. Internal programme funding mechanisms. The programme’s support and
investments are financed in the following manner: (i) activities directly managed by
the programme, as in the case of infrastructure, are fully funded by subsidies;
(ii) activities targeting the most vulnerable households are funded by grants; and
(iii) activities that support economic activities are funded by cost-sharing
mechanisms.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
27. The ProDAF approach is grounded in the following three intervention principles:

(i) improvement of food and nutrition security; (ii) territorial continuity of the
interventions through the economic development pole; and (iii) scaling up the
current project activities of IFAD and its partners. The programme will promote a
strategy for learning, capitalizing on lessons learned, and communication that will
be evaluated during the course of the activities. Public-private sector
complementarity in the various intervention domains is guaranteed. ProDAF will be
implemented in collaboration with other technical and financial programmes under
way in Niger’s agricultural sector through strategic and operational partnerships.

28. The programme will be implemented in phases based on: (i) coordination with the
activities of the PASADEM and Ruwanmu projects; (ii) the maturity of local partners
– the local authorities and economic operators – that will be jointly involved in the



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

5

programme; and (iii) the ability of teams on the ground to manage the
administrative and financial processes involved in implementing the activities.

B. Organizational framework
29. ProDAF will be placed under the Ministry of Agriculture. The National Steering

Committee is responsible for strategic orientation and will verify the coherence of
the programme in this respect with national strategies; it will also approve the
annual workplans and budgets (AWPBs). The Ministry in charge will delegate project
management by decree to the three autonomous regional project management
units (URGPs), whose operations it will oversee. These units will be set up in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder and will enjoy administrative and financial autonomy. A
national advisory assistance unit (CENAT) has been created and tasked with
providing support for project engineering, political dialogue, rural roads, monitoring
and evaluation and financial consolidation of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

30. Programme planning will be an ongoing process based on the AWPBs. The
monitoring and evaluation system will be designed using the logical framework as a
tool for management, planning and decision-making by the partners in programme
implementation. The programme’s computer database will be linked directly to the
geographic information system (GIS) to allow for map-based visualization of
programme results.

31. ProDAF’s planning and monitoring and evaluation system will scale up IFAD’s
existing systems in Niger and merge them into a single database for a GIS and
common manual of procedures. During the preparation of the AWPB, quantitative
objectives will be broken down by region and implementation phase at programme
launch after a review of the logical framework with the stakeholders involved. Two
reviews at, respectively, one third and two thirds of the way into the programme
and a final evaluation are planned to compare the changes observed with the
baseline situation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. ProDAF has a reliable and rigorous internal fiduciary management and control

environment, along with a qualified team inherited from ongoing IFAD projects,
which have resulted in remarkable performance levels. An account in CFA francs
(CFAF) will be opened in the name of the programme at a commercial bank in
Niamey acceptable to IFAD. An operations account in CFAF will also be opened for
each regional project management unit and CENAT itself (four in all). Based on
quarterly cash flow needs, each of the accounts will receive funds from accounts
designated (by a lender or donor), opened in response to a request for funds by the
URGPs. At the request of CENAT, tasked inter alia with quality control, coherence
and financial consolidation, the account will be activated and managed in
accordance with the renewable funds mechanism.

33. This innovative procedure will enable the programme to receive a substantial
advance corresponding to funds for expenditures equal to six months of the AWBP.
These funds will be subject to regular and periodic verification of payments. The
teams of the ongoing projects regularly and optimally use the latest version of the
Tompro financial management software, which has proved entirely satisfactory for
preparing reimbursement requests and monthly reports.

34. The procurement system is governed by current laws, decrees and legal provisions,
which contain general principles, controls and regulations for public procurement
and public service concessions and set public procurement thresholds for the state,
public establishments, state enterprises, and corporations with majority public
ownership, on the one hand, and territorial or local groups, on the other. A priori



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

6

control of procurement procedures is exercised by the General Directorate for the
Control of Public Procurement and Financial Liabilities.

35. ProDAF will be audited annually by a qualified firm.

E. Supervision
36. ProDAF will be under the direct supervision of IFAD. During the first 12 to

18 months, the supervision mission will verify that the main preparatory measures
have been adopted for the implementation of each component, as well as for
programme management, and monitoring and evaluation.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
37. The total cost of the programme over an eight-year period, including provisioning

for unexpected physical contigencies and price increases, is CFAF 103.6 billion,
equivalent to US$207.2 million. It consists of a cost of CFAF 22.3 billion
(US$44.7 million), covered with financing that has already been approved, and
CFAF 81.3 billion (US$162.5 millions), to be covered with new financing. The
US$162.5 million to be covered with new financing is comprised of a base cost of
US$142.7 million and US$19.8 million (12 per cent) in provisioning for unexpected
physical contigencies and financial events. This figure includes taxes in the amount
of US$19.6 (12 per cent), and the foreign exchange cost is set at US$46.0 million
(28 per cent).

B. Programme financing
38. ProDAF’s total cost of US$207.2 million will be financed by: (i) IFAD, thanks to the

harmonization of the AWPB of its PASADEM and PPI-RUWANMU projects (US$10.5
million) with that of ProDAF, the performance-based allocation system (PBAS)
2013-2015 financing (US$48.5 million, 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent loan),
and ASAP funds (grant of US$13.0 million); (ii) the GEF (grant of US$8.0 million, to
be confirmed); (iii) OFID (loan of US$6.0 million); (iv) and Italian Cooperation
(loan of US$28.2 million); (v) the Government of Niger (US$33.4 million – US$18.6
million in tax exemptions and US$14.8 million in funding); and (vi) the beneficiaries
(US$11.1 million). A funding gap of US$48.5 million remains, which could be
financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 (modalities to be determined).



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of sustainable family farming
1. Structured,

productive farms
resilient to climate
risks

15 774.5 22.0 15 743.5 22.0 10 122.3 14.1 7 061.6 9.9 9 724.4 13.6 13 169.1 18.4 71 595.5 44.1

2. Capacity building for
rural dwellers

6 173.4 42.1 6 198.1 42.2 1 365.4 9.3 - - 128.0 0.9 815.7 5.6 14 680.6 9.0

3. Women’s leadership
and the
improvement of
nutrition security

2 812.6 44.0 2 812.6 44.0 - - - - - - 762.9 11.9 6 388.0 3.9

Subtotal Strengthening
of sustainable family
farming

24 760.5 26.7 24 754.1 26.7 11 487.7 12.4 7 061.6 7.6 9 852.4 10.6 14 747.8 15.9 92 664.1 57.0

B. Access to markets
1. Structures for

access to marketing
platforms

12 662.4 32.5 12 662.4 32.5 - - - - - - 13 670.6 35.1 38 995.4 24.0

2. Management of
infrastructure and
the financing of
market operators

3 267.3 39.4 3 267.3 39.4 - - - - 1 286.0 15.5 469.3 5.7 8 289.8 5.1

3. Regional trade
integration

1 720.6 44.0 1 720.6 44.0 - - - - - - 466.6 11.9 3 907.8 2.4

Subtotal Access to
markets

17 650.2 34.5 17 650.2 34.5 - - - - 1 286.0 2.5 14 606.5 28.5 51 192.9 31.5

C. Programme
management and
coordination,
monitoring/
evaluation and
knowledge
management

6 084.2 32.6 6 084.2 32.6 1 482.8 7.9 964.4 5.2 - - 4 045.4 21.7 18 660.9 11.5

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

Table 2
Programme costs by expense category and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total
Expense Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 20 991.3 31.3 20 638.2 30.8 1 893.9 2.8 3 023.8 4.5 128.0 0.2 20 285.3 30.3 66 960.6 41.2

2. Vehicles 1 277.1 30.2 1 429.2 33.8 293.9 7.0 87.8 2.1 - - 1 135.0 26.9 4 223.0 2.6

3. Equipment and
materials

1 000.6 34.0 1 000.6 34.0 109.1 3.7 67.5 2.3 - - 765.2 26.0 2 943.0 1.8

4. Training 1 827.7 37.4 1 833.7 37.5 376.9 7.7 36.1 0.7 - - 815.5 16.7 4 890.0 3.0

5. Consultations 6 930.7 33.5 6 908.7 33.4 1 693.3 8.2 500.4 2.4 - - 4 675.8 22.6 20 708.9 12.7

6. Goods & services &
inputs

7 154.4 25.7 7 365.1 26.4 6 907.1 24.8 3 792.8 13.6 - - 2 645.1 9.5 27 864.5 17.1

7. Grants & subsidies 2 634.3 16.2 2 634.3 16.2 - - - - 11 010.3 67.6 0.0 - 16 278.9 10.0

8. Salaries &
indemnities

5 637.2 36.4 5 637.2 36.4 1 324.9 8.6 382.4 2.5 - - 2 498.6 16.1 15 480.3 9.5

9. Operating costs 1 041.4 32.9 1 041.4 32.9 371.5 11.7 135.2 4.3 - - 579.2 18.3 3 168.7 1.9

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. A total of 290,000 rural households – that is 2,030,000 people – will benefit from

programme activities and sustainably increase their productivity, resilience to
climate risks and access to local and urban markets. In particular, the programme’s



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

8

overall IRR is 15.7 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was conducted; it found that the
IRR is sensitive to a drop in sales prices or yields. A drop of 30 to 40 per cent in
yields results in IRRs of 11.4 per cent and 9.9 per cent respectively, while a
30 per cent drop in sales prices results in an IRR of just 10.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
40. The sustainability of ProDAF’s intended outcomes is ensured by its effective

partnership with local public institutions, organized rural civil society and the
private sector in designing and implementing the activities. Additional factors
include: the guarantee of the economic and financial profitability of the commercial
infrastructure built or rehabilitated; the microprojects financed; watershed
management for sustainable use of land and water resources; and investments in
small-scale irrigation equipment financed through cost-sharing under local market
conditions by local financial institutions capable of renewing such financing.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The main risks and the mitigation measures adopted are as follows:

(i) The political and security situation in the programme area is
deteriorating. The programme strategy is based on an intervention that
targets local organized economic actors and communities capable of ensuring
the sustainability and continuity of the investments. The operational
mechanism boosts national and local technical and operational capacity in
collaboration with the IFAD Country Office in Niamey.

(ii) Adverse weather events. ProDAF will contribute to better forecasting of
changing weather patterns by producing and distributing meteorological
information to prevent/anticipate crises and provide adaptive technologies
that will enable producers to practice farming that is resilient to shocks
associated with climate change.

(iii) Vulnerable beneficiaries can survive crises produced by severe
weather events resulting in their decapitalization. The programme will
help anticipate, absorb, and respond to shocks by increasing the resilience of
households vulnerable to crises and contributing to the social safety net
programme.

(iv) Lack of support from territorial authorities. The programme retains the
commune as the administrative gateway for all interventions while involving
the authorities in local public-private partnerships.

(v) The fees paid by market operators are essential for guaranteeing the
sustainability of the semi-wholesale markets. Implementation partners
will employ financial analysis to help economic operators and mayors’ offices
negotiate contribution/fee levels.

(vi) Social divisions and conflicts in communities/communes. Social
engineering by ProDAF prior to any civil intervention will facilitate local
consensus building between the authorities and organized economic
operators. In the long term, this process will lead to the creation of local
public-private partnerships.

(vii) The security situation in the programme area. The risk that the security
situation will deteriorate and hinder overland travel by the supervision
missions is real. The programme will therefore strengthen the operational
capacity of the IFAD Country Office and national advisory assistance to carry
out these missions.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

9

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The programme is fully integrated into IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

aligned with IFAD policies, especially its targeting policy, its policy on improving
access to land and tenure security and its environment and natural resource
management policy, as well as the Fund’s basic principles and strategies related to
climate change, gender and knowledge management. ProDAF is classified as an
environmental Category B programme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. The programme, like all other IFAD activities in Niger, is implemented within the

framework of its COSOP 2013-2018. It is in alignment with the objectives and
intended outcomes of the PDES, the I3N, and the I3N Acceleration Plan and
contributes to their attainment. In order to offer substantial and coordinated
support to the Government of Niger for implementation of its agricultural policies,
IFAD is working in financial and/or operational partnership with Italian and Spanish
Cooperation, KfW, the World Food Programme (WFP), FAO, the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the GEF. ProDAF is also developing
synergies and complementarities with other donors and lenders active in the sector,
such as the French Agency for Development (AFD); Swiss (SDC), Danish (DANIDA),
and Luxembourg (LuxDev) bilateral cooperation agencies; the GIZ, the European
Union, the World Bank, IFC, USAID and the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC).

C. Innovations and scaling up
44. ProDAF’s scaling up approach falls under the programme’s development objective,

which is to sustainably increase the income of family farms and improve their
adaptation to climate change and access to local, urban and regional markets. In
order to accomplish this, ProDAF capitalizes on proven, measured, and documented
outcomes obtained through the operations of IFAD or other partners in Niger, while
at the same time improving tools and approaches based on the lessons learned to
boost efficiency, impact, and sustainability. ProDAF’s scaling up is part of the
ongoing dynamic process of innovation, learning and scaling up launched after the
formulation of the two earlier projects and COSOP as part of the long-term vision
for IFAD activities in Niger. The tools for scaling up IFAD activities in Niger are not
only the operations financed by the Fund but the political dialogue and knowledge
management established in the various domains. The partners are another key
vehicle for scaling up to mobilize additional financial resources and/or
supplementary expertise.

D. Policy engagement
45. ProDAF’s intervention logic is to facilitate political dialogue and institutional

improvements through advocacy built on its activities in the field. The activities for
promoting political dialogue are designed to give ProDAF the opportunity to
participate in the strengthening of national public policies for sustainable
agricultural development and food and nutrition security (I3N), financing of the
agricultural sector (in association with the public and private sectors) and
administrative decentralization (support to local groups, communes, etc.), moving
toward a subregional dimension in the areas of transportation corridors and
cross-border trade (CEDEAO, UEMOA, CILSS, NEPAD).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Republic of Niger and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/beneficiary.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

47. The Republic of Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

10

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Niger in an amount equivalent to seventeen million two
hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 17,250,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Niger, within the Debt Sustainability Framework, in an amount equivalent to
seventeen million two hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 17,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of Niger in
an amount equivalent to nine million two hundred fifty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 9,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu
Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)


Democratic Republic of the Congo

North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock

Total project cost: US$52.974 million

Amount of IFAD loan under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant under the 2013-
2015 PBAS allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: repayment term of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
commission of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$9.718 million

Contribution of the borrower/
beneficiary: US$5.950 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.528 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture
Sector Support Project (PASA-NK), as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support
Project (PASA-NK)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Following several decades of political instability, insecurity and economic

devastation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is enjoying robust economic
growth and a stable macro-economic framework. Agricultural and mineral
resources are vast, among the largest in sub-Saharan Africa. The country has an
area of 2.34 million km² and a population of about 71 million, close to 70 per cent
of whom live in rural areas.

2. Growth in GDP, which has improved significantly since 2010, is greater than 7 per
cent. In addition to agriculture, which employs 64 per cent of the active population
and generates 33.4 per cent of GDP (Central Bank of the Congo, 2013), the most
important sectors are trade (22 per cent) and mining (12 per cent).

3. Economic growth, in tandem with public investment in the health and primary
education sectors, has enabled the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reduce the
incidence of poverty from 71.34 per cent in 2005 to 63.4 per cent in 2012. The
rural poverty rate remains high at 69 per cent in 2012. Food and nutritional
insecurity remain at alarmingly high levels: 54 per cent of rural households are
food-insecure, 43 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished and
8 per cent suffer from acute malnutrition.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
RB-COSOP

4. The country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2012-2016 set two
strategic objectives: (i) improve smallholder farmers' access to effective production
services, appropriate technologies and local markets; and (ii) professionalize
farmers' organizations so that they can become economic partners with private
enterprises in rural areas.

5. PASA-NK is aligned with both COSOP strategic objectives, and will strengthen
portfolio results in terms of sustainable access by smallholder farmers to inputs
and markets, remuneration of agricultural products at more advantageous prices
for farmers (the COSOP calls for a 30 per cent increase) and stability of apex
producer organizations (POs). PASA-NK will also balance the distribution of IFAD-
cofinanced operations in the country's western and eastern regions.

6. The Government intends to develop inclusive value chains, in addition to
investments now under way in agro-industrial complexes (Nsele agro-industrial
zone and Bukanga-Lonzo agro-industrial park). This intention is fully aligned with
the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA) and the aims of promoting value
chains in agriculture and agro-industry. The Government's vision and the strategic
objectives of the programme cofinanced by IFAD in the Democratic Republic of the



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

2

the Congo converge in North Kivu to remove the financial, institutional and physical
constraints now faced by the people living in the province.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. As indicated by its name, PASA-NK will be implemented in the province of North

Kivu, and more specifically in the territories of Beni, Lubero, Rutshuru, Nyiragongo
and Masisi. Activities will involve one or two crops in each of the territories
targeted.

8. North Kivu province falls within the post-conflict territories located to the country's
east, and covers an area of close to 60,000 km². The population in 2014 was an
estimated 6.5 million people, 88 per cent of them living in rural areas where the
population density is more than 100 habitants par km². According to the Human
Development Index, the province is ranked 10th of 11 provinces. An estimated 70
per cent of poor people in the province live in rural areas.

9. PASA-NK covers production and commercialization of four crops: maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee. The crops were selected on the basis of the following
criteria: (i) number of producers involved; (ii) potential for growth in production
and productivity; (iii) existence of expanding markets accessible to smallholders:
local, national, subregional and international markets, including fair trade niche
markets; (iv) potential for improving incomes and value added; (v) potential for
integration of vulnerable groups such as women, unemployed rural young people
and landless poor people; and (vi) presence in the subsector of a public service,
NGO or lead apex PO to provide technical guidance and other economic services.

10. Based on the four selected value chains, five lead organizations have been selected
to play a leading role in project implementation: (i) the Central Cooperative of
North Kivu (COOCENKI) for maize, to implement project activities in Rutshuru
territory; (ii) the League of Women Farmers Organizations of the Congo
(LOFEPACO) for rice, in Beni territory; (iii) the Farmers Union (SYDIP) for potato, in
Lubero, Masisi and Nyiragongo territories; (iv) the Federation of Agricultural
Producers Organizations of the Congo (FOPAC), for PO capacity-building and
advocacy; and (v) the NGO VECO for the Arabica coffee value chain, given the
tangible results it has achieved, to develop economic services for gourmet coffee in
Beni and Rutshuru.

11. PASA-NK will target, first and foremost, poor and very poor households who will
benefit from financial support granted by the project to facilitate access to
improved seed and fertilizer and agricultural advisory assistance. Storage and
processing activities will benefit all households. Activities to develop coffee growing
will affect poor, less poor and wealthy households owning coffee plantations. Poor
households will be defined as follows: (i) cultivated area of less than 1 ha;
(ii) livestock (type and number) of less than 5 head; (iii) transportation by bicycle
or scooter; and (iv) widows heads of household. Lead POs have suggested that
additional criteria be added, such as: (i) farmers working an area of at least 0.25
ha in a single location; and (ii) victims of domestic or sexual violence. A total of
28,400 households will benefit directly from the project activities.

B. Project development objective
12. The main objective of PASA-NK is to sustainably improve food security and incomes

among participating households. The development objective is to improve
productivity and profitability for four crops produced by smallholders – maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Capacity-building for actors supporting agricultural value

chains. Component 1, representing 58.1 per cent of total project cost, is divided



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

3

into three subcomponents: (i) development of economic services provided by POs;
(ii) institutional strengthening for POs; and (iii) support for the public sector. The
outcomes of these three subcomponents will be: (i) economic services provided by
POs are viable and appreciated by farmers; and (ii) the performance of provincial
public services in support of producers has improved.

14. Component 2: Support for rural infrastructure. Component 2, representing
22.5 per cent of total project cost, is divided into two subcomponents:
(i) rehabilitation of agricultural access roads; and (ii) capacity-building for
provincial and territorial coordination by the Agricultural Access Roads Division
(DVDA). The expected outcome is a reduction in the cost and time taken to
transport goods.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. PASA-NK calls for professionalizing POs around economic services to improve

smallholder access to agricultural inputs and markets and, accordingly, boost
agricultural productivity and incomes. These economic services comprise: (i) for
maize, access to improved seed, provision of advisory assistance, and storage and
warehousing to facilitate deferred group sales synchronized with periods of higher
prices for maize; (ii) for rice, access to improved seed and fertilizer, provision of
advisory assistance, storage and warehousing, and support for the LOFEPACO rice
mill; (iii) for potato, production of improved variety mini-tubers, access to fertilizer,
provision of advisory assistance, collection and sales facilitation for wholesalers;
and (iv) for coffee, improved variety nurseries, provision of advisory assistance,
washed coffee processing, facilitation of organic and fair trade certification, and
facilitation of quality green coffee sales on niche markets.

16. Based on this vision, the project will be implemented in accordance with the
following underlying principles:

17. Business plans. All lead POs will organize their interventions at the value chain
level based on business plans demonstrating the profitability of economic services
offered to their members. The economic services will be organized around weak
links in the maize, rice, potato and coffee value chains.

18. Financial terms. The project will trigger and support a virtuous process of
development within which POs will be assisted in undertaking economically viable
activities. In order to be viable, such activities must be based on a sound
mechanism for access to production factors, processing and commercialization.

19. Contractualization. This will be one of the building blocks of business plan
implementation by POs. Contractualization will govern relations with other actors
within the targeted food value chains: processors, traders, input suppliers and
other service providers.

20. Gradualism and sequencing of interventions. The project will be implemented
in the post-conflict area, where people are readjusting to stability. As a result,
project interventions and support will be organized in a prudent, gradual and
sequenced manner to ensure that each stage is properly managed and brings the
desired results.

B. Organizational framework
21. PASA-NK will be under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and

Livestock. The provincial Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of North
Kivu will become a member of the existing steering committee. The project will be
coordinated by a project coordination unit (PCU) with administrative and financial
management autonomy, based in Goma.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

4

22. To facilitate project start-up, IFAD will provide the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Livestock – as oversight agency – with a start-up advance of US$650,000 from
the grant proceeds, to: (i) recruit PCU staff and international technical assistants
who are to train the PCU to ensure ownership of the project objectives and
approach; (ii) put in place basic tools needed for first disbursement; and
(iii) undertake the baseline study to ensure that results are available as of year
one.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. Annual planning for the project will begin with an evaluation of business plan
execution by the economic services for the four value chains. This will establish
high-level direction to plan for the following year and update the business plans, as
part of the process of participatory self-evaluation and preparation of the annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B). The AWP/B for the following year will be based on
the updated business plans for each value chain, subsequent preparation of the PO
institutional strengthening plan, the scope of public services provided and
engagement with the private sector, based on the new business plan targets. The
planning of rehabilitation works on access roads will be aligned with opening up
access to areas targeted in the business plans.

24. The PCU will set up a simple, operational M&E system. The logical framework
provides minimum indicators to provide information on the effectiveness, efficiency
and impact of PASA-NK. In addition, the M&E system will provide information on
IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) system, and will include a
geographical information system.

25. Knowledge management under PASA-NK will leverage existing initiatives. Thus,
FOPAC, which has a communication system in the form of its quarterly news
bulletin and rural radio network, will play a leading role provincially by
disseminating information on the project in the bulletin and studies on advocacy-
related issues, mapping land tenure conflicts and mapping value chains. At the
national level, the project will enter into an agreement with the ECO CONGO
network, a digital content platform to disseminate relevant information on
sustainable rural and agricultural development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Both of the national confederations (COPACO and CONAPAC) publish a
periodical bulletin and PASA-NK could reserve space for an article twice a year. At
the regional and international level, it is proposed that the IFAD-cofinanced
Farmers Organizations Support Programme (PAOPA) be used for capitalization of
PASA-NK activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and procurement. However,

the rural engineering works will be the responsibility of a project manager with the
competencies and human resources needed for procurement. Contracts for civil
engineering works (building construction and rural road rehabilitation) are the most
difficult to organize and supervise for PCUs, as they have limited staff.

27. A strategy to mitigate fiduciary risks will be adopted, based on the following
measures:

• Monthly verification of the project accounting database, to be done jointly by
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and the IFAD country
office;

• Submission of a quarterly report using the template provided by IFAD
financial services. Reports are to be prepared by the PCU and sent to IFAD for
review;



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

5

• Recruitment of international technical assistance in financial management and
procurement, commencing at the outset of the project, to set up a more
effective organizational structure of fiduciary functions; and

• Semi-annual audit of project accounts and procurement by a qualified audit
firm. The PCU will be responsible for hiring the external auditors.

28. Flow of funds. Two mechanisms will be set up to finance project activities: (i) the
designated account and financing of project expenses with a justified and
reimbursable advance; and (ii) direct payments by implementing partners based on
the achievement of specific results.

29. Audit. The Government will, with the prior consent of IFAD, appoint external
auditors to perform two external audits of PASA-NK each fiscal year, in accordance
with international auditing standards and the procedures and criteria set out in
IFAD's guidelines on project audits (for use by borrowers/beneficiaries).

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will supervise the project directly in close collaboration with the Government.

IV. Project cost, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
31. The total cost of the project is estimated at US$52.974 million over a nine-year

period. The main sources of financing are: (i) IFAD with US$33.78 million, or 63.8
per cent of total project cost – the Democratic Republic of the Congo is classified as
"yellow" under the Debt Sustainability Framework, and is therefore eligible for 50
per cent grant and 50 per cent loan financing, i.e. a grant of US$16.89 million and
a loan of US$16.89 million; (ii) OFID with US$9.718 million, or 18.3 per cent of
total project cost; (iii) the Government with US$5.95 million in the form of
exemptions from taxes and tariffs on the goods and services to be purchased by
the project; and (iv) the beneficiaries with US$3.58 million, or 6.7 per cent of total
project cost.

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Capacity-building for actors
supporting agricultural value chains
1. Development of PO economic
services 16 022 75.3 - - 1 730 8.1 3 528 16.6 21 279 40.2

2. Institutional strengthening for POs 2 448 93.7 - - 164 6.3 - - 2 613 4.9

3. Support to public sector 5 276 76.4 689 10.0 940 13.6 - - 6 905 13.0

Subtotal 23 747 77.1 689 2.2 2 834 9.2 3 528 11.5 30 797 58.1

B. Support for rural infrastructure

1. Rehabilitation of access roads - - 8 481 75.0 2 827 25.0 - - 11 308 21.3

2. Capacity-building for DVDA - - 548 86.8 83 13.2 - - 631 1.2

Subtotal - - 9 029 75.6 2 910 24.4 - - 11 939 22.5

C. Coordination and management 10 032 98.0 - - 206 2.0 - - 10 238 19.3

Total cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

6

B. Project financing
32. Table 2 below indicates how the funds provided by IFAD will be used, by category

of expenditure.
Table 2
Project cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Studies 384 28.3 808 59.6 163 12.0 - - 1 355 2.6

B. Vehicles and equipment 2 418 65.3 146 4.0 1 137 30.7 - - 3 702 7.0

C. Training and workshops 8 164 93.4 188 2.1 -0 - 387 4.4 8 739 16.5

D. Civil and rural engineering 418 3.5 8 576 70.8 3 081 25.4 43 0.4 12 118 22.9

E. Support fund 9 279 67.1 - - 1 568 11.3 2 971 21.5 13 819 26.1

F. Technical assistance

National expertise 2 368 100.0 - - - - - - 2 368 4.5

International expertise 1 808 100.0 - - - - - - 1 808 3.4

Subtotal assistance technique 4 176 100.0 - - - - - - 4 176 7.9

Total investment cost 24 839 56.6 9 718 22.1 5 950 13.5 3 401 7.7 43 909 82.9

II. Operating expenses

A. Personnel 6 009 97.9 - - - - 126 2.1 6 135 11.6

B. Operating and maintenance 2 931 100.0 - - 0 - - - 2 931 5.5

Subtotal operating expenses 8 939 98.6 - - 0 - 126 1.4 9 065 17.1

Total project cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. All crop models indicate that the situation of smallholder producers will improve

with the project. The cost-benefit ratio is quite significant: 1.6 for potato, 1.4 for
rice, 1.3 for coffee and 1.2 for maize. Net present value is between US$81 and
US$565/household/year, calculated at an opportunity cost of capital of 30 per cent
per annum.

34. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 18 per cent and the
NPV, at the opportunity cost of capital of 9.32 per cent, is US$16.5 million. A
sensitivity analysis shows that the results obtained are robust: it would take an
income reduction of 37 per cent or a cost increase of 59 per cent to bring down the
EIRR to the level of the opportunity cost of social capital.

D. Sustainability
35. The sustainability of project-supported activities has been considered from several

different perspectives.

36. Institutional sustainability. The project has opted to build implementation
partnerships with lead POs and NGOs with proven experience in the subject areas
targeted. This approach, by handing over direct responsibility to professional
agricultural actors, provides guarantees of continuity and sustainability. Moreover,
having technical services take part in, inter alia, project supervision, setting up
farmers field schools, providing agricultural advisory assistance and M&E, will
position these services better within the socio-economic development of the
province, which is an element of sustainability.

37. Financing arrangements. The approach adopted by the project calls for
providing a temporary subsidy for agricultural inputs – improved seed and fertilizer
– as a process trigger, together with a policy to mobilize savings and create a
credit culture among farming households, facilitating smallholder access to financial
services over the longer term.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

7

38. Returns on economic services. More sustainable rice, maize, potato and Arabica
coffee production should enable beneficiary households to improve their savings
and investment capacity and encourage them to maintain the same levels of
fertilizer and improved seed use and value chain integration. Farmers should
therefore be in a position to pay for inputs at market prices by the time of project
completion.

39. Consolidation of associational and cooperative life. The project will contribute
to consolidating associational life by meeting the needs of beneficiary households
to enable them to participate in the activities of their POs, specifically by paying
dues and undertaking commercial transactions to purchase inputs and market
production. Commercial linkages between POs and market operators will enhance
the sustainability of the economic services.

40. Improving access and viable rural access roads. Improving access to
production areas and hubs and linking them to consumption centres are clearly
factors underpinning agricultural production. Rehabilitating access roads, supported
by a maintenance programme such as the one in effect in North Kivu, provides a
guarantee of sustainability in this regard.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The four major risks and related mitigation strategies are outlined in the table

below:

Risks Mitigation measures
Deteriorating security situation
given electoral and economic
challenges in the Great Lakes
region

Losses of goods and
destruction of infrastructure
funded by the project

 The Congolese army and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) conduct a search for
armed groups to disarm and neutralize them

 The European Parliament negotiates the text of legislation to dissuade European
companies from using blood minerals

 The United Nations system and MONUSCO monitor the security situation closely
 FAO and WFP collaborate closely on an analysis of the situation and the

complementarity of interventions (resilience, recovery, development)
 Trucks made available to lead POs ensure regular pickups and storage at well-

guarded central warehouses located in town
 Project activities are staggered

Land tenure issues: land
disputes and abusive breach of
land lease contracts

 The provincial decree of 2012 on customary land management stipulates
procedures for resolving land disputes

 FOPAC performs advocacy on land tenure issues to ensure secure access for
farmers

 Training of paralegals continues within the project framework
Delay in tax and quasi-tax
relief for agricultural production
and trade

 FOPAC organizes advocacy on this subject with supporting studies
 Synergies in action are sought with other organizations working on the same

subject, such as ELAN
 Updating of the national strategy is leveraged to revise the level and quality of

taxation applied to the subsector and, by extension, to others
Drop in prices, specifically for
Arabica coffee

 Coffee cooperatives are in command of processing and commercialization costs
 The gourmet coffee market, which offers prices that are 20 to 30 per cent higher

than the New York quoted price, is targeted
 Export prices and export procedures benefit from tax relief
 Revision of the national coffee strategy to commence in 2016 benefits from

support, focusing on competitiveness issues (taxation and legislation)

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The project is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

complies with IFAD's policies on targeting, gender equality, natural resource
management, climate change and access to land and land tenure security.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

8

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. PASA-NK is consistent with national legislation defining a strategic framework for

the agricultural and rural sector, i.e.: the Agriculture and Rural Development
Sector Strategy adopted in 2010, the Law on Fundamental Principles for Agriculture
passed in June 2012, the National Agricultural Investment Plan 2013-2020 adopted
in 2013, the Coffee Subsector Reactivation Strategy 2011-2015, the Provincial
Stabilization Strategy and the priority action plan introduced in the provinces,
including North Kivu.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. In the context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the major innovation

under PASA-NK is creating linkages between POs and government services to
improve the economic services provided to farmers and explore opportunities for
commercialization. This approach could be scaled up under the programme
cofinanced by IFAD and, over the longer term, in areas where there is a relatively
well structured farmers movement and active trade in agriculture.

D. Policy engagement
45. PASA-NK contributes to implementation of the following policies: the provincial

decree on the management of customary lands, and the tax exemptions on trade
in agricultural products. The project will support FOPAC in carrying out advocacy
actions in these areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

47. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve
million one hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve million one hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Benin for the Market Gardening Development
Support Project

Republic of Benin

Market Gardening Development Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry in charge of agriculture Ministére en charge de
l'agriculture

Total project cost: US$49.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: 16.8 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$23.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant:

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

0.35 million SDR (equivalent to
approximately US$0.5 million)

3.2 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$12.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$4.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015 116/R.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Market Gardening Development Support
Project, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
for the Market Gardening Development Support Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The population of Benin is estimated to be approximately 10 million, with a growth

rate of 3.5 per cent per year; 56 per cent of the population is rural. Benin is one of
the poorest countries in the world. Benin’s 2014 Human Development Index of
0.476 ranked in 169th out of 187 countries.

2. Agriculture is central to Benin’s economy, accounting for approximately 70 per cent
of employment and 30 per cent of GDP. Benin has recorded strong economic
performance, with an average annual growth rate of 3.9 per cent from 2006 to
2012, 5.6 per cent in 2013 and 5.7 per cent in 2014. Despite these positive trends,
economic growth has had a limited impact in terms of poverty reduction due to
high population growth and the vulnerability of the Beninese economy to external
shocks and climate change, and its dependence on primarily rainfed agriculture.

3. Poverty is characterized by strong regional disparities. Households most vulnerable
in terms of food consumption and poverty are those dependent on rainfed
agriculture (cereals and tubers) as the sole or primary source of income.

4. Youth and young adults (aged 15-35 years) account for approximately 60 per cent
of the national population. Due to a chronic lack of jobs in rural areas, youth
migration from rural to urban areas is growing by the year.

5. Benin is experiencing a deficit in vegetable production despite the market
opportunities existing in the country and elsewhere in the subregion. Moreover, its
high added value means market gardening production is a major direct and indirect
source of jobs for young people and women in urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

6. The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Sector Recovery (PSRSA) aims to boost market
gardening production and productivity to meet domestic demand and strengthen
the contribution of Beninese producers to cross-border trade.

7. The Market Gardening Development Support Project (PADMAR) is fully aligned with
the 2011-2015 country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). It is also in
keeping with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and perfectly aligned with axis 1
of the Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (CPRS), the National Agricultural
Investment Programme (NAIP), the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural
Development in Africa Programme (CAADP), the National Microfinance Strategy
(SNMF), the National Decentralization and Devolution Policy (PONADEC) and the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).



EB 2015 116/R.14

2

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will be implemented in southern Benin, working in 27 of the country’s

44 municipalities, located in seven of the country’s 12 departments: Atlantic,
Couffo, Littoral, Mono, Ouémé, Plateau and Zou. The project area has more than
5.8 million inhabitants. The departments and municipalities were selected based on
the following four criteria: (i) the potential for or emergence of profitable small-
scale market gardening; ii) the existence of useful hydro-agricultural potential that
could be developed for use by smallholders at a reasonable cost; (iii) proximity to
major consumer centres, including the cities of Lagos, Ibadan, Lomé, Accra and
Cotonou; and (iv) high rates of poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition and youth
unemployment.

9. The target group comprises: (i) market garden producers cultivating small areas –
1/8 hectare; (ii) vulnerable farming households with low crop diversification that
are motivated and interested in market gardening; and (iii) other value chain
actors, both upstream and downstream of production, including related services
and occupations such as input distribution, marketing, processing and trades
related to the construction and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and
equipment supply.

10. Moreover, every link in the market gardening value chain will target as a matter of
priority: (a) young women and men (aged 18-24 years) and young adult women
and men (aged 25-35 years) with economic initiative, motivated and engaged or
seeking to establish themselves in the market garden vale chain; and (b) women
working as producers, processors or traders. The goal is set as at least 40 per cent
women and 50 per cent youth and young adult men and women among the direct
beneficiaries.

B. Project development objective
11. Overall project objective. The overall project goal is to help sustainably improve

food and nutrition security and reduce rural poverty in the project area.

12. Development objective. The development objective is to sustainably boost the
income of market gardeners, while strengthening their resilience to the effects of
climate change.

13. The project aims to reach 20,000 direct beneficiaries (120,000 household
members), including 17,000 market garden producers, and create 3,000 jobs
upstream and downstream of production, primarily for young men and women. It
will have significant impact through the provision of economic and social training to
growers and of institutional strengthening to market gardening organizations and
public and private institutions involved in the market gardening value chain. It is
expected that production will increase by at least 50 per cent and climate resilience
will be strengthened for 10,000 households as a result of the support provided by
the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP).

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project consists of the following three components:

Component 1. Value addition and marketing
15. Subcomponent 1.1. Partnership development and stakeholder

professionalization. Market garden value chain actors are expected to forge
professional partnerships that will add value to their products on local and
subregional markets. Activities will include: (i) support for the establishment of a
stakeholders’ forum, the “Market Gardening Stakeholders’ Form” (TFM), to promote
better governance in the market gardening value chain; (ii) a programme to
strengthen the institutional capacities of professional organizations; (iii) support to
existing systems in terms of information on pricing and vegetable markets; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

3

(iv) support to the development of services and jobs upstream and downstream of
production, especially for young holders of initiatives in new businesses that will
accompany the modernization of the sector.

16. Subcomponent 1.2. Market infrastructure and improved accessibility. The
expected outcome is the establishment of resilient infrastructure to enhance value
addition and facilitates market access. Activities will include: (a) support for the
construction and restoration of infrastructure collection, packaging and temporary
storage of market gardening inputs and produce; and (b) the repair of 120 km of
rural roads and construction of crossings needed to improve access to market
gardening production areas and the maintenance system.

Component 2. Improving market gardening productivity and production
17. Subcomponent 2.1. Resilient market gardening facilities. The expected result

is guaranteed and sustainable access to water and land for market gardening
producers. In this regard, the project will support the following activities: (a) the
development of 2,100 hectares of resilient market gardening plots, including 100
hectares of plots for the demonstration of innovative, water-efficient and low-
carbon market garden irrigation; (b) land tenure security for market gardening
producers; (c) the establishment of a committee to monitor the work and maintain
the market gardening plots, and capacity-building of committees charged with the
maintenance and management of irrigation systems and facilities; and (d) the
construction of flood protection dikes in areas at high risk of flooding. Solar-
powered pump irrigation systems will be used wherever conditions allow.

18. Subcomponent 2.2. Access to improved technologies and techniques. The
expected outcome is increased productivity and production among market
gardening producers in the context of climate change. Activities will include:
(a) specialized local advisory support provided by Market Gardening Technical
Specialists (TSMs) and link-producers; (b) access to quality production inputs
through the provision of market gardening kits including water-efficient irrigation
facilities and quality inputs; (c) support for the provision of quality inputs and
demonstrations on market gardening irrigation innovations; and (d) nutrition
integration support, including the promotion of the cultivation of local vegetables.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project is part of the broader trend of market gardening intensification in the

coastal areas of West Africa but has the following specific features: (i) it targets
small-scale market gardening producers so as to maximize their contribution to job
creation and the reduction of rural poverty; (ii) it takes into account the value
chain dimension, which will be developed through TFMs, and will strengthen
professional organizations and occupations and services upstream and downstream
of production; (iii) it systematically promotes modern, water-efficient and,
wherever possible, solar technologies, with a view to strengthening the
competitiveness of small market gardening enterprises; (iv) it systematically
promote quality inputs; (v) it promotes local leafy vegetables popular among
consumers and rich in vitamins and minerals; and (vi) it systematically strengthens
climate change resilience.

20. The IFAD Framework Programme in Benin (ProCaR) will be responsible for project
coordination and management, while field activities will be implemented through:
(a) TSMs, who will act as a technical reference group for the project at the
commune level in collaboration with regional centres for rural development
(CARDER) and agricultural development centres at the commune level; (b) link-
producers: experienced producers, living on site and receiving regular training and
support from TSMs, who will ensure the inclusion of their peers in market
gardening activities, each supporting and training 24 producers in market
gardening good practices, and receiving regular capacity-building from TSMs; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

4

(c) facilitators, who will run the TFMs to ensure they are able, in the medium term,
to ensure governance of the market gardening value chain.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Finance will be the borrower/recipient for this project. The Ministry

in charge of agriculture will provide technical supervision. The ProCaR National
Steering Committee (NSC) will be modified to include representatives of PADMAR
stakeholders, including the National Platform of Farmers’ Organizations and
Agricultural Producers of Benin (PNOPPA). The Minister for Economic Development,
Public Policy Evaluation and the Promotion of Good Governance, or his
representative thereof, will chair the NSC. The NSC secretariat will be hosted by
the MAEP Department of Programming and Forecasting, supported by ProCaR. The
NSC will be responsible for approving annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and
monitoring the project.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. The activities implemented under the project will be presented each year in an
AWPB prepared with the help of TSMs and facilitators, and developed in the form of
site investment plans consolidated at the regional level. These regional investment
plans – standalone investments and enabling investments – will be consolidated by
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in a national AWPB to be submitted for
comments to the Ministry in charge of agriculture, then approved by the NSC,
before submission to IFAD for approval. Each draft AWPB will include: a detailed
description of the activities of the coming year; a procurement plan during covering
18 months the first year and 12 months from the second year; a statement of the
origin of funds and expected results. From the second year, the AWPB will include a
summary of the results achieved and constraints encountered during the year
concerned.

23. The project will develop a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
to measure progress in implementation, its effects and its impact on target groups.
M&E will inform a small number of relevant indicators relating to the Results and
Impact Management System (RIMS), relating to the impacts climate change.

24. M&E will have three levels of indicators and include: (i) internal monitoring of
planning by measuring progress in physical and financial implementation against
the AWPB; (ii) monitoring of the logical framework indicators to measure the
attainment of expected outputs and outcomes; and (iii) impact assessment. The
indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age.

25. The project will draw on the core nutrition and food security indicators generated
by the baseline survey of the Adapted Rural Financial Services Development Project
(PAPSFRA). An anthropometric and socioeconomic survey will be conducted at the
end of the project. The ProCaR online database will be updated to reflect the
specific project indicators.

26. The approach adopted will aim to establish a value chain between M&E, knowledge
and communication, to collect, process, document and broadly disseminate,
through various media, using new information and communication technologies.
Data on results and impact will be collected and compiled into an electronic library.
The data will be analysed and trends in key indicators will be presented in a
differentiated format according to user needs (graphics, maps). The ProCaR
website, social networks and sharing workshops will be used to share and
disseminate results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Project funds will be managed in accordance with the procedures in force in Benin

and with IFAD procedures for the financial management of projects. They will be
set out in detail in the letter to the borrower and in the ProCaR manual of



EB 2015 116/R.14

5

administrative, financial and accounting procedures, which will be updated to
incorporate PADMAR.

28. The ProCaR PCU, which was created by ministerial order and has autonomous
financial and administrative management, will be responsible for the financial
management of the project. It will prepare semi-annual financial reports for
submission to the Government and to IFAD, as well as project financial statements
for each fiscal year. At project launch, the PCU will prepare an 18-month
procurement plan to be submitted to IFAD for approval. The plan will indicate, for
each market, the procurement method, the proposed thresholds and the applicable
preferences. Goods, works and services will be procured in accordance with
national procedures for procurement, subject to their compatibility with relevant
IFAD guidelines.

E. Supervision
29. IFAD will directly supervise the project and administer the financing (loan and

grant). In this regard, the Fund will conduct two supervision missions per year,
with the participation of representatives of the Ministry in charge of agriculture, the
Ministry for Development and other interested ministries and partners. The first will
be primarily a support mission and will focus essentially on reviewing and
finalizing: (i) the initial AWPB; (ii) the manual of administrative, financial and
accounting procedures; and (iii) procurement documents.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
30. The total projects costs amount to US$49.2 million over seven years, with a base

cost of US$47.8 million. Taxes account for 9.8 per cent of total costs, at US$4.8
million, including US$0.4 million and US$1.0 million respectively for physical and
financial contingencies (3 per cent of base cost). Investment costs amount to
US$46.8 million, or 95.1 per cent of the base cost. Operating expenses account for
US$2.4 million, or 4.9 per cent of the base cost.

Table 1
Project costs by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value addition and marketing

Partnership development and
stakeholder professionalization 277.1 11.3 1 943.9 79.5 - - 203.6 8.3 - - 19.9 0.8 2 444.6

Market infrastructure and improving
access 1 343.0 18.0 - - - - 6 083.3 81.7 - - 19.7 0.3 7 446.0

Subtotal 1 620.1 16.4 1 943.9 19.7 - - 6 286.9 63.6 - - 39.7 0.4 9 890.6

2. Improving market gardening
productivity and production

Resilient market gardening facilities 1 534.5 18.3 - - - - 5 713.1 68.2 865.2 10.3 270.2 3.2 8 383.0

Access to improved technology and
techniques 1 221.9 4.7 17 572.6 67.1 500.0 1.9 - - 3 336.4 12.7 3 543.3 13.5 26 174.1

Subtotal 2 756.4 8.0 17 572.6 50.9 500.0 1.4 5 713.1 16.5 4 201.6 12.2 3 813.4 11.0 34 557.1

3. Coordination, M&E and
knowledge management

Coordination and management 226.5 6.7 2 875.1 85.3 - - - - 268.0 8.0 - - 3 369.6

M&E and knowledge management 235.8 17.2 1 108.3 80.6 - - - - 30.4 2.2 - - 1 374.5

Subtotal 462.3 9.7 3 983.5 84.0 - - - - 298.3 6.3 - - 4 744.1

Total 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

6

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan and grant, an ASAP grant, a loan from

the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), a contribution from the
beneficiaries and a contribution from the Government of Benin. IFAD will
participate in the project financing by providing a loan in the amount of US$23.5
million on highly concessional terms (equivalent to CFAF 13.7 billion or 47.8 per
cent of total project costs) and a grant in the amount of US$0.5 million (equivalent
to CFAF 0.3 billion). The IFAD loan will be used as follows: 73.9 per cent for
improving productivity and production (component 2); 9.2 per cent for value
addition and marketing (component 1); and 16.9 per cent for coordination, M&E
and knowledge management. The IFAD grant funds will be entirely allocated to the
“Access to improved technologies and techniques” subcomponent, implemented
under component 2, specifically to new irrigation technology demonstration
activities.

32. OFID will provide a loan of US$12 million (equivalent to CFAF 7 billion FCFA or 24.4
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 47.6 per cent for the resilient
market gardening facilities subcomponent, implemented under component 2, and
52.4 per cent for component 1 activities.

33. ASAP will provide a grant of US$4.5 million (equivalent to CFAF 2.6 billion or 9.1
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 93.4 per cent to finance the
activities of component 2 and 6.6 per cent for coordination, M&E and knowledge
management.

34. Beneficiaries will contribute in the amount of US$3.9 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.3 billion or 7.8 per cent of total project costs), corresponding to their
participation in meeting the costs of developing market gardening plots, access to
mark gardening technologies, and building market and crossing infrastructures.

35. The Government will contribute an estimated US$4.8 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.8 billion or 9.8 per cent of total costs) to the project financing, corresponding to
the total taxes and duties due on the goods and services procured by the project.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

I. Investment
costs

1. Rural/civil
works 2 503.8 18.0 100.7 0.7 325.7 2.3 10 168.6 73.1 521.2 3.7 289.9 2.1 13 909.9

2. Subsidies
and grants 0.0 - 11 819.9 66.2 - - 102.7 0.6 2 399.7 13.4 3 543.3 19.8 17 865.5

3. Vehicles 81.7 23.0 194.1 54.6 - - 53.0 14.9 26.5 7.5 - - 355.2

4. Equipment
and material 397.5 23.0 532.4 30.8 - - 382.4 22.1 396.0 22.9 19.9 1.2 1 728.1

5. Consultants 1 796.4 18.0 6 527.3 65.4 - - 1 192.4 11.9 464.1 4.7 - - 9 980.1

6. Training and
workshops 0.0 - 2 226.3 75.4 174.3 5.9 101.0 3.4 451.0 15.3 - - 2 952.6

Total investment
costs 4 779.4 10.2 21 400.6 45.7 500.0 1.1 12 000.0 25.6 4 258.5 9.1 3 853.1 8.2 46 791.5

II. Operating costs

A. Operating costs 59.5 18.0 270.8 82.0 - - - - - - - - 330.3

B. Staff costs 0.0 - 1 828.6 88.3 - - - - 241.5 11.7 - - 2 070.1

Total operating
costs 59.5 2.5 2 099.4 87.5 - - - - 241.5 10.1 - - 2 400.4

Total project
costs 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The project will provide direct socioeconomic benefits to at least 20,000 market

gardening value chain actors (thereby reaching 120,000 individuals), including
approximately 17,000 market gardening households cultivating small plots of 1/8
hectare. It will create 3,000 new jobs, primarily for young people, upstream and
downstream of production, including in related services and occupations, such as
input distribution, marketing, processing and trades related to the construction and
maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and equipment supply. It will contribute to
the production of 68,000 tons of a range of vegetables per year by the sixth year
of implementation. The basic economic rate of return (ERR) of the project is 27.5
per cent. The net present value (NPV) is estimated at US$25.3 million.

37. The direct benefits expected are: (i) 1,100 ha of land converted and equipped with
irrigation system in areas of high water table;  60 ha converted and equipped in
areas where the water table is of moderate depth; 60 ha converted and equipped
in plateaus or low water table areas; 480 ha of lowlands converted; 300 ha
converted and equipped in areas with artesian water; (ii) 12,000 linear metres (ml)
of ASAP-funded flood-protection dykes for market gardening facilities; (iii) 120 km
of desert tracks repaired and 279 ml of crossings built for use in all seasons;
(iv) 150 business, upstream and downstream of market gardening production,
created or strengthened; and v) 27 communes equipped to maintain the repaired
tracks.

38. In terms of environmental benefits, the project will make it possible to avoid:
(i) approximately US$560,000 in fuel consumption per year; (ii) an estimated
1,423 t CO2 eq of greenhouse gas emissions per year, equivalent to approximately
US$12,800; and (iii) 25-50 per cent of market gardening produce lost to flooding,
drought or excessive heat over every two-year period, corresponding to 20,400
tons or US$6.1 million. The project will also reduce water consumption through the
use of water-efficient technologies.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability has been systematically built into project design. The inclusion of the

poorest people and the facilitation of their access to quality equipment and inputs
is intended to create, in the medium term, self-financing capacity or access among
farmers’ organizations (FOs) to funding from financial institutions for the use of
their members. For market gardening sites, demand-based project interventions
are the true gauge of sustainability; these include: land tenure protection, the
participation of market gardening producers and rural communities in investment,
the use of locally tested and relevant technologies, the building of their financial
management capacities so as to enable them to buy inputs and renew equipment,
as well as the participation of producers in maintenance.

40. There is a high likelihood that the project achievements will be sustainable. The
establishment and effective functioning of TFMs, financing for water-efficient
irrigation systems and the provision of high-quality inputs will give stakeholders
the means to increase their competitiveness and enhance their production quality.
The strategy of fully empowering FOs to provide affordable services to their
members is intended to ensure the sustainability of project gains. Finally, the
empowerment of TFMs will ultimately enable them to ensure market gardening
subsector governance.

41. Improving land tenure security among market gardening producers will promote
investment in and the sustainability of their modes of production and reduce
conflicts. The organizational and management capacities of relevant civic land
tenure structures will be strengthened. Moreover, mechanisms for managing and
maintaining market gardening plots and infrastructure will be established, and user
capacity strengthened. Year-round production and better understanding of and



EB 2015 116/R.14

8

access to national and subregional markets to sell produce at remunerative prices,
as well as a more integrated understanding of the seasonal nature of these
markets, will be major gains contributing to sustainability.

42. The project will invest in monitoring water resources and salinzation risk as key to
the economic and environmental sustainability of its activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. Following the adoption of mitigation measures, the project risk level is rated as

medium. It will nonetheless face systematic risks inherent to the market gardening
subsector and to the planned programme activities. These risks have been
identified and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated at the design level.
The support of ASAP will help further mitigate these risks.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
44. The project is fully aligned with IFAD strategy and policies, including the 2011-

2015 Strategic Framework, the climate change strategy, environmental and social
evaluation procedures, the targeting and gender strategy, supervision and
implementation support, and environment and natural resource management
policies. The project is also fully aligned with the objectives of ASAP.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The project is closely aligned with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and aligned

with axis 1 of the CPRS and with the NAIP, the CAADP, the SNMF, the PONADEC
and the NAPCC. It is in line with other projects and initiatives under way,
supported by IFAD and other donors, including the IFAD-supported PACER and
PAPSFRA projects, the Belgian Technical Cooperation-funded Market Gardening
Stakeholder Support Project, the United States Agency for International
Development -funded Growing Resources for Enhanced Agriculture Enterprises and
Nutrition project and the African Development Bank-financed Ouémé Valley
Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project. Regarding rural youth employment, the
project will create partnerships with the Multi-year Water and Sanitation Sector
Support Programme and the Special Programme for Youth in Agriculture in Benin
and the Songhai Centre.

C. Innovations and scaling up
46. In the context of action research, the project will demonstrate market gardening

sector innovations that have a direct impact on priority areas, such as:
(i) determining appropriate fertilizer dosage for various types of market gardening
produce; (ii) phytosanitary treatments and mechanical protection measures, in
particular integrated protection against biological pests; (iii) the use of pesticides
and fertilizers of biological origin; and (iv) evaluating the performance of local,
salt-tolerant market gardening crop varieties and short-cycle varieties in mitigating
climate risks, and organic material value addition (compost).

47. The project will also demonstrate innovations in irrigation, water-efficient systems
and solar-powered pumps, in partnership with FOs, the Directorate-General for
Rural Development and Equipment and the National Agricultural Research Institute
of Benin. These demonstrations will be developed with the assistance of specialized
institutes, and funded by the ASAP financing (innovative kits) and the IFAD grant
(draining and piping).

48. The project will invest in monitoring pesticide residues in groundwater and market
gardening produce as an innovative element in keeping with the sustainable
agricultural production focus of the project. The project will also assess the
salinization level of the soil. Innovations once tested and evaluated will be scaled
up.



EB 2015 116/R.14

9

D. Policy engagement
49. The project will contribute to the transformation of the market gardening subsector

through the professionalization of its stakeholders. It will conduct, through TFMs,
policy consultations on topics of relevance to value chain actors, such as:
(i) improving access to land rights among vulnerable groups (women and young
people); (ii) policy relating to imports and access to specific market gardening
fertilizers; (iii) sustainable access to financing for small market gardening
producers; (iv) setting quality standards for market gardening produce and inputs;
and v) and the taxation of imports and exports.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

51. The Republic of Benin is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to sixteen million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (16,850,000 SDR) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty-five thousand
special drawing rights (355,000 SDR) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to three million two and twenty
thousand special drawing rights (3,220,000 SDR) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Malawi for the
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Republic of Malawi

Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water
Development

Total programme cost: US$83.95 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 19.30 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.48 million)

Amount of IFAD
Debt Sustainability Framework grant:

SDR 19.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.54 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 5.15 million (equivalent to approximately
US$7.06 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Department for International Development (DFID);
private sector

Amount of cofinancing: DFID: US$0.5 million
Private sector: US$3.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$13.08 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.28 million (in kind)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Malawi for the Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Malawi for
the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Malawi is a densely populated landlocked country of some 15 million people in an

area of 118,484 km2, of which 24,000 km2 is covered by freshwater lakes and
mangroves. Population growth is almost 3 per cent per annum and the country has
one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world. With a Human Development Index
of 0.414, Malawi is ranked 174th out of 187 countries (2014), while for its gender
development index it ranked 116th out of 208 countries (2013). Education levels are
low. Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition, combined with HIV/AIDS prevalence
of 11.9 per cent, add to the challenge.

2. Poverty is mainly rural. Approximately 51 per cent of the Malawian population lives
below the poverty line of a dollar a day (Millennium Development Goals [MDGs]
Report 2013), while in rural areas over 85 per cent of the people are poor.1 Rural
areas also have a higher occurrence of both stunted and underweight children than
do urban areas. In 2005, the Government of Malawi set up the Fertilizer Input
Supply Scheme, which increased maize production and enabled the country to
become self-sufficient in years with normal weather conditions. However, Malawi’s
progress against the MDGs remains mixed. Hunger has decreased, but persists.
Targets for poverty reduction and primary education are deemed unlikely to be
achieved by 2015.

3. Women have remained disadvantaged in many aspects of life, despite their large
share in the food-production labour force. They have little control over produce,
and benefit less from the income earned. Young people also face considerable
challenges, mainly in terms of few employment opportunities outside agriculture in
rural areas and the ongoing fragmentation of landholdings. Farming, predominantly
rainfed, is associated with low cash-income generation, hard labour and low status.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Most smallholder families in Malawi live at the subsistence level, with cash or food
insecurity for several months of the year. Adverse climate effects exacerbate the
already precarious situation of many smallholders. In 2015, for example, floods
destroyed a large part of the maize harvest in southern Malawi, while other areas
suffered under prolonged drought, with severe consequences for crop yields, food
security and nutrition.

5. Land productivity has been declining for decades, mainly due to existing
inappropriate land and water management practices that do not support sustainable
crop production and erosion control measures. Moreover, farmers do not possess
sufficient financing to purchase fertilizer to restore soil fertility. Irrigation is scarce
and this curbs agricultural production to only one harvest per year.

1 National Statistical Office of Malawi, Statistical Yearbook 2008.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

2

6. Access to land under customary procedures is increasingly under threat due to the
high demand for arable land. Seasonal sublets of land have become frequent and
benefit those who can afford to pay, while the poor may lose their land.

7. Several government- and donor-funded programmes aim to reverse current trends
in the loss of soil fertility and declining yields. The Government invests in the
Fertilizer Input Supply Scheme to enhance soil fertility and increase yields of maize,
the main staple crop, and to boost national food security. Unfortunately, it faces
difficulties in sustaining the scheme due to its high costs.

8. The proposed Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE) has been
designed to address the above issues through investments in irrigation and in
improved rainfed agriculture adapted to smallholders. It seeks to enable: higher
land and labour productivity; application of sustainable, climate-smart land and
water management practices; and a focus on agricultural markets to generate cash
income for smallholders.

9. The Government is committed to addressing rural poverty through agricultural
growth. The second Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS II) defines
water development as a key strategic area. In 2015, the Irrigation Master Plan and
Investment Framework (IMPIF) was formulated to expand access of smallholders to
irrigation in order to boost crop production and enhance resilience to adverse
climate events. The Government asked IFAD to invest in the IMPIF and in the
development of water management for smallholder agriculture.

10. PRIDE is fully compatible with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) 2010-2015 and complements services provided by the existing IFAD
portfolio. Synergies will be developed with both the Rural Livelihoods and Economic
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP – value chain development) and the Sustainable
Agriculture Production Programme (SAPP – good agricultural practices in rainfed
systems).

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The programme will be implemented over a seven-year period in two regional

clusters in the northern and southern regions of Malawi. The programme will target
poor smallholder farmers of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme. The
primary target group comprises food insecure households. Smallholder farmers will
be supported in: (i) being allocated secure land in the programme irrigation
schemes; (ii) joining water users’ associations (WUAs) and obtaining representation
on catchment management committees; and (iii) becoming business entities
(individually and as groups) to respond to market opportunities.

B. Programme development objective
12. The programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to food

insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks. Its development
objective is that smallholder farmer households increase their income and nutrition
through sustainable agricultural production. The programme’s two major outcomes
are that smallholders: (i) operate climate-smart land and water management
systems; and (ii) adopt environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural
production systems on both rainfed and irrigated land.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The

objective of this component is to develop climate-smart land and water
management systems for smallholder households on rainfed and irrigated land. The
objective will be achieved through preparation and management of about 15
irrigation schemes, together with establishment and strengthening of WUAs to
manage, operate and maintain irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

3

governance. Agricultural productivity will be increased through irrigation, using
water storage for a second or third crop, while PRIDE will address environmental
degradation risks by investing in soil and water conservation measures. The latter
will be funded entirely by a grant from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP). The measures aim to restore soil cover on
vulnerable grounds, control erosion, and carry out reforestation of slopes and
protection of river buffer zones, as a contribution to national greenhouse gas
reduced-emission targets.

14. Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this
component is to promote adoption of environmentally and economically sustainable
agricultural production systems by smallholder households on both rainfed and
irrigated land. The programme will support efficient knowledge transfer to
smallholder farmers through trials and demonstrations, combined with better
information from the private sector on market potential and opportunities. The
component will promote climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including
the use of weather and climate information services, irrigation optimization,
application of integrated pest management and reduction of post-harvest losses.

15. Market linkages will be promoted through: value chain analyses to identify suitable
crops; training, mainly through farmer business schools; and commodity platforms
to bring together all actors in a value chain. A dedicated irrigation technology
window – under the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund – will be piloted with the
private sector and cofunded by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID). The private sector will provide farmers with modern irrigation equipment
such as drip irrigation and will facilitate marketing of their produce.

16. PRIDE will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities, such as the choice of crops
or value chain commodities, and support this through the following measures:
(i) integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting
diversified and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated
homestead food production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved
cooking stoves, which reduce the need for fuelwood by as much as 60 per cent,
combined with nutrition education.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

17. During the implementation phase, PRIDE will actively mobilize partners and
resources for communities in scheme cluster areas so that these communities can
sustainably harness natural resources for agriculture, build competence in
production, and profit from better market linkages. The implementation approach
comprises a phased development process: identification, preparation,
implementation and review. Programme management will be tasked with
monitoring and reporting regularly to safeguard positive environmental and social
outcomes. With an average design-to-commissioning time of three years, irrigation
investments will be phased in three lots, with one or two schemes per irrigation
service division in each lot. Progress and lessons learned in the first three years of
irrigation projects developed under the programme will be carefully documented
and will inform the schemes to be developed in the second phase.

18. PRIDE builds on lessons learned in various projects in Malawi, such as the World
Bank/IFAD-funded Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development
Project (IRLADP), and links with other projects in the water sector promoted by
various donor agencies.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

4

B. Organizational framework
19. The lead programme agency will be the Department of Irrigation (DOI) within the

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MOAIWD). The DOI will
establish a dedicated programme coordination office (PCO) which will be staffed
with highly qualified personnel, either from the government's roster or from the
labour market. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions. A programme steering committee
(PSC) will provide strategic oversight and is composed of senior representatives of
the ministries concerned, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development (MOFEPD). The PCO will be assisted by a technical advisory team
representing the departments concerned with programme implementation: Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MOAIWD), Land (under the Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Urban Development), Environmental Affairs (under the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), Debt and Aid (under MOFEPD), and
others as needed. The programme will coordinate fully with the agriculture sector-
wide approach programme (ASWAp) to ensure full alignment with government
investments and policies.

20. In the village and scheme cluster areas, the programme will coordinate its entry
with the existing village-level leadership (traditional authorities) and structures,
organized in village development committees. These will convene a combined
village committee to provide oversight for programme and community activities.
Detailed preparations for land consolidation and irrigation scheme preparation will
be delegated to a WUA formation committee. Implementation of more
straightforward activities (soil and water conservation, GAPs and market linkages)
will be handed over to beneficiary groups and lead farmers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme’s approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
knowledge management will be in line with the 2001 National Irrigation Policy and
Development Strategy, the MOAIWD M&E framework and IFAD requirements, based
on emerging best practices of the IRLADP and other IFAD-funded projects.

22. The main planning tools for PRIDE comprise the logical framework, overall
programme budget and annual workplan and budget (AWP/B). Every year, a
decentralized, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken.
The consolidated AWP/B will be presented to the PSC for approval and to IFAD for
concurrence. Implementation of the AWP/B will be monitored through the
programme’s M&E system, which will produce semi-annual reports.

23. Programme M&E will be based on IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The programme will conduct baseline and follow-up surveys combining
collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data with application of a
multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist in tracking changes
in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, which measures changes in women’s
empowerment levels as a result of an intervention.

24. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s M&E system,
and particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons learned during
implementation. These will translate into factsheets that will contribute to the wider
policy debate in the smallholder agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place
through programme and MOAIWD websites, or relevant institutions such as
research agencies, and will be presented at national workshops on key programme
themes.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

5

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. A financial management assessment was carried out

during design and concluded that the proposed financial management
arrangements for PRIDE are at medium risk. Transparency International's Global
Corruption Perceptions Index scored Malawi at 34 per cent in 2014.2 IFAD’s Rural-
Sector Performance score regarding accountability and corruption in rural areas
scored Malawi at 3.75 in 2014, which translates into medium risk.

26. Mitigation measures aim to enhance the country’s financial management systems
through: use of computerized accounting software, specifically recruited
programme finance staff, accounting linked to M&E, and the use of dedicated bank
accounts. Processing of PRIDE’s day-to-day transactions will be handled outside the
government Integrated Financial Management System. However, the programme
will provide periodic returns to the Accountant General to enable the updating of
government accounts. Accounting will be linked to the M&E system, requiring that
the terms of reference of the financial management team and the M&E expert be
linked on these aspects. The proposed arrangement will be managed by the PCO
under the oversight and guidance of MOAIWD.

27. Flow of funds. IFAD and ASAP funds will flow into one designated account, from
which they pass to the programme operational accounts. The MOFEPD Treasury will
manage the designated account and the PCO the operational bank accounts. All
accounts will be opened at a commercial bank satisfactory to IFAD. Any
government agencies participating in PRIDE will be required to open a PRIDE-
specific bank account to receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved
AWP/Bs, to be retired before subsequent releases.

28. Procurement. All procurement funded under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent they are consistent
with IFAD’s 2010 Project Procurement Guidelines. Malawi’s legal and institutional
framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently robust.

29. A procurement assessment of IRLADP operations was undertaken as part of the
design of PRIDE and, as a result, a number of mitigation measures will be
incorporated concerning bid registers, contract administration, engagement of the
MOAIWD Internal Procurement Committee, and so forth. A procurement specialist
in the PCO will ensure compliance with IFAD requirements and that procurement
processes in practice are fully compliant with the legislative and regulatory
framework.

30. Governance. A governance and anti-corruption framework will be elaborated as
part of the programme implementation manual during the first year of
implementation. This will ensure transparency, accountability in the use of
resources, and participation, i.e. that people have a voice in decisions that may
affect them. Key features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of
women and disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community
representatives in local-level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring
of programme activities; (iv) both internal and external audit of programme
accounts and processes; (v) IFAD supervision and implementation support;
(vi) reporting of results to the PSC and IFAD, with key information published on a
programme website; and (vii) a grievance system.

E. Supervision
31. PRIDE will be directly supervised by IFAD jointly with the Government, with a focus

on: (i) fiduciary aspects; (ii) achievements and the quality of programme
implementation; and (iii) implementation support emphasizing environmental and
climate assessment procedures. Supervision missions will normally be carried out

2 Transparency International: 0 per cent means not corrupt and 100 per cent highly corrupt.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

6

twice a year. Timing of the missions will be coordinated with production of the six-
monthly progress report, so that missions can gauge the situation at the same cut-
off dates and thus provide an additional perspective on progress at PSC meetings.
During the start-up phase, implementation support will be provided to assist in
setting up adequate systems and to enhance technical capacities. Supervision will
focus on the quality of institutional arrangements, including timely installation of a
high-quality M&E system and creation of baselines.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs are estimated at US$84 million, including price and physical

contingencies, duties and taxes. The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) a
seven-year programme period, starting in 2016; (ii) price contingencies of 6 per
cent, and physical contingencies of 3 per cent; (iii) local inflation set at 10 per cent,
and foreign inflation set at 2 per cent; (iv) an exchange rate fixed at US$1 =
440 Malawi kwacha (MK); and (v) the Government will waive duties, excises and
taxes or will finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the programme.
Taxes and duties are estimated at US$13 million of total programme costs.
Component estimates are summarized in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID

Private
sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

I. Irrigation development and
catchment management 16 294 17 736 1 878 - - 7 283 10 527 53 718
II. Agriculture and market
linkages 2 979 7516 4 984 498 3 000 - 1 940 20 918
III. Programme management
and coordination 7210 1 288 201 - - - 616 9 314

Total 26 483 26 540 7 063 498 3 000 7 283 13 083 83 950

B. Programme financing
33. The programme will be financed by a total IFAD contribution equivalent to some

US$53 million in the form of 50 per cent loan and 50 per cent grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF); ASAP grant financing in an amount equivalent to
about US$7.0 million; DFID financing of about US$0.5 million; private-sector
financing of about US$3.0 million; a Government contribution of about
US$13 million; and a contribution by beneficiaries of about US$7.3 million (in kind).
The IFAD loan will be provided on highly concessional terms, including a 40-year
maturity period, a 10-year grace period, and a 0.75 per cent annual service charge.

34. IFAD will provide start-up funds from loan and DSF proceeds in the amount of
US$560,000 to cover specified expenditures aimed at enhancing capacity for a
quick start-up.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID Private sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 13 906 31.1 13 906 31.1 1 034 2.3 - - - - 6 953 15.6 8 896 19.9 44 696
2. Vehicles 565 70.0 - - - - - - - - - - 242 30.0 808
3. Equipment and materials 195 8.5 91 4.0 1 397 61.2 - - - - 157 6.9 443 19.4 2 284
4. Studies and consultancies 1 613 18.4 3 338 38.1 2 302 26.3 - - - - - - 1 506 17.2 8 760
5. Training 1 031 10.6 5 685 58.4 1 405 14.4 - - - - 172 1.8 1 439 14.8 9 732
6. Cofinancing - - 2 502 41.7 - - 498 8.3 3 000 50.0 - - -0 - 6 000
7. Operations and
maintenance 1 084 87.1 - - - - - - - - - - 161 12.9 1 245
8. Salaries and allowances 8 087 77.6 1 017 9.8 925 8.9 - - - - - - 395 3.8 10 425

Total 26 483 31.5 26 540 31.6 7 063 8.4 498 0.6 3 000 3.6 7 283 8.7 13 083 15.6 83 950

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is estimated at

20 per cent (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Malawi,
estimated at 12 per cent.3 The EIRR is based on the assumption that 80 per cent of
targeted farmers will adopt the GAP technology packages promoted by the
programme and 90 per cent will be engaged in farming of irrigated land.

36. PRIDE will generate financial benefits in the form of increased financial returns (net
incomes) to about 17,500 smallholder households as direct beneficiaries of the
programme. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the
programme area owing to expected increased financial returns (about 10-fold) from
irrigated and improved rainfed agriculture, post-harvest technologies and improved
employment opportunities.

37. Other social benefits include improved nutrition and increased food security through
diversification of crop production. PRIDE will strengthen the status of women
through their economic and social empowerment. The main approach includes
promotion of gender-balanced access to irrigated land, representation in WUAs and
other farmers’ institutions, access to GAPs and cash-crop value chains.

38. Better access to and use of weather information, irrigation and community-based
approaches are expected to lead to sustainable land and water management. In
conjunction with a higher degree of commercialization among farmers, PRIDE is
expected to render smallholder farming systems more resilient and better-adapted
to the effects of climate change.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability of the benefits generated and approaches will be ensured through a

number of mechanisms. PRIDE embraces a clear strategy for horizontal and vertical
scaling up, with identified pathways, key drivers and institutional space.

40. Knowledge management will be central to information-gathering and learning. Key
results and information will be communicated to the wider public for participation
and to the Government for action in policy development. The focus on linking
smallholders to market will be key, as irrigation investments will only remain
profitable if commercialization of smallholder farming takes place. Farmers will
manage the irrigation schemes through a proven institutional set-up involving
WUAs and consultative planning. These institutions are expected to remain and
become the main development engine, as is the commercialization approach. Land
consolidation will be practised using existing procedures and involving community

3 World Bank: Average deposit interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks in Malawi.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

8

organizations and the Government. The dynamics will be analysed in annual
studies.

41. Environmental and social sustainability will be achieved through implementation of
specific environmental and social management plans and necessitates resettlement
plans based on the assessments and frameworks adopted by the Government.
These frameworks will ensure that potential environmental and social impacts or
required resettlement actions be identified and addressed accordingly, before the
related irrigation schemes are constructed.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. Risk management will include adoption of mitigation measures and their

monitoring. Delayed programme start-up has been a common feature in the past.
Preparation of the implementation manual and a start-up plan aim to counteract
potential delays. By programme start-up, the action plan will be agreed and
earmarked funding will enable staff training and the purchase of equipment.
Another key risk is slow registration of WUAs. The registration process has been
placed in the start-up phase to complete the process before construction begins.

43. PRIDE will recruit from both the public and private sector to avoid gaps in staffing
and to obtain the best skill levels. A critical risk involves follow-up on environmental
safeguards. In line with IFAD’s 2015 Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP), a full assessment was carried out during design, leading to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework. These frameworks will guide the impact assessments, to be executed
during implementation, but prior to construction of the irrigation schemes. The PCO
will host an environmental coordinator to monitor needed actions in line with
Environment and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.

44. The establishment of irrigated command areas will require a redistribution of land.
PRIDE will benefit from the processes and experience of IRLADP. At scheme
development, farmers will be provided equitable access to land. Any agreements
will be subject to free, prior and informed consent by the affected parties, and will
include compensation for any loss of land and assets due to irrigation development.
A grievance mechanism will ensure the possibility of recourse following decisions.

45. Risks related to financial management include: (i) flow of funds is delayed due to
poor management of the designated account located within the Reserve Bank of
Malawi; (ii) MOAIWD capacity for internal audit is limited; and (iii) submission of
audit reports is delayed. The following mitigation measures will be established:
(i) the designated account will be located at a commercial bank; (ii) internal audit
will be outsourced; and (iii) the Auditor General has agreed to ensure timely
submission of audit reports.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. Programme design is compliant with the main IFAD policies and strategies. SECAP
has classified PRIDE as category A. In line with SECAP, as mentioned above, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework were developed during design and adopted by the Government. They
specify the next steps in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and
follow-up actions. PRIDE is compliant with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management
Policy and Climate Change Strategy. Climate-change adaptation measures are
integrated into programme activities to address climate risks and the potential
multiplication of effects, such as damage to landscapes and infrastructure.

47. Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated into programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. PRIDE will be



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

9

implemented respecting IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security, the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests and the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in
Africa. Before supporting any intervention that might affect land access and use
rights of communities, the programme will ensure that their free, prior and
informed consent has been solicited through inclusive consultations based on full
disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned and their implications.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. PRIDE is fully in harmony with MGDS II, which defines water development as a key

strategic area. Under this strategy, the IMPIF plans and coordinates interventions in
irrigation funded by IFAD and other donor agencies. PRIDE is also aligned with the
Government's Climate Change Investment Plan and will contribute to two
adaptation programmes: (i) strengthening catchment area and soil and water
conservation management; and (ii) improving community resilience through
agricultural production. PRIDE will coordinate fully with the ASWAp to ensure full
alignment with government investments and policies. The programme is fully
supported by the donor group on food agriculture and food security in Malawi.

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. PRIDE complements RLEEP and SAPP in the current IFAD country programme in

Malawi. It will build on and scale-up the successes of IRLADP and other irrigation
projects in terms of adopting innovative approaches that ensure full community
participation and promote equitable land access.

50. PRIDE, itself, aims to serve as a model to be scaled up in Malawi and elsewhere.
The potential for scaling up seems good, as pathways are in place – such as policy
engagement. For example, an integrated natural resources management policy
framework has been established, and the government policy on WUAs is conducive
to participatory planning. Key drivers for scaling up include financial and fiscal
space. The Government is committed to funding operations and maintenance for
larger rehabilitation works, and it will be the responsibility of WUAs to carry out
regular maintenance of the schemes. WUAs and other grass-roots organizations
represent the institutional space, an approach that has been successful in IRLADP.
PRIDE will be equipped with a strong M&E and knowledge management system to
deliver the information needed for successful scaling up of its approach and to
render it a sustainable investment.

51. In terms of innovation, PRIDE will support the newly established irrigation window
of the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund, funded by DFID and UNDP. It is expected
that the private sector will form a consortium to provide modern irrigation
technologies and marketing channels to smallholder farmers.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement is expected for compliance with environmental and social

safeguards, impact assessments, land tenure and the building of climate resilience.
The registration and full recognition of WUAs as key institutions is critical to the
success of PRIDE. The same applies to policies regarding GAPs and extension. The
mainstreaming of improved nutrition has become a key issue for IFAD. Dialogue on
these topics will take place at all levels – from community to national – to review
compliance, gather lessons learned and refine existing regulations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Malawi and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included in
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Malawi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

10

55. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,300,000) (approximately
US$26.48 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the Republic
of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,350,000) (approximately US$26.54
million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in
accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to five million one hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,150,000) (approximately
US$7.06 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola
for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture
Project

Republic of Angola

Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Angola

Executing agency: Ministry of Fisheries

Total project cost: US$12.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.91 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms, subject to interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent in addition to a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum on the principal amount
outstanding with a maturity period of 25 years, including
a grace period of 5 years, starting from the date of
approval by the Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): Although not included as part of this project proposal,
parallel grant financing is being finalized from the
European Community in the amount of
EUR 10.0 million.

Contribution of borrower: US$1.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD.





Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project,
as contained in paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal
Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Angola is located in south-western Africa and is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to

the west, Namibia to the south and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Zambia to the north and east, respectively. It is the third-largest country in sub-
Saharan Africa, covering an area of about 1.2 million square kilometres. Because
no population census has been conducted since 1970, population estimates must be
relied on and currently range between 16 and 18 million people, of whom some
41 per cent live in rural areas. Angola is one of Africa’s most resource-rich
countries, representing sub-Saharan Africa’s second-largest oil producer, after
Nigeria, and the world’s fourth-largest producer (in value) of diamonds. The
country also possesses a wealth of other natural resources, including minerals,
water, agriculture, forestry and fisheries.

2. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975 after 14 years of fighting, but
was then immediately engulfed in one of Africa’s most prolonged civil conflicts,
between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). Peace seemed
imminent in 1992 when national elections were held, but fighting was renewed
when UNITA rejected the election results. A new peace agreement, the Lusaka
Protocol, was signed in 1994, but war resumed in 1998. In April 2002, a ceasefire
was called following the death of the UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi; and on
21 November 2002, the Government and former rebels signed a peace agreement
that definitively ended the Angolan Civil War.

3. After almost four decades of war, much of the country’s economy had collapsed,
infrastructure was destroyed, institutions were weakened or no longer functioning,
the society was polarized, an estimated 4 million people were displaced, poverty
was rampant, and the newly created political process was fragile. Over the last 12
years since signing the peace accords, the Government, together with its national
and international partners, has developed and implemented programmes to restore
order and security, revitalize the economy, restore basic social services and
rehabilitate basic infrastructure. The political process appears to have stabilized,
and in the latest election (August 2012), the MPLA party of President Jose Eduardo
dos Santos won over 72 per cent of the vote.

4. Angola ranks 148th out of 186 countries on the Human Development Index (HDI)
(2012), an improvement when compared with its 2004 HDI ranking of 166th out of
the 177 countries. However, despite the progress made, poverty remains prevalent
throughout much of the country. An estimated 68 per cent of the population live
below the poverty line, and 15 per cent of households live in extreme poverty.
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where 94 per cent of households are
categorized as poor. Other indicators also point to the difficult conditions in the
country as a whole: (i) 38 per cent of the population lack access to safe water


sources; (ii) only 30 per cent of the population have access to government health
facilities; (iii) life expectancy at birth is estimated at 47 years (2010), among the
lowest in the world; (iv) despite major efforts at educational reform, about 75 per
cent of teachers have never received any relevant training; (v) only 54 per cent of
enrolled children complete the primary level; and (vi) Angola ranks 106th out of 134
countries in the gender gap index (2009).

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Government is fighting poverty on various fronts through (i) its 2005 Strategy
to Combat Poverty (ECP); (ii) its 2009 National Strategy for Food and Nutrition
Security (ENSAN); (iii) poverty alleviation activities including in its national annual
plans; and (iv) resources earmarked in each municipal budget for implementation
of annual local plans to combat poverty, including rural development. The
Government continues to allocate more than 30 per cent of its budget to improving
social conditions, a figure projected to increase over the next five years.

6. The ECP’s main goal is to halve the country’s poverty level by 2015 and to
consolidate peace and national unity through sustained improvement in the living
standards of all Angolans. The main priorities identified in the ECP are (i) the
reconstruction of infrastructure; (ii) increased access to education, health and other
basic services; and (iii) decentralization of governance structures. The ECP
highlights rural development, with a focus on improving food security and
revitalizing the rural economy. Key proposed actions are (i) strengthening the
production capacity of the traditional sector, particularly food crops and fisheries;
(ii) relaunching rural commerce; (iii) sustainably managing natural resources; and
(iv) reorganizing the legal framework and public institutions. Priority actions are to
be guided by the following basic principles: (i) a focus on smallholders; (ii) the
importance of community participation; (iii) the concentration of planning,
implementation and monitoring at the municipal level; (iv) complementary
activities with donors, the private sector and NGOs; (v) specific targeting of
women, including access to land; and (vi) HIV/AIDS treated as a cross-cutting
concern.

7. The goal set out in the ENSAN is to ensure that, at all times, all Angolans have
physical and economic access to adequate quantities of a variety of good-quality
food to enable them to contribute to the human, economic and social development
of the country. The main policy priorities are to: (i) increase and diversify
agriculture and sustainable fish production to improve the well-being of the
population; (ii) improve access to food; (iii) diminish levels of malnutrition; and
(iv) guarantee basic sanitation, and food and drinking water quality. Both the ECP
and the ENSAN are reflected in the Government's National Development Plan
(2013-2017).

8. Parallel to these efforts, the Government is also making considerable headway with
promoting decentralization through several complementary initiatives: (i) the
Integrated Municipal Programme for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation;
(ii) the transfer of health services to the municipal level; and (iii) the creation of
consultation and social dialogue councils. In addition, the National Development
Plan includes measures that reinforce the integrated vision of development, as
evident in the newly launched Rural Villages Requalification Programme. The
multidimensional nature of poverty, recognized in the ECP and in Angola’s human
development indicators, suggests that livelihood and food security improvements
alone will not be enough to sustainably overcome poverty and maintain households
in rural areas. Opportunities for active citizenship, local participation in governance
processes and access to quality social services (health, education, water and
sanitation) are also needed and can help free up time for productive activities.


9. The proposed Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) will promote
community development planning that will (i) strengthen inclusive and participatory
processes; (ii) facilitate the involvement of communities in local-level decision-
making bodies; (iii) introduce a culture of saving and improved financial
management at the household and the micro, small and medium enterprise levels
through the promotion of savings groups; and (iv) strengthen local organizations
not only as delivery mechanisms for fishing assets and services but also as more
effective facilitators of a holistic development process within the fishing
communities.

10. The project will complement various ongoing interventions in the country,
particularly: (i) the World Bank-funded Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture
Project in Malange Province; and (ii) the African Development Fund’s Fishery Sector
Support Project dealing with marine and coastal fisheries, which also could
potentially cofinance national inland fishery interventions. In addition, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which is currently involved in other
fisheries activities in Angola, will likely be a partner in AFAP implementation.

11. IFAD has worked in Angola, and specifically in the fisheries sector, since 1991 and
is therefore in a strong position to be an effective partner to Angola as it addresses
its rural development challenges. The Fund also has considerable experience in
economic and institutional development in rural areas. Through AFAP, IFAD will
promote bottom-up approaches for rural development, centred on the capacity-
building of grass-roots organizations. It will also contribute to strengthening central
and local institutions following a thorough needs assessment. In addition, to ensure
effective project implementation, IFAD will tap into its experience from other
projects in the region (e.g. the Pro-Poor Value Chain Development Project in the
Maputo and Limpopo Corridors (PROSUL) and the Artisanal Fisheries Promotion
Project (ProPESCA), both in Mozambique).

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project will be implemented in four provinces in Angola’s central-north region:

Bengo, Cuanza Norte, Luanda and Malange. Component 1 (inland artisanal fisheries
development) will cover two areas: communes north of the Cuanza River, between
Dondo (Cuanza Norte) and the mouth of the Cuanza River (Luanda); and
communes traversed by the Dande and Bengo Rivers, in Bengo and Luanda. Both
areas have a large number of lakes, some of which are seasonally or permanently
linked to those rivers. All fishing communities are located around the lakes and
along the rivers. The component will target an estimated 15,000 people, or about
10,000 fishers and 5,000 processors and small traders.

13. Component 2 (small-scale aquaculture development) will be implemented in the
provinces of Bengo, Cuanza Norte and Malange. It will initially focus on Malange
and later expand to suitable areas in the other two provinces. The component will
target about 800 families, or 724 families engaged in small-scale family fish
farming, 62 in aquaculture as emerging farmers, and 14 as semi-commercial fish
farmers. Geographically, some 678 will be from Malange, 79 from Cuanza Norte
and 43 from Bengo.

B. Project development objective
14. The project’s goal is to reduced poverty in artisanal inland fishing and small-scale

fish-farming households in target communities. Its development objective is
improved food security and nutrition among artisanal inland fishing and fish-
farming households. The project design has incorporated a number of activities that
address climate change issues as they affect fisheries and aquaculture, the project’s
two technical components.



EB 2015/LOT/P.2

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project comprises two technical components:

(a) Component 1: Inland artisanal fisheries development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable inland fisheries sector development and
management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level;

(b) Component 2: Small-scale aquaculture development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable small-scale aquaculture sector development
and management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level.

16. To achieve the outcomes of both components, the project will support activities that
(i) strengthen institutional capacity (national, provincial, local/extension services);
(ii) improve community participation in economic and wider local development
processes; (iii) increase the quantity and quality of fish produced and sold on a
sustainable basis; and (iv) improve market-related infrastructure.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
17. Target groups. The project will conduct a mapping study to determine areas

suitable for aquaculture development. A service provider, in cooperation with
extension workers, will then decide on the target group within each community,
which should include woman-headed households, young and old people, people
with illnesses, and other disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

18. Aquaculture development strategy. The project will work with the target groups
to identify areas where there is potential for aquaculture development, and then
introduce small-scale aquaculture to improve rural communities’ nutritional status
and food security. As the project progresses, it will encourage family fish farmers to
increase their production (for example by applying better technology or by
enlarging their pond surface area) in order to have surplus produce to sell on the
market. It is expected that some farmers will invest profits from fish sales back into
their fish farm (e.g. in improved fish food or more ponds built by hired labour),
“naturally” growing their small subsistence activity into a more commercial
enterprise.

B. Organizational framework
19. The Ministry of Fisheries will be responsible for policy and legislative initiatives

relevant to the project, and will make institutional adjustments in sector
administration and provide broad project oversight. A national project oversight
committee will be established to guide project planning and implementation,
provide high-level advice, review and approve annual workplans and budgets,
review implementation progress and impact, and address key issues. Project
coordination and management will be delegated to the Institute for the
Development of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture (IPA), which will establish a
project coordination unit (PCU) responsible for programming, budgeting, resource
allocation, and monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the Ministry of Fisheries will
coordinate with the provincial governments of the four participating provinces, with
other government bodies, and with NGOs, private firms and individuals
implementing non-core project activities. The Ministry of Finance will play an
important supporting role: it will be responsible for the financial supervision of the
project; coordinate with the local authorities, at provincial, municipal and
communal levels, to ensure that project objectives and outcomes are achieved; and
maintain a dialogue with IFAD, particularly on policy and legislative matters.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. All project activities will be carried out through the joint and coordinated efforts of
IPA project staff, community facilitators (from the service provider), functional
literacy trainers and other stakeholders at the community level. All activities will be
jointly planned and regularly monitored with communities against targets and
expected results.

21. The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be its main management tool
for tracking implementation progress and results. It will generate quality data that
will enable IPA and the Ministry of Fisheries to monitor the project, and it will also
provide information on the development of inland fisheries and aquaculture in the
project area for use at higher government levels. The system will allow IPA to
participate more effectively and knowledgeably in national science councils, and in
national and international forums on rural livelihoods and rural development, food
security, nutrition and poverty reduction, contributing to the existing knowledge
base, planning and policy discussions. The AFAP experience will feed into wider
regional learning on community-driven development, particularly the development
of adequate rural microfinance systems.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be coordinated

by IPA through its Financial Management Directorate (DAF/IPA). The PCU will be
responsible for administrative management, finance and accounting, budget
planning and cash flow, procurement and payments from project accounts. As
appropriate, the Ministry of Fisheries/Office for Studies, Planning and Statistics
(GEPE), together with the Ministry of Finance, will provide budget estimates,
mobilize counterpart funds, supervise, make disbursements and provide other
support needed for DAF/IPA to conduct the project’s financial management. IPA
already has some experience of working with projects funded by development
partners since it is implementing the African Development Bank-financed Fisheries
Sector Support Project.

23. Procurement. The project will follow national procurement procedures to the
extent that these are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. In this
regard, the PCU will be aided by an experienced procurement specialist recruited
along with all other PCU staff. A financial procedures manual will (i) set out the
operational procedures for procurement, management of contracts and payment of
receipts; (ii) describe a contract monitoring system; and (iii) give guidelines for the
creation of a records management system and registry of procurement records.
IFAD will provide support in the project’s first year to avoid possible delays in
project implementation.

24. Internal and external audit. The PCU will contract an internal auditor to ensure
compliance with audit requirements. All accounts, including the designated account
and statements of expenditure for each fiscal year, will be audited by qualified and
experienced independent external auditors acceptable to IFAD. The consolidated
annual financial statements will be compiled by the PCU/IPA within three months
after the end of each fiscal year and the audited financial statements will be
submitted within six months as per the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.

25. Governance. Internal controls will be ensured through the establishment of
separate functions, reconciliation of accounts, supporting documentation
requirements and different approval levels depending on expense amounts. In an
effort to strengthen internal controls, the PCU will produce, and attach to the
project implementation manual as an annex, project financial management
procedures specifying detailed arrangements for the flow of funds, roles and
responsibilities, and procedures.



E. Supervision
26. IFAD will directly supervise all phases of the project jointly with the Government

and in-country partners.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
27. Total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at

US$12.1 million (see table 1). Physical and price contingencies make up 13 per
cent of the total project costs; the foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$0.8 million; and taxes are estimated at US$0.7 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan Borrower/counterpart Total

1. Inland fisheries 5 208 89.3% 627 10.7% 5 835 48.1%
2. Aquaculture 2 335 89.3% 279 10.7% 2 614 21.5%
3. Project management 1 875 95.8% 83 4.2% 1 958 16.1%

Unallocated 1 732 100.0 1 732 14.3%

Total 11 149 91.9% 989 8.1% 12 138 100.0%

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed by IFAD and the Government of Angola. The IFAD loan

amounts to US$11.1 million (92 per cent of total project costs). The Government’s
contribution is estimated at US$1.0 million (8 per cent of total project cost) and will
cover actual costs, taxes and duties. Parallel financing is expected from the
European Commission in the form of a EUR 10 million grant. Table 2 provides a
summary by category of the proposed financing plan; the table, for now, does not
reflect European Commission grant funding.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government IFAD loan Total
Amount % Amount % Amount %

Investment costs
1. Works 52 3.5 1 429 96.5 1481 12.2
2. Equipment and materialsa 71 13.5 454 86.5 525 4.3
3. Trainingb 477 13.6 4 297 91.0 4774 39.3
4. Consultanciesc 80 10.4 692 89.6 772 6.4
5. Salaries and allowancesd 268 11.5 2 054 88.5 2322 19.1
6. Operating costs 41 7.7 491 92.3 532 4.4
7. Unallocated 0 0.0 1 732 100.0 0 14.3

Total 989 8.1 11 148 91.9 12 100 100.0
a Equipment and materials comprises vehicles, boats, motorcycles and equipment
b Training comprises training, studies, meetings and workshops.
c Consultancies comprises local and international technical assistance
d Salaries and allowances comprises project staff and IPA staff.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial and economic analyses were carried out to assess: (i) the financial

viability of the interventions at the beneficiary level; and (ii) the likelihood of
adopting the proposed project interventions. The financial models including family
fish farmer, emerging fish farmer, semi-commercial fish farmer, canoe fishing,
plank boat fishing and enterprise models (including traditional processing and fresh



fish trading) generally show positive financial returns for the proposed aquaculture
and fishery rural economic activities, with the financial internal rate of return
ranging from 34 to 237 per cent.

30. The economic analysis shows an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
12.3 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was undertaken to assess the impact on
economic returns against changes in output (fish price) and key input prices (ice
and feed prices). The analysis shows that the project’s main economic profitability
indicators are more sensitive to changes in the benefits than to changes in the
costs. The production models are more or less equally sensitive to a risk of 10 per
cent increase in production cost as to a 10 per cent benefit decrease, resulting in a
negative net present value (NPV). With a two-year delay, the EIRR is still positive
at 7.2 per cent, but the NPV slips into a substantial negative of 1,125.

D. Sustainability
31. Factors contributing to the long-term sustainability of project outcomes are the

following: (i) the Government’s long-term commitment to addressing rural
development, poverty alleviation and food and nutrition security, and recognition of
the importance and role that the inland fisheries and aquaculture subsectors play in
achieving the stated policy objectives and actions; (ii) adoption of a precautionary
approach to fisheries development capable of being replicated elsewhere in Angola;
(iii) empowerment of communities that will lead to their greater involvement in
local-level planning and management and decision-making processes; and
(iv) knowledge management activities providing the opportunity to generate and
disseminate project-related experiences and lessons learned to other institutions in
Angola and beyond.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The major risks identified in the project are the following: (i) project-supported

activities may contribute to overexploitation of the resource in the absence of
baseline information, a monitoring programme and fishery management actions;
(ii) market demand may be insufficient to absorb the incremental fish production
derived from project interventions; (iii) the absence of climate-change data may
impede the assessment of impacts related to climate change; (iv) there may be
limited government institutional capacity in the sector; (v) service providers may
not be present in the project area; and (vi) fiduciary risks may exist. The
Transparency International score for Angola is 2.3 and IFAD’s Rural Sector
Performance Assessment E(ii) indicator for accountability, transparency and
corruption in rural areas is 2.75, both indicative of high risk. Use of the
Government’s Integrated Financial Management System has benefits in terms of
budgetary control but risks that funds may be slow to be released unless the coding
is accurate. The overall financial management risk at design has been assessed as
high largely because this is the first time IPA and IFAD are working together and
understanding will need to be built. Mitigation measures include: (i) adopting a
precautionary approach towards the expansion of fishing operations; (ii) ensuring
that institutional capacity is strengthened and that participation in local
development processes is improved; (iii) engaging the private sector to implement
some aspects of the project (e.g. hatcheries); (iv) maintaining continued policy
dialogue between government and IFAD; (v) using internationally accepted
standards for financial reporting, and for internal and external audits;
(vi) implementing off-the-shelf accounting software; (vii) preparing a project
implementation manual; (viii) seeking support from international technical
assistance; (ix) recruiting suitably skilled staff with IFAD’S prior no objection; and
(x) installing proper record-keeping and back-up processes.



V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The proposed project is consistent with key IFAD policies and strategies, in

particular with its policies on targeting, rural finance, gender, and the environment,
and with its knowledge management and scaling-up strategy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. This project is fully aligned with government policies and priorities as outlined in the

ECP and ENSAN policy documents. Investments in fishery development will improve
participating households’ livelihoods and food security (addressing the three pillars
of food security – food availability food access and food use).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The project will introduce relevant innovations and capacity-building, and offer

products/services that meet the needs and use the capacities of the different social
groups, age groups, and men and women. Such an approach will allow beneficiaries
to participate according to their needs and capacities, and progress at their own
pace. In terms of scaling up, the project has significant potential for widening
coverage to a larger and more diversified programme; the African Development
Bank, the European Union and the World Bank have expressed interest in
developing a common approach and possibly cofinancing the promotion of the
fisheries and the wider agricultural and rural sectors.

D. Policy engagement
36. Support for a policy dialogue on fisheries and aquaculture development will be

central to this project. This will include support for policy dialogue between IFAD
and the Government through national and international technical assistance that
will address one or more of the following issues: (i) updating of the country’s
aquaculture development strategy, (ii) formulation of new aquaculture regulations
with special attention to the characterization and regulation of small-scale
aquaculture and the introduction of exotic fish species; (iii) development of
incentives for aquaculture; and (iv) policy compliance and law enforcement.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Angola and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

38. The Republic of Angola is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Angola in an amount equivalent to seven million nine hundred and ten
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7 910 000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led
Project

Kingdom of Swaziland

Smallholder Market-led Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Kingdom of Swaziland

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$21.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 8.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$9.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.36 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of three years, with
an interest rate equivalent to one hundred per cent of
the variable interest rate, as determined annually by the
IFAD Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): To be identified

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.8 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$6.6 million

Contribution of private sector: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led Project
(SMLP), as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Swaziland for
the Smallholder Market-led Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Although Swaziland is classified as a middle-income country, with a relatively high

GDP of US$2,415 per capita, 63 per cent of the population live below the national
poverty line and an estimated one in four of the adult population is affected by
HIV/AIDS. The predicament of the most vulnerable worsened during the recent
fiscal crisis, which had an adverse impact on employment and key social
programmes, including basic health and educational programmes. Recent economic
growth, which owes much to higher Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
revenues over the past two years, has not been pro-poor and there are indications
that the terms currently enjoyed by Swaziland in SACU may soon become less
favourable.

2. Poverty in Swaziland is predominantly rural and varies among the country’s four
regions and between different ecological zones. Regionally, the prevalence of
poverty in 2010 was greatest in Lubombo region at 69 per cent, followed by
Shiselweni region at 68 per cent.

3. The main factors contributing to rural poverty are small landholdings and low land
productivity, compounded by frequent droughts that lead to crop failure and loss of
livestock. People are often isolated from markets and information sources and have
limited access to off-farm employment opportunities. All these factors are
aggravated by the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, trapping the poor in poverty
and militating against recovery. Frequent drought has been attributed to climate
change and has led to a decline in Swaziland‘s food production. About a quarter of
the Swazi population is food insecure and dependent on assistance, and a third of
children under five are stunted.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. Poverty and food insecurity are still widespread in rural areas, in spite of the
country’s economic development. The high poverty rates suggest that past
government policies and programmes have not been able to adequately address the
needs of the poor rural population. Smallholder agriculture remains the backbone of
rural livelihoods, while it is often drought prone and characterized by low
productivity and isolation from markets. IFAD projects, namely the Lower Usuthu
Smallholder Irrigation Project (LUSIP), the Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land
Management Project (LUSLM) and the Rural Finance and Enterprise Development
Programme (RFEDP), demonstrate the potential for smallholder farming systems to
(a) cover basic food needs; and (b) enter into remunerative value chains, if the
right inputs, services and market linkages are provided together with a strict focus
on targeting the poor and disadvantaged.

5. The above projects demonstrated the relevance of access to irrigation water for
smallholder crops such as maize, but even more so for potential high-value crops



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

2

such as vegetables. The RFEDP developed a honey value chain, which was adopted
by wholesalers and has become very prominent among farmers with small
landholdings and few livestock. The experience shows that the productivity of staple
crops such as maize can be enhanced through access to irrigation, inputs and
better farming technology, leading to better nutrition and food security among food
deficient households. More advanced, economically active households have strong
potential for entering remunerative value chains with the surplus produce of high-
value crops such as vegetables, which they are able to produce with the support of
dedicated business development services and dedicated wholesalers.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in 25 chiefdoms in the

rainfed Middleveld and Lowveld areas of the Lubombo and Shiselweni regions. It
will target poor smallholder farmers that are (i) food-deficient and living at a
subsistence level; and (ii) economically active and able to sell surplus production.
The farmers will be assisted in increasing their farm productivity and production
through access to irrigation, inputs, training and access to services. Economically
active farmers will sell surplus production to wholesalers to increase income. Along
selected value chains, employment opportunities will be created for young people,
for example in managing collection and information centres. The activities are
tailored to the capacities of smallholders, including women and families affected by
HIV/AIDS.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s goal is to contribute to national poverty reduction. The development

objective is to enhance food and nutrition security and incomes among smallholder
producer families through diversified agricultural production and market linkages.
By the end of the project, rural poverty should be reduced by 20 per cent in the
targeted chiefdoms and food insecurity reduced by 50 per cent in currently food
deficient households. The project’s three major outcomes are: (i) the project
chiefdoms engage in effective planning and decision-making; (ii) soil and water
resources are sustainably managed for market-led smallholder agriculture in the
project chiefdoms; and (iii) smallholder producers in the project chiefdoms supply
crop and livestock products to market partners, while subsistence farmers are
enabled to produce sufficient nutritious food for themselves.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project will have three components:

9. Component 1: Chiefdom development planning. In each chiefdom, community-
based development planning will be the starting point to identify and direct
development activities to the targeted households. To this end, an institutional
framework supporting decision-making by the traditional leadership will (where
needed) be established and strengthened. Community development committees
(CDCs) will be assisted in processing information on the chiefdom’s resource base,
population, any bottlenecks and opportunities, and development options and
priorities for inclusion in a chiefdom development plan.

10. Component 2: Infrastructure for soil and water conservation. Investments in
soil and water conservation at sub-catchment and homestead levels will help
harness irrigation and drinking water resources for both enhanced subsistence and
market-led agricultural production. The infrastructure will be designed for erosion
control and water catchment to improve and safeguard productive land. The main
interventions will focus on preventing silting in water reservoirs and harnessing
run-off for agricultural production. This component will comprise erosion control,
the rehabilitation of approximately 18 existing and construction of approximately
two new small earth dams and the installation of rainwater-harvesting equipment.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

3

11. The process of planning, design, construction and operation and maintenance of the
above infrastructure combines oversight by the CDC, active participation of the
producers benefiting from the infrastructure, and sound engineering services
through existing or hired specialized agencies. The new construction of dams
requires a rigorous planning process, with environmental impact assessments and
checks and balances on engineering and aftercare. Producers benefiting from this
infrastructure will form users’ groups to operate, maintain and guard the
infrastructure.

12. Component 3: Market-led smallholder agriculture. The project will support
smallholder farmers in enhancing their crop and livestock production through
improved access to efficient technical advice, agricultural technology including post-
harvest processing and storage, farm inputs and irrigation. In addition to achieving
higher productivity, especially in the case of food deficient farm households,
economically active households will be linked to markets, including small local
traders and larger wholesalers such as the National Agricultural Marketing Board
(NAMBoard) and Eswatini Kitchen, a private company.

13. The project will concentrate on commodities that respond to the food and income
requirements of farmers and the productive capacity of the project area.
Commodities identified thus far include beekeeping, legumes, vegetables, fruits,
indigenous chicken and goats. In addition, technical support will be provided for
major staple crops such as maize and sorghum to safeguard household food
security.

14. The main approach for developing value chains will involve setting up innovation
platforms, where representatives of wholesalers, buyers, extension services,
business development services, rural finance services and smallholder farmers will
identify together the required improvements and innovations. Measures include
providing market information, estimating market demand, sourcing from new
internal and external markets, business plan development, financial services,
backward and forward linkages between wholesalers/buyers and producers, and
extension services. These activities aim to establish pro-poor value chains by using
existing unmet market demand as the entry point for agricultural development, and
will help gear agricultural practices to the specifics – in terms of quantity, quality
and timeliness – of that market demand, and ultimately raise incomes and increase
food availability among poor rural households.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The Smallholder Market-led Project (SMLP) is a six-year project that uses the
availability of confirmed markets as a driver for promoting smallholder production
for household nutrition and sale of marketable surplus. Both intervention areas
follow a clear value chain development approach that includes all players from
production through to processing, services and marketing.

16. Chiefdom development planning (CDP) is the starting point to involve both food
deficient and economically active households. Investments in soil and water
conservation are the next step to increase productivity in smallholder farms and to
safeguard a sustainable natural resource basis for market-led production. The
involvement of wholesalers such as NAMBoard and Eswatini Kitchen will bring the
essential pull for the smallholders, while they also bring in the essential technical
services for improvements in agricultural production and marketing. Business
service providers, for instance TechnoServe, will bring in the required know-how for
both producers and wholesalers, in terms of technical and business-related aspects
such as business planning and access to finance. The project approach builds on
existing policies, approaches and market demands, and offers an opportunity to
apply them on a larger scale while maintaining a focus on poor rural areas.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

4

17. The choice for market-led development builds on the success of earlier projects,
notably RFEDP, LUSIP and LUSLM, in promoting smallholder agricultural production.
Support in terms of agricultural extension for better crop and livestock husbandry
and better capture of soil moisture and rainwater resulted in larger volumes of
agricultural produce. The surplus produced was, however, absorbed locally, with
little or no produce reaching national markets or sold at national market prices.
Although smallholders clearly have productive potential, national wholesalers are
either unable to cover their markets or have resorted to sourcing their demand
from producers elsewhere. Current demand for agricultural products in Swaziland
has not been linked to the agricultural potential of smallholder producers.

Organizational frameworkB.
18. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead agency for SMLP and will delegate day-

to-day project implementation to the Swaziland Water and Agriculture Development
Enterprise (SWADE), a parastatal with proven experience in the management and
implementation of similar projects. At the outset – to ensure smooth project start-
up – SWADE will be supported and strengthened with short-term technical
assistance on financial management and monitoring. SWADE will establish a
dedicated project implementation unit (PIU), which will work under Ministry of
Agriculture oversight comprising a project steering committee (PSC) and two
technical committees. The PSC will provide strategic advice on project
implementation and review and approve the results-based annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B), procurement plan and financial and technical progress reports. It
will be chaired by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and
composed of high-level representatives of the Ministries of Natural Resources and
Energy, Economic Planning and Development and Finance. Other participants may
include NAMBoard, the Swaziland Environment Authority and other important
stakeholders.

19. The technical committees will guide the PIU with technical advice on CDP and
infrastructure, and on market-led infrastructure. Both committees will host the
relevant ministries, technical agencies and private sector. Project partners will be
engaged under service agreements. Wholesalers already identified include
NAMBOARD and Eswatini Kitchen.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

20. Planning. The main planning tools for SMLP comprise the logical framework, the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework with its indicators and targets, and the
results-based AWP/B. The logframe provides the overall targets for project
implementation at the output, outcome, development objective and impact levels.
The results-based AWP/B breaks down these targets by year and assigns financial
resources by financier.

21. Every year, each project partner will prepare a results-based AWP/B, for
consolidation by the PIU. Guidelines and templates provided in the project
implementation manual will facilitate the planning and reporting process. The
AWP/Bs will be prepared under a participatory approach based on the chiefdom
development plans (see component 1). They will incorporate information from the
M&E systems of the PIU and project partners, and recommendations from IFAD
supervision and implementation support missions. The PSC will approve
consolidated draft AWP/Bs, which will then be submitted to the Government and
IFAD to seek their concurrence.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The project will undertake regular monitoring of
activities, output and outcomes. Regular outcome surveys will provide information
on progress at the household level, and how project activities have led to change
and impact. Chiefdom socio-economic profiles will be used as a basis to monitor
and assess progress and targeting of development activities, as well as periodic



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

5

review of agreements reached between market partners in the innovation
platforms. Project M&E will be based on IFAD’s results and impact management
system (RIMS) and be complemented with indicators and surveys as required.

23. The project will conduct baseline studies using RIMS and multidimensional poverty
assessment tool methodologies. In addition to standard collection of gender and
age disaggregated data, the baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the women
empowerment in agriculture index, which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men at household level. SMLP has also been identified as a
potential candidate for the IFAD impact assessment studies.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and sharing knowledge will be
firmly based on the project’s M&E system. The PIU will issue progress reports on a
quarterly basis to be reviewed by the PSC and technical committees. Besides
project reports, policy workshops and short publications will be prepared on key
lessons learned and disseminated to inform the public and trigger feedback at
national and regional levels.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
25. Financial management. The project’s financial management system will be in

compliance with Swaziland’s and IFAD’s financial regulations and procedures. Under
these procedures, the project will adopt an appropriate financial management
system that will include financial planning through AWP/Bs, financial accounting and
reporting, funds flow management, procurement and audit. The project will ensure
that adequate capacity in terms of human resources and equipment are in place.
The PIU financial management team will open and maintain appropriate accounting
records including books of account, asset and contract registers. The chart of
accounts will be based on government accounting codes to ensure full compliance
with the national system in addition to meeting IFAD requirements of cost analysis
by financier, expense category and component. Previous experience with exchange
visits of financial management staff between countries in the region was successful
in promoting the adaptation of financial management best practice. Financial
statements and reports will be prepared at the end of each quarter for oversight by
the project director. The reports will be consolidated and presented in semi-annual
physical and financial progress reports. SWADE uses the accrual-basis International
Financial Reporting Standards and audits are conducted in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing, the same standards as IFAD. Well-reputed
private-sector audit firms have in the past issued unqualified audit opinions on the
three areas required by IFAD: financial statements, withdrawal applications and the
designated account.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD and any cofinancing funds will be disbursed to the project
through the Ministry of Finance into designated accounts held at the Central Bank
of Swaziland. The accounts will be operated by the authorized representative(s) of
the Ministry of Finance. Separate operational accounts in local currency will be
opened by the project for each funding source, including Government counterpart
funds. Payments of cash expenses will be in line with the approved AWP/B.

27. Procurement. All project procurement of goods, works and services will be carried
out in line with the approved project procurement plan, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act and Procurement Regulations to the extent consistent with
IFAD’s 2010 Procurement Guidelines. The Government procurement legal
framework accommodates provisions of IFAD guidelines where there is conflict.

28. Governance. An enhanced framework for good governance has been developed for
SMLP to ensure: (i) transparency; (ii) accountability in the use of resources; and
(iii) participation, with people having a voice in decisions that may affect them. Key
features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of women and
disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community representatives in local-
level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring of project activities,



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

6

including a complaints mechanism; (iv) internal and external audits of project
accounts; (v) IFAD supervision and support; (vi) regular outcome surveys to
provide information on the coverage and quality of project outputs; (vii) reporting
of results to the PSC, IFAD and national government institutions, with key
information published on a project website; and (viii) a complaints and remedies
mechanism. The framework will support the transparent use of funds and
constitutes a preventive measure against misuse of project funds.

SupervisionE.
29. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, with a focus on: (i) fiduciary

aspects; (ii) achievements and quality of project implementation; and
(iii) implementation support. Direct supervision will be a continuous process
requiring sustained communication and engagement with the Government,
specifically the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance, the PIU, project
partners and the target group. Instruments for guiding and improving
implementation will include continuous policy dialogue with the Government,
adjusting AWP/Bs, revising implementation manuals, supervision and midterm
review missions, and amending legal agreements as appropriate.

30. During the start-up phase, supervision will focus on ensuring that the institutional
arrangements to support project implementation are in place. IFAD will support a
series of workshops and training sessions to sensitize all potential stakeholders,
service providers and beneficiaries to the project objectives and their own roles and
responsibilities. Targeted training during the start-up phase will aim to increase
technical capacities and ensure adequate implementation quality.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
31. Total investment and recurrent costs, including contingencies, over the six-year

project life are estimated at US$21.1 million or 244.1 million Swazi emalangeni
(SZL). The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) project duration of six
years; (ii) cost price inflation at 6 per cent for the project period and 3 per cent per
annum for six years for foreign inflation, in line with International Monetary Fund
estimates; (iii) an exchange rate calculated in constant purchasing power parity
from a base of SZL 10.6:US$1; (iv) government financing or waiver of all taxes on
goods, works and services procured under the project. Taxes have been estimated
using information from the Swaziland Revenue Authority that includes duties and
value added tax; (v) base costs are real costs at July 2014 prices; and (vi) physical
contingencies estimated at 5 per cent for the civil works. Price contingencies are
based on local and foreign inflation. The component estimates are summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector
Government
of Swaziland

Unidentified
financing Total

1. Chiefdom development
planning

700 200 - 600 800 2 300

2. Infrastructure for soil and
water conservation

2 200 - - 1 200 3 000 6 400

3. Market-led smallholder
agriculture

5 600 100 600 2 900 - 9 200

4. Project management 1 100 200 - 1 900 - 3 200

Total 9 600 500 600 6 600 3 800 21 100



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

7

B. Project financing
32. The loan will be provided on IFAD ordinary terms and conditions with a three-year

grace period and an 18-year maturity. IFAD will provide a grant equivalent to
US$500,000 to enhance the project’s start-up capacity, such as designing baseline
and impact studies and establishing the overall project M&E framework and
financial reporting system.

33. The project will be financed by IFAD, the private sector, the Government and
unidentified financiers. The IFAD financing will be in the form of a loan in an
amount equivalent to US$9.6 million and a grant in an amount equivalent to
US$0.5 million, for a total IFAD contribution of US$10.1 million. The Government
will contribute US$6.6 million and the private-sector contribution is estimated at
US$0.6 million. The financing gap of US$3.8 million is expected to be funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or another cofinancier to be identified.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Government
Unidentified
financing Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consultanciesa 4 800 71.4 500 8.1 200 3.6 200 3.3 400 6.5 6 100 29.1
2. Equipment and

materials
1 200 65.5 - - - - 200 14.0 400 20.5 1 800 8.6

3. Goods, services
and inputsb

1 200 86.2 - - - - 200 14.3 - - 1 400 6.6

4. Works 1 300 26.2 - - - - 700 14.0 3 000 60.4 5 000 23.6
5. Operating costs 1 100 86.2 - - - - 200 13.8 - - 1 300 6.2
6. Salaries and

allowances
- - - - 400 6.3 5 100 93.7 - - 5 500 25.9

Total 9 600 45.6 500 2.4 600 2.7 6 600 31.5 3 800 17.8 21 100 100.0
a Includes studies, technical assistance and training.
b Includes vehicles.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. The overall economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at

23 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the net benefit stream,
discounted at 5 per cent based on the Central Bank of Swaziland benchmark
interest rate/discount rate, is SZL 259.9 million (US$24.8 million). The analysis
shows significant net incremental benefits for farmers and rural entrepreneurs in
the project area.

35. An estimated 55,250 households will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 70 per cent or 40,000 households are classified as poor. It is estimated that
30 per cent of the target group will fully take up the project interventions related to
value chain activities, which in turn will lead to substantial increases in incomes and
the availability of nutritious food.

36. Benefits will accrue from: (i) efficient planning and implementation of pro-poor
development activities at chiefdom level; (ii) increased and sustainable access to
water for irrigation and drinking; (iii) increased productivity in livestock, crop and
horticulture production; and (iv) sustainable access to markets, services
(extension, finance) and inputs.

D. Sustainability
37. Project sustainability will be supported by close alignment with the policy and

planning framework in Swaziland. The project will assist in addressing emerging
needs, e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and supplying consumer markets
with national products. CDP is expected to become a simpler tool that is easy to



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

8

apply and fully meets people's needs. Moreover, it will foster transparency in
decision-making and funding for development activities at community levels. The
introduction of soil and water conservation will protect the key resources of
smallholder farmers from degradation and in turn enhance productivity. Efficient
knowledge management will be the key element to distil successful approaches and
disseminate them widely. The Ministry of Agriculture will ensure that extension
services are better equipped and regularly trained to serve the chiefdoms.
Wholesalers such as NAMBOARD are likely to continue investing in smallholder
farmers, provided that the project succeeds in setting up value chains. This will also
encourage other wholesalers to undertake similar arrangements to source
agricultural produce from smallholders. The focus on commodities, already being
produced by smallholders and of high nutritious value, will generate long-term
benefits for the health of rural people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The principal risk areas affecting project execution include:

(i) Slow start up due to limited institutional capacity may reduce the likelihood
of the project reaching its targets. This risk has been mitigated by the
preparation of a draft project implementation plan and a financial
management manual during project design. The Government will finalize the
project manuals before project start-up. IFAD will finance start-up costs up to
US$500,000 equivalent to enhance technical capacity in project management,
especially for baseline surveys, M&E and financial management.

(ii) Non-availability of project financing would lead to a reduction of the
project area from 25 to about 20 chiefdoms. IFAD and the Government are
exploring mobilizing additional funds through PBAS reallocation as well as
cofinancing from GEF under GEF-6. In the case of both financing opportunities
being realized, the GEF funds will be used to increase complementary
activities and/or scale up the geographic scope. The SMLP, with its focus on
sustainable land management and climate-sensitive design, would be an ideal
baseline project for a GEF-6 grant.

(iii) Fiduciary risks. The inherent fiduciary risk in Swaziland is medium, based on
Transparency International and Rural Sector Performance Assessment scores.
Tools for effective financial management are present in SWADE, with strong
capacities in many areas. The challenges encountered in the past pertain to
the application and implementation of the control framework: financial
reporting, budgeting, staffing, mingling of financier and government funds,
and internal audit reports not being acted upon. Close collaboration was
needed on the preceding IFAD-funded project to achieve acceptable financial
management results. Consequently SMLP’s initial fiduciary risk assessment at
design is high, but these risks will be mitigated with technical assistance and
the application of lessons learned, starting with the incorporation of internal
control mechanisms into the financing agreement. Consequently, fiduciary risk
rating is expected to drop to medium during the first year of implementation.
The Ministry of Finance has a strong oversight role in management of external
funds and participates in the PSC. During design, a financial management
manual was prepared to guide the PIU on appropriate management of the
fiduciary aspects of the project. IFAD will provide close oversight through its
supervision and implementation support.

(iv) Reliability of existing market demand has been extensively researched during
project design. The involvement of NAMBoard in a number of the market chains
with smallholders suggests a fair degree of stability. Similarly, Eswatini Kitchen is a
confirmed reliable partner. Existing market demand may also be affected by
production in South Africa and by changes in global demand. The development of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

9

market information system under the project will mitigate this risk by
communicating early, allowing for mitigation measures in case of falling demand.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

39. Project design is compliant with the applicable IFAD policies and strategies. Both a
strategy for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated in the project design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. The IFAD
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has informed the project’s
approach to addressing issues of land tenure insecurity under traditional
authorities. Potential negative environmental impact has been analysed and
mitigation measures designed in line with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
40. Aside from harmonization with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and

Action Plan and with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework, the project
will complement, derive lessons from and sustain positive initiatives emerging from
the Swaziland Agricultural Development Programme cofinanced by the European
Union (EU) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The
project will create space for learning between similar projects, such as the recently
started High-Value Crop and Horticulture Project funded by EU and European
Development Fund.

Innovations and scaling upC.
41. SMLP is based on experiences and lessons learned from its precursors and aims to

replicate successful practices on the largest scale possible in terms of both direct
inclusion of poor rural households and policy influence. The project applies an in-
built learning loop, whereby interventions start off on a small scale, then are
assessed for effectiveness and subsequently fine-tuned for replication on a wider
scale. This applies especially to results and lessons learned on innovation in market
linkages through the innovation platforms established by NAMBoard, Business
Development Services and buyers such as Eswatini Kitchen. Once approaches have
been tested and fine-tuned, the project can help roll out the innovation to the
entire designated project area.

Policy engagementD.
42. The project will inform policymakers on three key policy aspects: (i) efficient local

planning processes for development with CDP simplification; (ii) management of
small-scale irrigation by end users; and (iii) implementation of the new land law.
The project is well positioned to engage with policymakers and other stakeholders
as it can report the needs of smallholders, bring in the farmers’ representatives and
private-sector views, and provide quantitative and qualitative assessments for
policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Kingdom of Swaziland and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

44. The Kingdom of Swaziland is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

10

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Kingdom of Swaziland in an amount of eight million five hundred fifty
thousand euros (EUR 8,550,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland in an amount of three hundred sixty thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 360,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





