























































World Bank Document



PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA61676

Project Name Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Kyrgyz Republic
Sector(s) Animal production (70%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-

industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and 

institutions (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (25%), 
Micro, S mall and Medium Enterprise support (15%), Climate 
change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P155412
Borrower(s) Kyrgyz Republic
Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 11-Apr-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Apr-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

08-Apr-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

02-Jun-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
With GNI per capita of US$1,269 (2014), the Kyrgyz Republic is one of the low income economies 
of the Europe and Central Asia Region. In 2014, approximately 30.6% of the population lived 
below the poverty line, with the incidence of poverty slightly higher in rural area than in urban 
areas (32.6% vs. 26.9%). Economic growth in the country has been quite volatile. GDP growth was 
6% in 2011 but contracted to 0.9% in 2012, owing to a sharp drop in gold output. In 2013, the 
economy grew at a whopping 10.9%, but slowed to 3.6% in 2014 and remained at 3.5% at the end 
of 2015. The narrow export base is dominated by gold, with agricultural products representing on 
average 16% of total exports from 2009 to 2013. The economy is highly vulnerable to external 
shocks, in particular many households depend on remittances from the energy-based economies of 
Russia and Kazakhstan. It is partially dependent on wheat imports from Kazakhstan and the past 
global food price shocks quickly transmitted to the country. The official unemployment rate in the 
country has hovered below 10% for the past decade, however mostly on account of significant 
outmigration of labor force (predominantly men, a majority from rural areas) to Russia and 
Kazakhstan. The recent economic difficulties of Russia and the strong devaluation of the ruble have 
negatively affected the earnings of the migrants and their remittances to their families in 
Kyrgyzstan.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is an important sector for the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy and livestock production is a 
major livelihood support system for rural people. Agriculture represents about 15% of GDP, and it 
is still a major employer, providing more than a third of jobs. The sector’s growth rate in 2015 was 
a relatively high 6.2%. Agriculture is a key priority for the government because of its contribution 
to poverty reduction and rural employment. Livestock production, which accounts for about 50% of 
the agricultural GDP, is dominated by household and small farm production. It is important for 
rural household food security, nutrition, regular income generation, and acts as a social safety net 
with animals sold in times of hardship and economic distress. The primary land use of the country 
is native pasture production (87% of the total land is under pastures), which provides an advantage 
for livestock-based livelihood and food security for the rural population.  
 
With the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU), the country’s 
agriculture sector is facing new challenges, and also new opportunities. The Kyrgyz Republic 
became a full member of the EAEU in May 2015. The EAEU includes Russia and Kazakhstan, 
which are the Kyrgyz Republic’s main export markets. However, since 2012, a partial dairy export 
ban has been in force, limiting the number of dairy exporters to seven (more information in 
paragraph 7 below). The Kyrgyz dairy producers and processors may be unable to capitalize on new 
market opportunities due to their inability to meet the animal health, food safety and quality 
standards of the EAEU. However, Kyrgyz dairy products benefit from a reputation of better taste 
due to the production model based on natural pastures. Addressing current constraints in the Kyrgyz 
dairy sector would allow to capitalize on new market opportunities, as well as on the achievements 
and initiatives of the previous and ongoing projects in the agriculture sector.  
 
Market opportunities for Kyrgyz milk and dairy products. The demand for Kyrgyz dairy products, 
in particular in Kazakhstan, is significant. Even though the border is closed to most of the official 
dairy exports (only seven companies can export dairy products to Kazakhstan), informal trade is 
booming. While the official value of exports of milk/dairy products in 2012 was US$30 million 
(equivalent to 4% of the annual milk production volume), the unofficial export revenues were 
closer to US$ 100 million (14% of the milk production volume). Russia is also considered a 
potentially large export market for dairy products (in particular, cheese). Once milk quality is 
upgraded, exporting to other countries (such as China, Afghanistan and Pakistan) should be 
possible.  
 
The Kyrgyz dairy sector is primarily dependent on smallholder private dairy units with an average 
herd size of 3-5 heads of cattle. Around 60% of the rural population own livestock, but the average 
herd size tends to be small. Milk is an important part of the diet and around 90% of the population 
consume dairy products regularly. In value terms, milk is one of the top five agricultural products of 
the country. Per capita availability of milk is around 193 kg and 25% of the milk produced is 
surplus, for processing and export. It should be noted, however, that farmers who keep animals do 
not consider themselves dairy farmers (animals are rather considered a subsistence livelihood 
source), and the animal breeding and management practices are poor, which accounts for low dairy 
sector productivity. 
 
Livestock productivity is low compared to countries with similar production conditions. 
Furthermore, productivity has been declining from 2,041 kg in 2009, to 2023 kg in 2012 and 2, 013 
kg in 2013.  Many factors cause this low productivity at the farm level: inadequate on-farm animal 
health management, poorly equipped laboratories and disease diagnostic services, irregular and 
incomplete vaccinations, low breed stock (genetic) quality, absence of sustainable breeding policies 
and practices, inadequate feeding, improper shed maintenance, and farm hygiene issues, overall 
poor knowledge of animal husbandry techniques, low level of investments into production and 
marketing infrastructure. Addressing these issues can significantly increase both the productivity 
and total output of milk, which would contribute to increasing producers’ incomes and help address 
the sourcing problems faced by dairy processors. Processors experience a shortage of clean and 
high quality milk, and as a result underutilize their processing capacities and forego additional 
incomes that could come from exporting to other countries, and primarily, to the neighboring 
Kazakhstan. Export bans have a multiplier effect, as they affect not only the processors but also the 
milk-selling farmers and households and other players in the value chain.  
 
The Kyrgyz Dairy Sector Development Program (KDSDP) was initiated with support from IFC’s 
advisory program in 2015, to help the country capitalize on market opportunities presented by the 
EAEU. The Program is designed to help ensure steady milk exports to Kazakhstan (and other 
countries) through a dairy value chain approach, which would enable farmers to receive steady and 
increased incomes for the milk. It has already started working by supporting dairy processors in 
Issyk-kul Region. However, issues related to animal health and low productivity continue to persist. 
To make value chain development successful, it is imperative that on-farm improvements as well as 
necessary public sector investments are supported to ensure high quality and increased volume of 
milk. Thus, the KDSDP has grown into a comprehensive program addressing the various 
bottlenecks affecting the dairy value chain. The program covers all aspects of the dairy value chain: 
cattle breed improvement, animal feed improvement, improvements of animal productivity and 
milk quality, extension education and outreach services, animal health and hygiene, milk collection 
upgrades, laboratory, disease diagnosis and testing capacity (animal disease control, food safety and 
milk quality) upgrades, processing capacity upgrades, food safety standard upgrades, enabling 
regulatory framework, and export promotion.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality 
on beneficiary farms.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector
Comments (optional)
This component would contribute to the program development objective by improving the public-
private dialogue on private sector development issues, and by supporting the improvements in the 
breed stock (genetic quality) of the dairy cows. This component would focus on the following 
activities: (i) Improving the Public-Private Dialogue; (ii) cattle identification and registration in 
Issyk-kul Region; (iii) Establishment of a World Organization for Animal Health-certified Zone 


Free of Animal Diseases (with a focus on Foot and Mouth Disease in close collaboration with the 
Islamic Development Bank); and (iv) Support to Artificial Insemination (AI) Service Providers.
Component Name
Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement
Comments (optional)
During Phase I, the Model Dairy Village (MDV) concept would be introduced, determining the 
locations of the MDV service points, and providing the initial support to these services. The 
component would start with the most-needed services (which could be a veterinarian, an AI office, a 
milking center, a milk collection point, etc.). It would work predominantly with groups of 
beneficiaries. It would provide training, demonstrations and advice to farmers on good animal 
breeding practices, including: (i) fodder production and feeding management; (ii) animal husbandry 
and farm management, including (a) animal housing, general management and handling; (b) animal 
health, farm hygiene & clean milk production; (c) breeding management; and (d) manure 
management; and (iii) milk cooling and handling.

Component Name
Component 3: Farm-level Investments
Comments (optional)
Phase I would finance: (i) a US$ 1.2 million Revolving Fund to facilitate access to finance for small 
farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity 
building to project beneficiaries to enable them to access existing financing programs.

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
The component would cover the costs associated with project management, including Monitoring 
and Evaluation for the project implementation, as well as the establishment and maintenance of the 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 5.00 Total Bank Financing: 5.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 2.75
IDA Grant 2.25
Total 5.00

V. Implementation
The Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration (MOAM) and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) would 
be the Implementing Agencies for the project. Both Ministries have prior extensive experience with 
implementation of Bank-financed projects.  
 
The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) reporting to MOAM, and the Credit Line 
Management Unit (CLMU) at MOF would be responsible for implementation of the technical 
assistance and credit line activities, respectively. Both implementing units have extensive 

experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. The technical assistance activities 
(Components 1 and 2) would be implemented through the ABCC, which has been successfully 
implementing technical assistance activities in the agriculture sector in three Bank-financed projects 
(Agribusiness and Marketing Project, Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project, and the JSDF-
financed Support to the Community Seed Funds Project). The Revolving Fund for farmers, farmer 
associations, agro-processors and traders would be managed by the CLMU which has successfully 
managed credit lines in three previous Bank-financed projects (Rural Finance II Project, 
Agribusiness and Marketing Project, and Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project).  Similar to 
the previous projects, procurement functions for the proposed project would be carried out by 
ABCC and the overall Financial Management would be the responsibility of CLMU. Safeguards 
support would be the responsibility of the ABCC. ABCC would also open a regional office in Issyk-
kul, where the technical staff and Environmental Specialist would be located. Both PMUs, but, in 
particular, ABCC would closely liaise with the other projects under the KDSDP, to ensure that all 
necessary activities are implemented, and no duplications occur.  
 
A Steering Committee would be set up to provide strategic guidance for project implementation, as 
well as ensure that key issues that need to be resolved are brought to the attention of the 
Government and their resolution facilitated. The Steering Committee would consist of 
representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, MOAM, Ministry of Economic Regulation, MOF, 
Issyk-kul Oblast Governor’s Office, and private sector representatives. 
 
A consulting firm with international experience in dairy sector development, in particular, in 
working with farmers to improve on-farm productivity and milk quality, would be contracted under 
the project to support project implementation. The consultants would have the following main 
responsibilities: (i) identify the locations for the service points for the Dairy Model Villages 
(Component 2); (ii) provide training-of-trainers to local consulting companies that would train 
farmers in the project area (Component 2); (iii) provide advisory services to individual larger 
farmers; or groups of farmers, on specific areas related to the improvement of milk quality and 
quantity on beneficiary farms (Component 2); and (iv) assist ABCC in coordinating the project 
activities with other activities of the program, in particular, those financed by IsDB and other donors 
(Component 1 and Component 4).  
 
In addition, local consulting companies and/or NGOs would be hired under the project to ensure 
outreach to farmers, training and advisory services on the ground (under Component 2).  
 
Finally, a local consulting company or NGO experienced in group mobilization and group lending 
arrangements would be hired under the project to provide the necessary training to the groups of 
beneficiaries of the Revolving Fund, as well as help with ensuring collection of repayments due to 
the Revolving Fund (Component 3).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE  

    November 4, 2016 

Report No.: 110125 

 

Operation Name Second Development Policy Operation 

Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 

Country Moldova 

Sector General public administration sector (30%); Banking (20%); 

Public administration- Industry and trade (20%); General 

finance sector (20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (10%) 

Operation ID P149555 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Financing 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF FINANCE 

Date PID Prepared November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 16, 2016 

Corporate Review Decision October 21, 2016 

 

 Country and Sector Background 

Moldova has experienced rapid growth and poverty reduction over the past decade, 

although deterioration in external conditions and increased governance challenges since 

2014 have led to slower growth. Since the early 2000s, the economy has expanded by an 

average of 5 percent a year. Poverty declined substantially to 11 percent in 2014 from 26 

percent in 2007 (using the national poverty line) and from much higher levels earlier in the 

decade. Consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent of the population w as consistently 

higher than average consumption growth. Since 2014, however, external conditions have 

deteriorated significantly with the slowdown in the European Union (EU) and the Russian 

Federation on which Moldova is dependent for trade and remittances. This, together with a 

series of summer droughts and increased governance challenges, particularly in the financial 

sector, have resulted in slower growth in Moldova. The economy contracted by 0.5 percent in 

2015 and public and guaranteed debt increased to 46.6 percent of gross domestic product 

(GDP) from 38.2 percent a year earlier. A rebound in agriculture, in 2016, together with recent 

reforms are helping Moldova respond to adversity. Growth is projected to improve modestly to 

2.2 percent in 2016. 

Progress in poverty reduction has been driven largely by remittances and pensions, with 

the reform program supported by DPO-2 taking initial steps toward addressing the 

medium-term challenge of shifting toward greater sustainability. Remittances have made a 

significant contribution to domestic income, which has fueled private consumption and, 

together with exports, driven economic growth. Remittances, mainly going to rural areas where 

many of the poor are, have also contributed to poverty reduction and the welfa re improvement 

of the bottom 40. Pensions have also played an important role in raising incomes among the 
population, although mainly in urban areas. At the same time, employment has declined, led by 

falling labor force participation rates among both men and women which have reached very 

low levels compared to other countries. This declining labor supply is largely explained by a 

combination of greater emigration flows, the segment of the inactive labor force who have 

future migration plans, and informal workers who drop out of the labor force, all symptoms of 

low labor demand and limited availability of productive jobs. In fact, the lack of jobs and the 

wage differential with richer neighboring countries continue to motivate emigration. Going 

forward, the reforms to improve the business climate, enhance financial sector stability, and 

improve expenditure efficiency should help Moldova move toward a more sustainable model 

of growth and poverty reduction driven by private sector job creation. 

European integration has anchored the government’s policy reform agenda since 2009, 

but political instability and governance challenges have slowed the pace of reform.  
Negotiations between Moldova and the EU on an Association Agreement and a Deep and 

Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement began in 2010 and were concluded on June 27, 2014, 

with the signing of both documents. Visa-free access for Moldovan citizens travelling to the 

Schengen area went into effect in April 2014. However, periodic breakdowns in pro -European 

coalitions made progress uneven. Governance challenges have continued to take the center 

stage, as exemplified by the banking fraud revealed in 2014 that involved the loss of the 

equivalent of over 10 percent of the country’s GDP. After a period of short -lived governments, 

the Government of Mr. Filip was appointed in January 2016, dedicating policy efforts on 

stabilizing the macroeconomic situation, increasing transparency, and addressing identified 

weaknesses in the financial sector. 

The proposed operation supports the efforts of the Moldovan authorities to address key 

constraints to inclusive and sustainable growth by consolidating reform efforts in three 

areas. Accordingly, the proposed operation is built around three pillars, which are also the 

program development objectives. The first pillar of the operation seeks to strengthen the 

regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, fac ilitate 

competition, and reduce regulatory compliance costs. The second pillar aims at strengthening 

financial sector stability, promoting transparency of shareholding, and easing conditions for 

access to finance. The third pillar, focusing on the quality of public spending, seeks to improve 

the public investment management (PIM) framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture 

more efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance 

programs. The reform program builds on strong complementarity with other World Bank 

Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and analytical and advisory 

activities. In addition, although not a formal continuation of the previous program, the first two 

pillars of this series support the implementation of select laws supported by the 

Competitiveness DPO (approved in FY2013). 

 Operation Objectives 

The proposed DPL series supports the Government of Moldova's to improve the business 

climate, promote financial sector stability and development, and improve the equity and 

efficiency of public expenditure. The proposed operation is the second in a planned 

programmatic series of two single-tranche operations supporting key policy and institutional 

reforms with three development objectives: 



 Pillar A: Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business 
environment, facilitate competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs. 

 Pillar B: Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease 
conditions for access to finance. 

 Pillar C: Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies 
in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improve the coverage of well-targeted social 

assistance programs. 

The Pillar A seeks to improve the business environment facing Moldovan companies and 

farms. Supported measures aim to reduce the burden of regulatory and compliance costs of state 

inspections and to enhance competition and to set up an institutional mechanism for information 

collection on all state aid to increase transparency on how state aid is granted and contribute to a 

more efficient use of state budget resources. 

The objective of the Pillar B is to support the Moldovan authorities to build a more 

sustainable, resilient, and transparent financial sector that can prudently expand access 

to financial services. The policy actions address priority reforms in the areas of the corporate 

shares registry, the integrity of shareholders’ ownership rights, corporate gover nance 

standards, shareholder transparency, and proper supervision by NBM and NCFM. Reforms 

under this pillar are also aimed at enhancing access to finance, which continues to constrain 

private sector development, especially for SMEs and entrepreneurs. 

Pillar C focuses on improving the public investment management framework, making 

investment subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improving the 

coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs. Existing inefficiencies and inequities 

in the allocation and implementation of public investment resources, including in the 

agriculture sector, and the erosion of coverage in well-targeted social assistance programs 

reduce the effectiveness of public spending for reaching national strategic objec tives, poverty 

reduction and promoting shared prosperity. Transforming the economy will require significant 

upgrades in infrastructure through public investments. Moreover, adequate appraisal of 

investment projects ensures cost effectiveness. Agricultural support to small or individual 

farmers is still modest, and does not reflect their current and potential role in high -value 

agricultural production. 

 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

This operation (second in a programmatic series of two) supports efforts of the 

Government to improve the business climate, promote financial sector stability and 

development, and improve the equity and efficiency of public expenditure, and is aligned 

with the National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020” (NDS). The three pillars of the 

operation directly support three of the eight national priorities in the NDS: “improving the 

business climate” (supported by Pillar A), “reducing financing costs” (supported by Pillar B), 

and “ensuring competitiveness of agro-food products” (supported by Pillar A and C). In 

addition, improving the public investment management framework is expected to contribute to 

efficiency of public spending, and ultimately, to growth. Increasing the coverage of well -

targeted social assistance programs is expected to contribute to poverty reduction and to 

increase shared prosperity, while maintaining fiscal sustainability. The reforms supported in 

this DPL series are informed by substantial technical assistance and analytical work. This 



includes both recently completed and ongoing activities, with strong collaboration with other 

development partners. 

This operation is a key component of the CPS for FY14-17. The CPS discussed by the 

Board in September 2013 includes three pillars: (i) Increasing competitiveness; (ii) En hancing 

human capital and minimizing social risks; (iii) Promoting a green, clean, and resilient 

Moldova. The DPO operation will directly support the first pillar of the CPS, improving 

economic competitiveness. It will also contribute to the second pillar (minimizing social risks) 

by strengthening the efficiency of the social assistance system. In addition, reforms aiming at 

making public expenditure more efficient and equitable support the cross -cutting governance 

theme of the CPS. 

 Tentative financing 

Source: ($m.) 

Borrower/Recipient 0 

International Development Association  17.8 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 27.2 

 Total 45 

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The reform program supported by this operation builds on strong complementarily with 

other World Bank Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and 

analytical and advisory activities. The operation is complemented in each area by technical 

assistance and investment lending. TA in investment climate reform and competition policy 

has strongly informed the policy reforms in these areas. On the investment side, the 

Competitiveness Enhancement Project II, complements the DPO series with Regulatory 

Reform, SME Development and Access to Finance components. The World Bank Group’s 

Competition Policy Team provided technical assistance to the Competition Council to help 

implement the state aid registry. Reforms in the financial sector are also supported by the 

programmatic technical assistance. Reforms in public investment management are supported 

by technical assistance under the programmatic Public Expenditure Review and the Trust Fund 

for Strengthening Public Investment Management. In social assistance, the DPO complements 

the on-going Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net results-based SIL.  

 Risks and Risk Mitigation 

The overall risks to this operation are substantial. Key risks are: (i) political and 

governance; (ii) macroeconomic; (iii) sector policies and institutions and (iv) institutional 

capacity for implementation and sustainability. The overall risk rating level of the proposed 

DPO is substantial. To partially mitigate these risks, the Bank team has consulted with 

Parliamentarians as many proposed policy measures require parliamentary passage. In 

addition, the policy actions across all three pillars of this operation help increase transparency 

and promote good governance. Finally, development partners, including the International 

Monetary Fund and the European Commission remain engaged in policy dialogue, technical 

assistance, awareness campaigns and financing (including three-year IMF EEF program  

 Poverty and Social Impacts (PSI) and Environmental Aspects 

The policies and reforms supported by the operation are expected to have positive 

distributional and gender impacts and thus help reduce poverty and promote shared 



prosperity. Pillar C will make fiscal policy more equitable and efficient and therefore have a 

direct effect on poverty reduction and the promotion of shared prosperity. Pillars A and B will 

contribute to the twin goals indirectly by helping provide opportunities for business growth, 

supporting fair and transparent institutions and improving the functioning of financial markets, 

thereby enabling higher growth. No measure is expected to have negative distributional or 

gender impacts. Measures under pillar A are expected to promote employment growth in 

sectors that have a high share of women’s employment such as agriculture (which accounts for 

27.3 percent of women’s employment) and services, where the largest share of employed 

women works. 

Among the measures expected to have a direct positive impact on poverty, the measures 

to increase the inclusion of small farms in the agriculture support program are expected 

to be pro-poor and to contribute to strengthen the livelihoods of the rural poor.  According 

to the 2011 agricultural census overall most corporate subsidy recipients are large farms, with 

30 percent of all corporate farms receiving subsidies against 7 percent of individual farms. For 

both individual and corporate farms, the share of subsidy recipients is slightly lower among 

female-headed than male-headed farms. Redirecting resources to small farmers is the more 

important considering the high incidence of poverty in rural areas vis a vis urban ones (14.5 

percent versus 1 percent in big cities and 5.7 percent in small towns), and the particularly high 

incidence of poverty among farmers and agricultural workers (12.5 and 13.9 percent 

respectively).  

The measures aimed at facilitating the use of movable collateral, based on international 

experience, can be expected to benefit smaller firms in the service sector which have 

limited fixed assets, and therefore have a positive (if small) distributional impact.  The 

cogency of the constraints faced by smaller firms in accessing credit is illustrated by the 20 13 

Enterprise Survey which indicates that over a third of firms with fewer than 20 employees, and 

in particular those managed by women, that applied for a loan were rejected. To the extent that 

these measures extent to agricultural enterprises the poverty reducing impact of these measures 

will be amplified (about 6.5 percent of the poor lives in households engaged in entrepreneurial 

activities outside of agriculture, but the share rises to 23 percent when agriculture is included). 

The parametric changes in the Ajutor Social social assistance program of last resort have 

explicit positive pro-poor and gender impact. Indeed, the rationale for the changes is to stop 

the erosion of the potential beneficiary base of the program. By directly supporting the income 

of a significant proportion of the poorest households in the country, these measures were 

estimated to reduce poverty by as much as 0.5 percentage points, with additional 

improvements in the livelihoods of the poor not captured by a decrease in poverty incidence  

(but in lower depth and severity of poverty). The proposed policy action is not expected to 

substantially modify the gender incidence of these programs, but as 57 percent of adult 

recipients of Ajutor social in 2015 were women, this measure is expected to have a positive 

gender impact.  

The withdrawal of the licenses from BEM, Banca Sociala, and Unibank and their 

liquidation has affected negatively the workers who lost their jobs and were not absorbed 

by other banks. The country’s regime of severance packages (growing with years of tenure in 

the job so that for example it would provide 9.6 weeks of salary for those employed for one 

year, and 18.6 weeks of salary for those with 10 years of tenure) was applied to cushion the 

shock on those who lost their job. Given wage levels in the banking sector (almost twice as 



high as the average for the economy) those severance packages were quite generous (the 

equivalent of 6.3 times the poverty line for those with one year of tenure in the job and of 27 

times the poverty line for those with ten years of tenure). In addition, because of their higher 

than average wages, workers in this group were not among the most poor and vulnerable (in 

2015 only 9 percent of workers in the financial sector were among the bottom 40 percent). 

Finally, there is at least anecdotal evidence that several employees from the banks that were 

liquidated were reabsorbed elsewhere in the sector. Other negative impacts of the bank 

liquidations, such as the losses for the depositors were fully compensated for during the 

liquidation process. 

The DPO environmental assessment (EA) and of the proposed priority actions shows most 

of them are either neutral or beneficial for the environment (see Annex 4). Measures in 

Pillar C to improve the public investment management framework and make investment 

subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable would eventually lead to better natural 

resource management, promotion of organic agriculture, energy efficiency and climate change 

adaptation technologies. Existing EA legal and administrative frameworks in the country is 

overall well developed and in compliance with good international practices. The PIM regulation 

requires environmental assessment for projects, and as such would help mitigate the potential 

environmental impacts. 



























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA14019

Project Name NMPRP-2 Additional Financing (P148733)
Parent Project Name Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P113493)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Vietnam
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (80%), Animal production 

(20%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural markets (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148733
Parent Project ID P113493
Borrower(s) Government of Vietnam
Implementing Agency Ministry of Planning and Investment
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Nov-2014
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Nov-2014
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

26-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

14-Jan-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
In spite of Vietnam’s impressive achievements in poverty reduction – poverty declined from 58 
percent in 1993 to 14 percent in 2010 according to official statistics, and to 20 percent according to 
GSO-WB – poverty remains high at 60 percent in the West Northern Mountains Region and at 38 
percent in the East Northern Mountains Region (GSO-WB methodology). Limited access to basic 
services, markets, and financial, land, and information resources are the most important constraints 
for the poor in the Northern Mountains. Addressing these constraints is hampered by weaknesses in 
institutional capacity and public sector management: Vietnam has moved from a highly centralized, 
hierarchical, central planning system, to one where many decisions are decentralized. However, 
capacity building at the local level has not kept pace with decentralization. A five-year (national) 
Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP 2011-2015) which responds directly to these 
development challenges was approved by the National Assembly in November, 2011.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context


Poverty is increasingly concentrated among Vietnam’s ethnic minority populations. While ethnic 
minorities account for only 15 percent of the country’s population, they make up for half of the 
poor in Vietnam and have experienced a much slower pace of poverty reduction compared to the 
majority of Vietnam’s population. Poverty among ethnic minorities remains at 66 percent.   Most of 
these ethnic minority groups live in highland or upland areas, in particular in the North-West and 
North-East as well as in the Central Highland regions. The Northern Mountains region has the 
highest rate of poverty and is home to almost one-third of Vietnam’s poor. 
 
Improvements in both the delivery and accessibility of basic public services in the Northern 
Mountains region are especially needed to reach the twin goals of eliminating poverty and fostering 
shared prosperity in Vietnam. Over the last fifteen years, the GoV has launched a number of 
programs through the Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MoLISA), the MPI, the 
Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD) and other line Ministries to address this poverty challenge. Among others, 
these include: (a) the Program for Socio-Economic Development in Communes Facing Extreme 
Hardship in Ethnic Minority and Mountainous Areas (referred to as P135) to finance the commune 
and inter-commune level infrastructures and strengthen planning and implementation capacity; (b) a 
follow-up program (P135-2) designed to reduce poverty among disadvantaged groups; and (c) 
Program 30-A (Support for Fast and Sustainable Poverty Reduction in Poor Districts)  financing the 
development plans for the 62 poorest districts in the country. More recently, the GoV decided to (a) 
continue the series of poverty programs with the newly launched P135-3 under the CEMA; and (b) 
launch a New Rural Area Program (NRAP) under the MARD. In total, Vietnam currently has 16 
different NTPs implemented through various ministries. The consequence of this evolution is a 
degree of institutional fragmentation (and resulting contestation) across major Government 
agencies. 
 
The World Bank has supported Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts through two community-
driven development (CDD) operations – the Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project 
(CBRIP) and the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (NMPRP-1) – which introduced 
participatory approaches and promoted decision making at the commune level; three Development 
Policy Credits (DPCs); and the ongoing CDD operation (NMPRP-2) which focused on 
infrastructure support, livelihood activities, market linkages and further devolution of investment 
ownership to communities. There is evidence that the positive lessons from the Bank’s support are 
being mainstreamed leading to a wider menu of community projects, a stronger focus on 
participatory planning, transparency, devolution of decision making, and institutional capacity 
building at the local level.  
 
In spite of the positive results of various poverty programs, both the GoV and donor agencies are 
concerned about the inefficiencies, administrative requirements and associated costs resulting from 
the high level of fragmentation in Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts. Although a clear consensus 
on the consolidation of poverty programs has not yet emerged, various GoV stakeholders at the 
national and provincial levels, as well as donor agencies are taking initiatives to address this 
situation. These efforts focus on (a) the consolidation of existing poverty programs and NTPs in 
possibly two overarching national poverty programs;  and (b) the integration of the planning efforts 
at the local level in one common SEDP.       
 
Alignment with Government Strategy. The NMPRP-2 supports the Government’s Resolution 80/



Page 3 of 6

NQ-CP on Direction of Sustainable Poverty Reduction which aims at accelerating poverty 
reduction in the poorest districts, communes and villages of the country, by setting poverty 
reduction targets of 4 percent per annum over the 2011 – 2020 period (compared to a national target 
of 2 percent) and by prioritizing the mobilization of resources and support to these areas.  
 
The GoV is moving towards medium term planning (3 years planning cycle with a multi-year 
budget allocation rather than annual budgeting as is currently the case). Fully implemented, this will 
give more predictability, flexibility, and discretion to the commune level to plan their investment 
priorities in a more integrated manner. The GoV is also moving towards greater consolidation of its 
various poverty alleviation efforts. The SEDP approach developed under the NMPRP-2 fits very 
well both in this medium-term planning context and in the efforts to integrate various NTPs.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The development objective for the proposed project is to Enhance the living standards of the project 
beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructures; (ii) the productive and 
institutional capacity of local governments and communities; and (iii) market linkages and business 
innovations. The key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the PDO are as follows:  
 # At least 60% of the project beneficiaries report satisfaction on the selection, design, and 
implementation of project activities.  
 # The project beneficiaries report an improvement in on- and off- farm income of at least 10% over 
the life of the project.

B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
The AF focuses on institutionalizing and mainstreaming the socio-economic development planning 
approach in the broader planning and budget allocation processes in the project area. The PDO will, 
therefore, be revised to capture this important element of the AF.  
 
Project Development Objective for the AF is revised to read: The Project Development Objective 
(PDO) is to enhance the living standards of the Project Beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access 
to productive infrastructure; (ii) the productive and institutional capacity of local governments and 
communities; (iii) commune integrated investment planning and (iv) market linkages and business 
innovations.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: District Economic Development
Comments (optional)
(about 30% of total allocated provincial project funds, equivalent to US$28.8 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide investment support to the District Socio-Economic Development 
Plans, focusing on productive and economic infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, 
direct local employment and income generation, and facilitation of business innovation. This 
component supports specific efforts to link the supply side, namely the market and business 
institutions, with the poor.

Component Name
Component 2: Commune Development Budget
Comments (optional)



Page 4 of 6

(about 58% of total allocated provincial project budget, equivalent to US$55.68 million). This 
component will provide block grants to communes to finance small-scale sub-projects at the village 
level for productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement activities that are identified through 
participatory planning processes. Livelihood support will assist the poor with strengthening the 
operations of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), develop necessary skills and the further 
development of market linkages and ensure that women participate in and benefit from the project 
through targeted support to village level women’s groups.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building and Communication
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of the total project provincial allocation budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US
$6.76million). Under the AF, this component will mostly focus on the farmers and other 
beneficiaries to help sustain their capacity for implementing project activities during the AF period 
and beyond. This component will continue to help improve the capacity of project implementation 
agencies at all levels, especially of the local governments and the communities to plan, manage, 
implement, supervise, and maintain productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement programs, 
communication and information sharing and learning. This component will also support the scaling 
up and institutionalization of the participatory local development planning through the Socio-
Economic Development Plan (SEDP)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of total allocated provincial project budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US$8.76 
million). This component is to ensure effective and efficient project management through 
facilitation of various implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, coordination, 
and quality enhancement efforts.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 110.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 10.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 110.00

V. Implementation
MPI will take charge of overall project coordination at the central level, while provinces will be 
responsible for project implementation. At the central level, Central Project Coordination Office 
(CPO) will be established at the Department of Agricultural Economics in the MPI, and facilitate 
overall coordination with provinces, as well as serve as the focal point vis-a-vis the World Bank and 
relevant central government agencies. At each project province, a Provincial Project Management 
Unit (PPMU) will be established at Department of Planning and Investment (DPI). At the district 
level, District Project Management Unit (DPMU) will be created. Community Facilitators (CFs) 
who will provide vital support to the communes in particular in the process of CDBC planning and 



Page 5 of 6

implementation will be competitively selected, and hired under the project as members of DPMU. 
At the commune level, a Commune Development Board (CDB) will be established under Commune 
People’s Committee (CPC) to oversee the implementation of Component 2. Each unit will be staffed 
with appropriate experts as required (see Annex 6 for proposed staffing and key responsibilities).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA17494

Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Sri Lanka Project ID: P156019
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sri Lanka Agriculture Sector Modernization Project (P156019)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

25-Apr-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Jun-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops (20%), Agro-industry, 
marketing, and trade (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Ge neral agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (20%), Water resource management (20%), Rural policies and 
institutions (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%) , Nutrition and food 
security (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry Primary Industries, Provincial Councils of 
Northern, Eastern, North-Central,  Central and Uva Provinces

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.74
International Development Association (IDA) 125.00
Local Communities 0.00
Local Farmer Organizations 44.10
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 169.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


Decision Note):
Other Decision: .
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Sri Lanka is a lower-middle-income country of 20.5 million people and a per capita GDP of US$ 
3,811 (2014).  Growth over the past decade has been strong, averaging 6-7% per year.  Absolute 
poverty declined from 22.7 to 6.7% from 2002 to 2012.  Despite this progress, roughly one 
quarter of the Sri Lankans remain nearly poor, as defined by living above the national poverty line 
(about US$ 1.5 but below US$ 2.50 per day (2005 PPP terms).  Sri Lanka has comfortably 
surpassed most of the Millennium Development Goals. Primary school enrollment is near 
universal, while secondary and tertiary enrollment has substantially increased.  Maternal and 
infant mortality rates are at very low levels, and life expectancy at 74 years has been above its 
regional peers for over a decade. 
 
With the end of the civil war in 2009, reconstruction, infrastructure investment, and increased 
consumption have delivered a strong economic peace dividend, driven by the non-tradable sectors 
and public sector investments.  Sri Lanka is also undergoing a structural transformation away 
from agriculture, which now accounts for 10% of GDP towards industry (32.5%) and services 
(57.5%) with associated productivity growth and accelerating urbanization.  However, this 
transformation is progressing relatively slowly with 30% of the labor force remaining in 
agriculture.  Notwithstanding the post-conflict environment, Sri Lanka’s economic policies over 
last ten years have been inward-looking with an increasing degree of protectionism and anti-
export bias.  This has prevented the country from capitalizing on comparative advantage and 
exports; attracting domestic and foreign investments to foster technology transfer; and generating 
new sources of innovation driven growth and employment. 
 
The country’s fiscal landscape is challenging.  In 2014, a widened deficit and a slowdown in 
growth increased the fiscal deficit to 5.7% and the public debt 71.8%, as share of GDP, marking a 
slight reversal of the fiscal consolidation path of the post-conflict period.  The fiscal budget for 
2016 presented to Parliament projected a deficit of 6.0% of GDP for the years 2015 and 2016.  
The government presented its economic policy in November 2015 that includes as priorities the 
generation of one million job opportunities, enhancing income levels, developing the rural 
economy, and creating a wide and a strong middle class.  It proposed fiscal consolidation through 
increasing revenue collection, reforms of state owned enterprises, and enhanced trade and foreign 
investment.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Sri Lanka’s agriculture is characterized by a non-plantation sector and a plantation sector.  Of the 
country’s approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, 80% are used for non-plantation 
foods crops, comprising rice, maize, fruits, vegetables, and other crops that are primarily grown in 
small-holdings.  About 1.65 million smallholder farmers operate on average less than 2 hectares 
and contribute 80% of the total annual food production.  Commercial crops (minor export crops) 
include cinnamon, pepper, cocoa, and coffee and are grown on small and medium land holdings 

as well.  Plantation crops—coconut, rubber and tea—are cultivated in large estates and small and 
medium land holdings.  Typically, non-plantation crops are grown under irrigated conditions 
while plantation and minor export crops are grown in the rain-fed areas.  Monsoonal rainfall 
patterns shape the agricultural seasons and irrigation patterns.  Two thirds of the agricultural area 
are located in the dry zone where the bulk of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is located. 
 
Sri Lanka’s has successfully attained self-sufficiency in rice and recently also in maize 
production. Rice production has increased steadily from 2.9 million tons (2002) to 4.8 million 
tons in 2015, in part because previously inaccessible land was reopened for cultivation after the 
end of the war but also through introducing high-yielding varieties, expanding irrigation capacity, 
fertilizer subsidies, restrictions on crop choices, and import substitution.  Achieving self-
sufficiency has meant that the production structure has remained concentrated in the low value 
food crops. In 2013, about 45% of the cultivated area was under rice cultivation (up from 37% in 
1980) but the share of rice in the overall value of crop production was only 18%.  Furthermore, 
average rice yields of 4.06 tons/hectare are relatively low and agricultural productivity, as 
measured by total factor productivity, has only grown by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 
1980, lagging behind other South and East Asian countries. 
 
With rice self-sufficiency secured, there is a need to diversify the production structure out of the 
lower value food crops towards high-value agriculture.  Sector policy to date, however, has 
neglected the domestic fruits and vegetable sectors, despite growing domestic demand and 
potential for export growth.  Demand has instead been met by increased imports.  A broad 
recognition has however emerged recently that the modernization of agriculture is needed if 
agriculture is to realize its potential for greater value generation and as a renewed source of rural 
growth for poverty reduction and job creation. Such modernization will require a structural shift 
towards a more high-value oriented agriculture production structure, agro-processing and value 
addition activities, and increased competitiveness.  It will also involve aligning trade policies to 
become more consistent and conducive for high-value export agriculture; realigning and better 
targeting of public sector support, especially fertilizer subsidies; greater attention to R&D; and 
relaxing the rice self-sufficiency policy and allowing for more demand-driven and market 
oriented production.  This will require differentiated strategies for different parts and production 
arrangements across the country.  In the northern and eastern parts of the country, comprising 
primarily the dry zone, there is significant scope for agricultural productivity growth and potential 
for better linkages to domestic and export markets, including value-added production.  In other 
parts of the country, more robust and scaled-up private commercial investment and innovation 
through agri-enterprises and agri-enterprise-farmer partnerships is needed for value addition and 
farmer integration into high value chains through scaling up and diversification into more 
commercial crops.   
 
The proposed project provides a broad framework for Sri Lanka to experiment with innovative 
approaches to address the above mentioned sector issues, overcome the low productivity 
equilibrium, and strengthen agriculture’s contribution to the economy and employment creation.  
The strategic thrust reflected in the project design is to support overall agriculture sector 
development and addressing the longstanding constraints through: (a) developing an incentive 
structure for small, medium, and large enterprises, including farmer producer organizations, to 
invest in commercial agriculture and value chains; (b) promoting partnership arrangements 
between private sector partners and smallholder pro ducers for better linkages; (c) demonstrating 
new agriculture technologies and innovations at sufficient scale to enhance productivity, 

resilience, and diversification in selected prioritized lagging regions; (d) promoting technology 
diffusion through capacity building and training and new models for extension service delivery; 
and (e) supporting sector policy analysis and research for reform.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support increasing agriculture productivity, 
improving market access, and enhancing value addition of smallholder farmers and agribusinesses 
in the project areas.

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following results indicators: (a) number 
of direct project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender; (b) number and share of participating 
farm households adopting improved technology packages and production practices supported 
under the project; (c) number and share of project-supported farmer producer organizations and 
farmer – agribusiness partnerships making a profit; (d) percentage increase in average value of 
sales of agriculture products due to project interventions; and (e) the number of new jobs created 
through small and medium enterprise investments under the project.

D.  Project Description

The project comprises four components, as follows: 
 
Component 1: Agriculture Value Chain Development (Total US$102.7 million; IDA US$58.6 
million). The component would promote commercial and export-oriented agriculture through 
attracting and leveraging investments from farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for 
high value agriculture production and value addition. Component 1 comprises the following sub-
components: 
 
Sub-component 1.1: Investment Preparation Support, supporting: a training program on principles 
and procedures of the Matching Grants Program under sub-component 2; public advertisements 
and information workshops at national, provincial and district levels for prospective grant 
applicants; support to the project’s Technical Review Group and Board; international advisory 
support to operationalize the Matching Grants Program; staffing support and equipment and 
operation cost for the Matching Grants Secretariat and three regional support offices; technical 
assistance support to assist applicants in the preparation of quality investment proposals; and 
technical assistance support to support the environmental and social safeguards requirements 
within the Matching Grants Program. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses, supporting a 
Matching Grants Program to support investments from farmer producer organizations and 
agribusinesses in agriculture. Matching Grants would be provided under two windows.  Matching 
Grants of US$5,000 up to US$75,000 would be provided for investments to be developed and 
implemented by farmer producer organizations.  Eligibility criteria for farmer producer 
organizations to participate in the program would include: formal registration; appointment of an 
accountant; a cash contribution of 10 percent of the total investment; and availability of 
commercial financing of 40 percent of the total investment.  Matching Grants of US$75,000 up to 
US$500,000 would be provided to agribusiness for agriculture value chain investments. 


Applications for grant support would be evaluated on criteria, such as outreach and capacity 
building to smallholder farmers, including women headed producer groups; focus on lagging 
regions; as well as technical quality, innovation, business rationale and others. 
 
Sub-component 1.3: Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG), supporting a PCG to share financial risk 
with participating financial institutions that have expressed interest in lending to beneficiaries of 
the Matching Grant Program.  The PCG would be administered by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) and operate on the basis of the World Bank Group Principles on Partial Credit Guarantee 
Schemes, published in December 2014, covering the governance, management, administration, 
sustainability, and monitoring of PCG. 
 
Component 2: Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations (US$ 58.63 million, 
IDA US$ 58.63 million).  The component would support smallholder farmers to produce 
competitive and marketable commodities, improve their ability to respond to market 
requirements, and move towards increased commercialization.  Component 2 comprises three 
sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Farmer Training and Capacity Building, supporting knowledge building and 
capability improvements of smallholder farmers and the establishment of farmer organizations to 
help them to respond better to market opportunities.  Individual farmer capacity building and 
farmer producer organization training will be implemented through training programs reaching 
out to approximately 600 villages and approximately 500 farmer producers groups.  The trained 
and established farmer producer organizations would become eligible for participation in the 
Matching Grants Program under Component 1. 
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Modern Agriculture Technology Parks, supporting the introduction, 
demonstration, and scale-up of innovative agriculture technology packages to support 
productivity improvements, diversification, commercialization, more sustainable and climate 
resilient production patterns.  The sub-component would support 7 agriculture technology 
demonstration parks in the selected districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura (Northern 
Province), Batticaloa, (Eastern Province), Matale (North-Central Province), Moneragala (Uva 
Province), and Polonnaruwa (Central Province) which have been identified based on high poverty 
headcounts and agriculture potential.  The agriculture parks would be established to demonstrate 
entire value chain approaches, involving farmer mobilization and training, production, post-
harvest handling and/or processing, and marketing. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure, supporting: (i) the up-
grading and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks in 
selected areas and linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement 
of existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development (sub-component 2.2). 
 
Sub-component 2.4:  Analytical and Policy Advisory Support, supporting the CPCU, MOPI and 
MOA in addressing knowledge gaps; developing an evidence-based policy, legal and regulatory 
framework; and formulating sector and sub-sectoral strategies to provide an enabling environment 
for a sustainable and competitive modern agriculture and food system.  The component would 
provide support to evaluate policies and regulations and recommend adjustments, reforms or new 
policies to promote competitiveness, responsiveness to market demand, sustainability, and 
resilience; undertake market analyses for new exports, and analyze policy, regulatory and 
institutional constraints, and identify public investments to address these constraints; and evaluate 
the social and economic impact of policies and public expenditures and make recommendations to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures.  The sub-component would also 
provide some technical support the MOA, including the design of a National Agriculture 
Information System and others. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total Cost US$ 7.74 million, US
$ 7.7 million IDA).  The component would support the PMOs at MOPI and MOA at the central, 
provincial and district levels in project management and coordination, technical supervision, 
financial management, procurement, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E).

Component Name
Agriculture Value Chain Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is national in scope and designed as framework approach.  Specific project locations 
and their characteristics are not yet known and would be identified during implementation as part 
of the project’s demand-driven Matching Grants Program approach. Itis expected that project sites 
would be located in all three major agro-ecological zones, including the wet zone (average annual 
rainfall above 2500 mm); the intermediate zone (annual rainfall between 1750-2500 mm); and the 
dry zone (annual rainfall less than 1750 mm).  The dry and intermediate zones cover about 66% 
of the agriculture land area and receive about 30% of the country’s annual surface water yield.  
They are extensively used for agriculture and require irrigation water to be productive.  The bulk 
of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is hence located in the dry zone.   The wet zone, on the 
other hand, comprises 34% of the agricultural land area and receives 70% of the country’s annual 
surface water yield.  The three major plantation crops, most other export crops and various types 
of fruits are grown here under rain-fed conditions. 
 
The project’s proposed agriculture technology demonstrations parks included under Component 2 
and the complementing production infrastructure investments will be located in the 7 priority 
districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, Batticaloa, Matale, Polonnaruwa, and Moneragala.  
While exact project sites are not yet known and will be determined as part of a detailed feasibility 
study process during implementation, the districts are located in the dry zone (except for 
Moneragala, which is located in the intermediate zone) and have been identified based on high 
poverty rates and high absolute numbers of poor.  The majority of these districts are located in the 
former conflict affected areas and are characterized by poor or dilapidated public infrastructure, 
lack of productive infrastructure at the farm level, and poor access to markets, as well as limited 
livelihood and employment opportunities.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU06)

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional responsibilities and arrangements for project implementation will be established, as 
follows: 
 
A Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) will be set up in the Ministry of National Policies and 
Economic Affairs with representation from other government stakeholders.  The CPCU has the 
mandate to ensure effective coordination and communication between the Ministry of National 
Policies and Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, Ministry of Primary Industries, 
Ministry of Agriculture, and Provincial Councils; provide overall policy guidance and support to the 
implementing ministries; mobilize and ensure coordination with public and private sector 
stakeholders; and oversee the project’s regular internal auditing/ third party-monitoring of the two 
main investment components to ensure adherence to project principles and transparency. 
 
Ministry of Primary Industries (MOPI).  MOPI will be responsible for implementing Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, and will oversee the following project-relevant units and entities: 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOPI is responsible for the management of Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, including annual work and budget planning, coordination of the 
Department of Export Agriculture in Kandy and the three regional offices (Kilinochchi, Ampara, 
Matara); coordination with the three Provincial Councils and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture; 
procurement; fund withdrawal and financial reporting; technical and institutional aspects of 
implementation; general oversight, field supervision and acceptance checks; and training and 
capacity building, and the periodic progress reporting to the Bank.  A separate Secretariat would be 
set up in the PMU of MOPI to manage the day-to-day implementation of the matching grants 
program. 
 
A Board of Directors will be set up to oversee and govern the application process and approval of 
matching grants under sub-component 1.2.  The Board will be chaired by the Secretary of MOPI and 
include representatives from MOF, Board of Investment, Ceylon Export Board, Central Bank, 
Chamber of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and the Provincial Councils 

and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture.  The Board would be responsible for reviewing and 
approving applications for matching grants that have passed the technical, institutional and business 
reviews, ensuring that proposals are in accordance with government policy directions and objectives, 
especially outreach and integration of farmers and female entrepreneurs; make good business sense; 
and are in compliance with project regulations, including safeguards. 
 
A Technical Review Group (TRG) will be appointed, comprising representatives from government 
technical departments, academia/ research, industry-related enterprises, and other stakeholders.  The 
TRG would provide guidance to farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses that have 
expressed interest in applying to the matching grants program on technical and business-related 
aspects of investment proposals, such as crop/ product selection, technology innovation, production 
organization and processing, marketing research, partnership arrangements, investment costing, and 
other elements of investment planning process.  The TRG would review finalized investment plans 
for farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for technical and economic soundness and 
compliance with project regulations and recommend such proposals for approval to the Board.  
 
The Regional Development Department of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka would be responsible for 
administering the Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) under Component 1, sub-components 1.3.  The 
Department would also maintain the PCG Operational Manual, develop a business plan and pricing 
model, continuously review the eligibility criteria for loans, establish a registration system for loans 
to be covered under the PCG, and manage the claims processing system under the project. 
 
Under the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)  the following project-relevant units and entities would be 
set up or would be set up for the management of Component 2.  
 
A Coordinating Committee will be set up in MOA to be responsible for the regular coordination 
between MOA and the Provincial Councils of the participating provinces, based on the principles of 
the Wadduwa Declaration of the National and Provincial Ministers of Agriculture, signed on 
September 30, 2015. The Coordinating Committee would ensure that project’s sub-components 2.2 
(Agriculture Technology Demonstration Parks) and 2.3 (Upgrading Production and Marketing 
Infrastructure) are fully coordinated with the Provincial Councils based on the devolved provincial 
mandates for agriculture and rural development 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOA will be responsible for overall day-to-day coordination 
and management of Component 2 in coordination with the five Provincial Councils and Provincial 
Ministries of Agriculture.  The PMU would be responsible for annual work and budget planning; 
coordination with provinces/ districts in public outreach and community mobilization, procurement 
and contract management, fund withdrawal and financial management, including and financial 
reporting; technical and institutional implementation aspects, field supervision and acceptance 
checks; and training and capacity building.  It would also be responsible for reporting on project 
progress and implementation issues to the Bank, including the relevant project M&E indicators and 
safeguards implementation performance. 
 
The Sri Lanka Council for Agriculture Research Policy (CARP) under MOA, would be responsible 
for implementation of sub-component 2.4. Day to day activities under the component will be 
managed by a small Policy Analysis Unit, housed in CARP with project support and reporting to the 
Chairman of CARP.  The primary responsibility of the Unit would be to support policy level 
discussions of the CPCU, Ministry Finance, MOPI and MOA; monitor consistency of economic 


policies across various parts of the government; develop an annual program of studies and analytical 
work, and monitor implementation during the year through periodic activity progress updates.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes To mitigate potential environmental and social 
impacts that may be caused due to physical project 
interventions and ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided and/
or mitigated, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared.  These will provide detailed guidance on 
the specific due diligence requirements as well as on 
the specific environmental and social safeguards 
instruments required for sub-projects, including 
screening, environmental management plans, 
resettlement action plans etc.) to mitigate any 
potential negative project impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project will support agriculture activities on 
existing farmland.  Expansion of farmland into 
fragile habitats is not foreseen. The project will 
improve agricultural practices and is expected to 
reduce the pressure on farmland and surrounding 
natural habitats.  Some activities might impact 
natural habitats because of their proximity to such 
habitats (construction and/or upgrading of rural 
infrastructure).  The EAMF prescribes a due 
diligence mechanism under OP 4.01 to ensure 
impacts are mitigated.  Preventive and mitigation 
measures will be included in sub-project EMPs, as 
needed.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas.  No activities in 
commercial forests or in close proximity to forest 
areas are expected.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
a key thematic area,  however, the intensification and 
diversification of agriculture could to lead to changes 
in the application of pesticides for pest and disease 
control.  A Pest Management Plans (PMP) has been 
prepared based on Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) principles, describing the national regulatory 
framework, current status of pest and disease control, 
monitoring and supervision mechanism, major 


experience and problems, and lessons learned from 
past projects.  It specifies a range of actions to 
strengthen integrated pest management practices and 
awareness and includes capacity building and 
monitoring program to facilitate implementation.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No No project-support activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or to affect physical cultural resources, as 
defined by OP/BP4.11. Measures on safeguard 
chance finds are  included as part of mitigation 
measures defined in EAMF OP/BP 4.01.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No No conclusive evidence or data exist yet on the 
possible presence of indigenous peoples 
communities in the country.  In general, "forest 
dwellers" who live in remote locations and close to 
commercial forests and national forest reserves are 
considered native communities.  Their livelihood is 
dependent on forest resources.  Project supported 
agricultural activities will take place on existing 
agricultural areas and there will be no expansion into 
forest areas.  No activities in commercial forests or in 
close proximity to forest areas are expected and 
therefore forest dweller communities will not be 
affected through proposed investments under the 
project.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will not involve involuntary resettlement 
or physical displacement.  Small-scale land 
alignment or acquisition for village-level civil works 
may be necessary.  Where the need for land 
acquisition may arise, the project’s RPF will apply.  
The RPF provides the guidelines and procedures for 
land acquisition; describes provisions for 
compensation and mitigation measures, includes a 
grievance redress mechanism, and set up safeguards 
monitoring and institutional arrangements in the 
event of land acquisition and livelihood losses.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The project may include the up-grading and 
rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation facilities   and 
water tanks.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the 
dependence on water conveyance and control via 
irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with 
the storage and operation of upstream medium/ large 
dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s cascading tank 
and irrigation infrastructure.  The rehabilitation of 
small irrigation schemes and tanks will not include 
dams and embankments more than 15 meters high 
and will not include medium to large scale dams.  

The EAMF includes generic dam safety measures to 
be adopted in the design and implementation of 
rehabilitation/ improvement of irrigation structures.  
It also includes guidance on the preparation of 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plans and dam 
safety plans in accordance with OP/BP4.37.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and therefore 
this policy is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this policy 
is not triggered.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to bring positive environmental benefits to the project areas through the 
introduction and expansion of modern technology applications that help improve current cropping 
patterns and farming methods, increase efficiency in the management of water resources, protect 
agriculture soils, and roll out integrated pest management. However, two components under the 
project may involve activities that could have significant environmental impacts if not mitigated 
properly, especially during the construction phase.   Component 1 will support commercial 
agriculture and agro-products processing. Component 2 would finance the establishment of 
agriculture technology demonstration parks and improvements of rural infrastructure, including 
access roads and tracks, rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, land preparation, market 
facilities, and others. The project’s process-oriented and demand-driven framework approach does 
not allow to determine project investments and specific project locations for investments under 
these components at appraisal. However it is known that these will be conducted in existing 
agricultural areas. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses:  
 
The agricultural sector faces a number of challenges in managing land productivity which often 
results in encroachment of forest areas for search of new land for cultivation. Soil erosion, crop 
disease management, water use efficiency, water pollution from excessive use of chemicals, and 
cultivation of unsuitable crop varieties are among the key areas where focus in terms of 
environmental management are a priority.   
 
Supporting the commercial agriculture and agro-products processing will require that stringent 
environmental screening, identification of potential environmental and impacts and management 
in terms of set up and operations of the activity. Among other best practices would be organic 
cultivation and at the same time careful soil management needs to be taken care of to prevent soil 
erosion and top soil degradation.  As specific sites and nature of the agro-business activities are 
not yet known, best practices that need to be employed and general recommendations cannot be 
employed as the nature of the activity varies and depend upon the soil type, area of cultivation ,i.e. 
dry zone or wet zone, and topography, crop type and the specific agriculture sector.  A site-


specific Environmental Management Planning approach plays a key role and has been 
incorporated in to the Matching Grants Program.  In addition, via strengthening technical 
knowledge and extension services focusing on the careful and minimal use of chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides/herbicides through good practices such as Integrated Pest Management and 
Integrated Plant Nutrition Management via the project’s Pest Management Plan, activities that 
facilitate sustainable agricultural development should be essentially promoted. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of Modern Agriculture Technology Parks: The sub-component 
would support 7 agriculture technology demonstration parks in selected districts in the Northern, 
Eastern, Central, North-Central and Uva Provinces, which have been identified based on high 
poverty headcounts and agriculture potential. The exact location of where these interventions will 
be taking places will only be deduced during the project implementation stage. Environmental 
screening will be an essential part of the site selection process in order to ensure project-supported 
agriculture-related activities would take place on existing farmland and no expansion or creation 
of new farmland into fragile habitats is foreseen. The project will bring improvements to 
agricultural practices that are expected to reduce the pressure on these areas and the likelihood of 
encroachment into sensitive natural habitats. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure:  This component will 
entail physical interventions under the following purview; (i) the up-grading and rehabilitation of 
small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks and irrigation systems in selected 
priority areas, linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement of 
existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development.  Impacts to physical and ecological environments during the construction 
phase of physical interventions outlined under Sub-component will be predominantly during the 
construction phase and consist of impacts such as the stress of natural resources such as sand, 
water and spil, removal of productive topsoil, solid waste generation in the form of construction 
waste, localized dust and noise and safety and occupational health to laborers. These impacts will 
be management via mitigation measures that will be implements via sub-project specific 
environmental management plans. 
 
The project is expected to generate positive social benefits and provide sustainable poverty 
reduction opportunities into lagging rural areas. Improved agriculture productivity and value chain 
development are expected to create additional economic returns for farmer households.  Expected 
benefits include employment opportunities for poorer households, individual and collective 
empowerment through membership in formal farmer producer organizations and in partnership 
arrangements with agribusinesses, improved access to finance, technology, and markets, as well as 
technical and management skills. Attention to more equitable sharing of economic gains from 
investments in commercial agriculture modernized value chains will be paid during the process of 
farmer producer organization establishment. Investments in local infrastructure will have positive 
impacts if infrastructure is targeted to serve both agricultural production needs and the needs of 
local communities.  A mandatory social screening is specified in the Operations Manual and RPF 
and will allow for the detailed assessment of potential social impacts and risks and relevant 
mitigation measures of all sub-projects.  Land acquisition is expected to be small-scale and to be 
manageable through the RPF and Resettlement Action Plans.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
No potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under the project.  It is 
worthwhile to note that women producer organizations will receive priority in the matching grant 
facility and other project-supported activities. However, a number of issues deserve attention and 
monitoring from a social development perspective during implementation:  Women-headed and 
poor households may be especially vulnerable and their participation in project activities might be 
limited resulting in inequitable production arrangements within farmer producer organizations or 
in partnership arrangements with agribusinesses. Market risks will remain substantial, and timely 
access to market information will remain challenging.  This may result in producer organizations 
not being able to assess market and demand conditions adequately.   Modern agriculture requires 
more investment while some of the proposed commodities may provide returns only with some 
time lags.  Poorer households may therefore face increased risk of indebtedness because of their 
motivation to participate in the project.  Producer arrangements will require the organization and 
streamlining of large numbers of smallholder producers under unified production and land 
management arrangements, requiring special attention to ensuring voluntary and fully informed 
participation.  Complex land tenure and land ownership patterns in Sri Lanka’s smallholder 
agriculture might hinder the introduction of modern agriculture practices and new technologies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Alternative design consideration included a three pronged approach that included major 
investment components on climate smart agriculture, value chain development for higher value 
agricultural products, and on reforms to the country’s research and development and extension 
systems.   This scope was considered to broad and complex, including from an environmental and 
social safeguards perspective and the project design was simplified as described above.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared as details of specific sites and related activities and interventions are not yet available. 
The EAMF primarily includes an assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with 
anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental risk mitigation and 
institutional arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, instruction to the preparation 
of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), implementation and monitoring. The RPF provides 
guidance on the land acquisition process and  the preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans where needed. 
 
To ensure that project interventions supported under the Matching Grant Program are 
environmentally sound, the EAMF includes environmental screening and evaluation criteria which 
will be part of the screening process for matching grant applications under Component 1.   MOPI 
will be responsible for ensuring the environmental screening of all project concept notes and full 
proposals submitted by applicants to the matching grant program.  The environmental screening 
process and evaluation criteria presented in the EAMF are reflected in the Operational Manuel of 
the Matching Grant Program as well and built in to the eligibility assessment criteria of matching 
grant applications.  
 
All interventions (excepting those that obviously are environmentally benign or low impact) under 

Component 2 will be subject to an environmental screening with the objective to: (a) determine the 
anticipated environmental impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; and (ii) determine if the 
anticipated impacts and public concern warrant further environmental analysis, and if so to 
recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental Assessment needed as per the set 
criteria in the EAMF.   
 
The EAMF is taking the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental analysis and 
mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will have the potential to 
trigger negative environmental impacts and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank’s 
environmental safeguard policies and the relevant national Environmental regulations during 
implementation. As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in 
general will be required to prepare an EMP and follow the World Banks Environmental Health 
and Safety Guidelines and agriculture sector guidelines as defined in the EAMF. 
 
Interventions under Component 2, sub-component 2.3 may include the rehabilitation and up-
grading of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks (managed by the Agrarian 
Services Departments) linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks under sub-
component 2.2.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the dependence on water conveyance and control 
via the irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with the water storage and operation of 
upstream medium/large dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s historical cascading tank and 
irrigation infrastructure.  There is an ongoing and effective dam safety program in Sri Lanka 
targeting all large to medium scale dams (upstream of small irrigation structures) and smaller 
dams along cascading irrigation systems.  Full-level inspections, dam safety assessments, and 
safety remedial measures have already been conducted and details are documented by the 
Government satisfactorily to the Bank and in compliance with the provisions of OP/BP4.37 on 
Dam Safety.   
 
Typical interventions under this project would include repairs and improvements, such as 
protection of downstream slopes of dam embankments, providing toe-filters and toe drains to 
improve downstream drainage and arresting excessive seepage flows, upstream slope protection 
strengthening of the structural stability of  spillways and sluice structures etc.  The anticipated 
project activities will result in an overall enhancement of the safety of dams (tank bunds) against 
the risk of failure.  The project, however, will not finance construction of new tanks (new dams/
tank bunds).  Small dams i ncluded under the project would be less than 5 meters in height. 
 
All irrigation infrastructure related interventions will require a screening, as per the EAMF to 
verify whether upstream medium to large scale dams are present and connected hydrologically, 
and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed outline follow-up actions.  If the presence of 
upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been rehabilitated or 
strengthened and thus have Dam Safety implications, the following will be conducted: an 
inspection and evaluation of the safety status of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance 
history; and a review and evaluation of the mandated dam owners operation and maintenance 
procedures.  A report will be provided on the findings of the review, including recommendations 
for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an 
acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary additional dam safety measures or remedial work may be 
financed under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken 
using the following procedures: a competent professional will be recruited to design and supervise 
the work.  Because the size of dams would be less than 5 meters in height, qualified professionals 


will be hired by MOA to design and supervise the work. 
 
The MOA and MOPI have limited prior experience with Bank-funded projects respectively and 
the capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards in project implementation is limited 
as well.  MOPI is a new entity.  MOA has been long established, however, does not partake in the 
implementation of national level environmental regulations and institutional capacity is weak.  
MOA has however sufficient capacity and technical expertise in pest management because MOA 
is implementing national programs in pest control and pesticide management.  To address capacity 
weaknesses, the PMUs under MOA and MOPI will both recruit full-time qualified environmental 
and social specialists prior to the commencement of field implementation to be responsible for the 
implementation of the project’s environmental and social regulations, including the EAMF, PMP, 
EMPs, and RPF and RAPs.  In addition, the project will provide training in environmental 
management and on environmental and social management to improve institutional capacity. The 
cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social project 
regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with direct and indirect project beneficiaries, government stakeholders at various 
administrative levels and farmers will be conducted as part of the participatory process for 
designing and implementing sub-projects.  Consultation will aim at: sharing information, listening 
to feedback, engaging citizens in decision making, and involving stakeholders in participation in 
the implementation process.  Consultations will also enable the project team to hold joint 
discussions with the beneficiary communities, share ideas about planning and implementation, and 
benefit from local knowledge to take more informed decisions. Consultation will take place inform 
of public meetings, focus group discussions, sub-project specific community consultations as part 
of the social screening process and direct one-to-one consultations.  A Public Information Booklet 
will be used as an information dissemination technique to promote competition and innovation in 
technology development and advocate for poor framer groups, including women farmer groups, to 
take part in project activities.  Following review by the Bank, the safeguards instruments including 
RAPs, EMPs have been disclosed through the Infoshop and locally on the ministries’ websites, 
and through the PMUs and at Divisional Secretariats of project areas. 
 
The project will adopt following as citizen engagement mechanisms: (a) continuous community 
consultations as social preparation and screening of  subprojects; (b) social audit committees at 
local level to monitor subproject implementation; and (c) third party monitoring of project 
implementation to ensure projects benefits are distributed  equally and efficiently across different 
social groups and geographical regions.  The outcome of the citizen engagement exercises will be 
documented and reviewed during implementation support missions.



















































COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC15495

Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P155617
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Assam Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P155617)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

05-Sep-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

22-Dec-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(30%), Crops (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), 
Animal production (10%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation 
and market access (20%)

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services (ARIAS) Society

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 50.00
International Development Association (IDA) 200.00
Total Project Cost 250.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 



(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1.      During the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, 
and projections are for the high growth rate to continue.  Despite the headline figures on growth, 
concerns linger about the pattern of growth. India continues to face daunting challenges in 
reducing the number of poor, creating jobs, and achieving shared prosperity. Long term 
agricultural growth remains volatile, fluctuating around 3 percent per year.  With India’s labor 
force predominantly in rural areas, and about 68 percent employed in agriculture, the political, 
social and economic importance of agriculture continues. 
 
2.      The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the important role of agriculture in the ongoing 
rural-urban transformation process and the potential it represents as an important source of growth 
and job creation.  The GoI also recognizes the necessity of strategic shifts for structural 
transformation of Indian agriculture to tap into this potential of growth and job creation.  These 
shifts reflect underlying trends in demand for food and factors affecting the supply of agriculture 
produce, and include:  (i) a shift away from a focus on foodgrain production towards 
diversification into high value agriculture production of fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc.; (ii) a shift 
away from a focus on on-farm production towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of 
agriculture value chains; (iii) a shift away from a focus on productivity towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; and (iv) a shift away 
from a focus on agriculture production towards nutrition sensitive agriculture. 
 
3.       To facilitate these four shifts, GoI has launched a number of policies and initiatives since 
2014. These include, among others, a technology driven second green revolution with a focus on 
higher productivity and diversification; a “National Adaptation Fund” to meet the challenges on 
climate change; a nationwide District Level Incubation and Accelerator Programme” focusing on 
micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector; and a scheme for promotion of a National 
Agricultural Market to accelerate the integrated development of agriculture marketing and trade. 
 
4. Consumer demand for food commodities in India is rapidly changing, fueled by strong 
economic growth.  The structural shift in consumption pattern away from cereals to high value 
agricultural commodities is seen both in rural and urban areas.  This in turn is generating growing 
domestic demand for higher quality/value agricultural commodities (including animal proteins) as 
the share of cereals and staples in food expenditure declines, whilst that of animal proteins, fruits 
and vegetables increases.  This provides opportunities for farmers to obtain higher incomes from 
increasingly smaller holdings. 
 
5. Signaled by changes in consumers’ food baskets, India’s agriculture and agri-food marketing 
system is poised for a profound transformation.  The agri-food marketing system is changing from 
ad hoc transactions towards coordinated systems like cooperatives, producers’ associations and 
contract farming.  Public policy has been proactive in facilitating this transformation.  The central 
and state governments have taken important policy initiatives, such as de-regulation of food 
industry, enactment of an integrated food law, de-monopolization of agricultural markets, 
reduction in excise duties on manufactured food products, and priority sector lending to food 
industry to strengthen agriculture-industry linkages. 

Food processing is a “sunrise sector” and its share in GDP is on a continuous rise, with a 
compound annual growth rate of 8.4 percent. According to the Annual Survey of Industries 
2012-13 the food processing sector ranks first amongst all industry groups, both in terms of total 
number of factories (16%) and  number of factories in operation (16%), and third in terms of total 
output (12%), next only to ‘coke and refined petroleum products’ and ‘basic metals’.  More 
importantly, this sector is the largest employer amongst all industry groups, accounting for 11.59 
per cent of industry employment in India.  Its employment intensity can be seen by the fact that 
for every INR 1 million invested, 18 direct jobs and 64 indirect jobs are created in organized food 
processing industry.  Furthermore, food in India has an economic multiplier of 2-2.5, thus 
implying that not only the food products industry can be the antidote for India’s jobless growth, 
but that such a scenario may come at a relatively low (fixed capital) cost. 
 
7. Transition to high value commodities and opportunities in agro-food processing underscores 
the enormous potential for commercialization and income growth in agriculture (including small 
holder) as production, consumption and trade shift from traditional food crops to horticulture and 
other non-traditional (high value) commodities.  Moreover, relative to other countries, India has 
considerable comparative advantages in having a very large (growing and largely un-tapped) 
domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver for near term 
agriculture growth.  Nonetheless, beyond the domestic market there are also strong comparative 
and competitive advantages in developing high value agricultural trade, which is currently 
negligible.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8. In Assam, agriculture and related sectors are the principal occupation of the vast majority of 
rural population in terms of employment and livelihood. About 90 percent of state’s population 
lives in rural areas and is mostly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.  Agriculture and 
the allied sectors directly or indirectly support more than 75 percent of the population, providing 
employment to about 50 percent of the total workforce.  While the average operational holding in 
India is 1.10 hectare, Assam’s farmer families are predominantly small and marginal (85%) with 
an average land holding of only 0.63 hectare. 
 
9.      The recently concluded the Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP) was 
instrumental in increasing cropping intensity, on-farm productivity and diversification of 
agriculture in the state. Supported by AACP and other Government of Assam (GoA) initiatives, 
high value horticulture has seen a significant growth in production - the annual growth rate of 
production of fruits, spices and vegetables was 19.2, 6.4 and 72.2 percent respectively in the last 
decade, with Assam contributing significantly to national production in commodities like ginger, 
banana, pineapple, litchi, etc. As such AACP has laid the foundations for long term agriculture 
transformation in the state by shifting the focus from rice production towards diversification into 
high value agriculture production (vegetables, spices, fish, dairy etc.).  This move towards higher 
value products offers opportunities to increase contribution of agriculture to Assam’s growth. 
 
10. Diversification to higher value commodities and opportunities in specialized commodities 
reflect significant opportunities and challenges for farming communities in Assam:  growing 
specialized commodities would need adoption of rapidly changing technologies and quality 
standards.  Smallholder farmers face significant challenges in learning about and adopting rapidly 
changing agriculture technologies.  The Bank supported AACP has successfully introduced the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model, a participatory, decentralized 



planning, funding and implementation of technology dissemination to district, block and village 
levels in partnerships with farmer groups, and different line departments.  While the ATMA 
platform has introduced improvements in technology transfer and demand driven extension, the 
current approach focuses mainly on production related issues.  Its capacity needs to be 
strengthened to enhance the ability of farmers to adopt efficient and market led production and 
post-harvest practices for meeting the volume, timing and quality requirements of different 
markets. 
 
11. The key constraints in structural transformation of agriculture in Assam are limited market 
access, poor post-harvest handling infrastructure and fragmented supply chains:  agriculture 
marketing in Assam is characterized by a multiplicity of regulatory authorities in the state (viz., 
local panchayats, municipalities and state agriculture marketing board).  Reforms would be 
needed not only to harmonize the regulatory regime in the state, but also for the development of 
alternative marketing options for farmers.  The supply chain is characterized by the dominance of 
middlemen at different levels, involving pre-harvest contractors, forwarding agents, commission 
agents, wholesalers, sub-wholesalers and retailers.  The existence of multiple intermediaries 
causes prices to snowball with each transaction.  Despite the comparative production advantage in 
agriculture and allied commodities, and emerging marketing opportunities, conversion of this 
advantage into competitive food processing industries has proved to be a challenge in the state.  
There is low investment in assets and limited technology penetration across the food processing 
sector in the state, even though this sector contributes about 22 percent of the industrial output 
and represents 26 percent of gross value add of the state.  The food processing sector is largely 
unorganized and operates on a small scale.  Facilitating the development of organized Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) both for value addition and job creation, would require 
handholding, business facilitation services, and facilitation of access to financing, along with 
critical regulatory changes for agro and allied MSMEs to flourish in the state. 
 
12.     GoA recognizes that creating conditions for agriculture based rural transformation in the 
long term would require:  (i) a shift away from a focus on on-farm production towards value 
addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture value-chains; (ii) a focus on productivity 
towards resilience of agriculture production systems in order to deal with the effects of climate 
change; and (iii) creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a dynamic agri-business 
and enterprise sector in Assam.  Furthermore, GoA at the highest level is committed to 
transforming the agriculture and allied sector to a more commercial and market oriented 
production; promoting MSMEs and implementing necessary reforms for realizing the project 
goals. GoA has also stated its intention that this project will form the nucleus of a much larger 
government agribusiness and rural transformation program. Fundamentally this will involve 
mainstreaming of project’s initiatives in government programs and policies as well as 
convergence of various public programs to deliver along the objectives enshrined in this project. 
Especially the government will oversee the refocusing and strengthening of training and human 
resources program to support (agriculture) enterprise development activities in Assam.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
13.   The proposed World Bank support to this project is consistent with the current Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (2013-2017). The CPS outlines Bank support to India under 
the three pillars of integration, transformation and inclusion with a cross-cutting focus on 
improving governance, environmental sustainability and gender equality.  The proposed project is 
aligned along at least two of these three pillars – transformation, and integration.  Under 
transformation, the project will directly help achieve one of the intended outcomes of the CPS, 



which is increase investor confidence and inward financial flows into the agriculture sector (CPS 
para 43).  The broader objective would be to instill a collective entrepreneurial spirit where 
producers shift from being “price takers” of primary produce, with no or very little influence over 
the market to being more business and value focused.  A key project thrust will be on enhancing 
agglomeration of producers to improve economies of scale in producing, processing and 
marketing.  In parallel with this, the project will support agriculture and livestock productivity 
(including value and incomes) through essential technology transfer in production and improved 
post-harvest and market operations, and also explore and pilot possible financing modalities to 
support entrepreneurship and agri-business (CPS outcome 2.4 para 86 and 89).  Overall, the 
support of the project to the development of higher value commodities and more efficient supply 
chains will underpin ongoing structural transformation of the economy (CPS para 34).  Under 
integration, the project offers the opportunity to increase gross state domestic product (GSDP) 
growth by stimulating private sector investment and agri-enterprise development in Assam, a 
special category state. (CPS, Outcome 1.4).  
 
14.   The project will also leverage the pent-up demand and natural resource advantages of the 
state as well as improve the investment climate (CPS para 72).  In particular, the focus will be on 
processed food, agribusiness, logistics and infrastructure, and MSME finance and insurance. The 
project will establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills 
training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs (CPS, Outcome 
1.3). Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the WBG’s goal of promoting shared 
prosperity.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
15. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “increase value-added and 
improve resilience in the production and processing of selected agriculture commodities, focusing 
on small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs in targeted districts”.  
 
16. Project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the MSME 
segment.  Others would include farmer producer organizations, sector management companies, 
and other value chain participants.  During preparation, specific attention would be given to 
gender inclusion in project design and implementation arrangements. The methodology followed 
to identify targeted districts is elaborated in the Annex 3, attached to the PCN.

Key Results (From PCN)
17. The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  
 
a) Increase in value addition by agri-enterprises; 
b) New agri-enterprises established in the targeted districts; 
c) Number of jobs created, including for women (percent); 
d) Increase in value of agricultural marketed output per farm (in formal partnership);  
e) Increase in market oriented production – (% of farmer and area under cultivation); and  
f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage).

D.  Concept Description

18.   The proposed project would support, value addition in the production and post-harvest 
segments of selected agriculture value-chains; facilitate agribusiness investments through 


inclusive business models that provide opportunities to small farmers as well as stimulate the 
establishment of new small and medium agribusiness enterprises; and support resilience of 
agriculture production systems in order to better manage increasing production and commercial 
risks associated with climate change, in the targeted districts . The project would adopt a cluster 
strategy within the targeted districts to generate economies of scale; promote vertical and 
horizontal links between local agricultural enterprises; enable diffusion of innovations; leverage 
network externalities; and channel public support for services and infrastructure. By adopting a 
cluster approach, the project would enable all the value chain participants to develop competitive 
and innovative products that meet market demands rapidly and successfully. 
 
19.    The project would achieve the PDO by:  (i) promoting investments in agri-enterprises, 
reducing the business and transaction costs, facilitating access to finance for agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or policy change; (ii) 
supporting the development of a modern supply chain; improved information communication 
technologies (ICT) based farm information and intelligence services, and alternative marketing 
channels; and (iii) improving producer’s access to knowledge, technologies and infrastructure so 
that they are able to respond to market opportunities and climate variability. 
 
20.    By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions of the growth nexus (business 
environment, key infrastructure, access to basic services, local governance), the proposed project 
aims to remove key constraints to business development and strengthen the platform for growth in 
agriculture and allied sectors within targeted districts.  By doing so, it will contribute to the key 
aspects of the GoI, GoA and the Bank’s CPS strategic objectives related to faster and broader 
agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. In line with the PDO, the project will have 
the following components. 
 
Component A: Support to Agri Enterprise Development 
 
21. The focus of this component to enhance the pace of agricultural enterprise growth and 
employment in the targeted districts.  This would be done by establishing a cohesive institutional 
platform, and securing increased private sector investment in the development of value chains, 
processing and marketing in the targeted districts. 
 
Component B: Farm - Market Infrastructure Development 
 
22. The focus of this component is to establish a modern supply chain from farm to market that 
would enable farmers and other value chain participants to access new markets. This would be 
done by enabling secondary and tertiary processing that creates higher value for the produce; 
improving value realization at the farm level through improved sorting, grading and packing of 
produce that enhances the average price realized; supporting a supply chain infrastructure that 
prevents wastage and value erosion in transportation, and allows access to more distant markets; 
and supporting the development and up-gradation of basic and agriculture-specific infrastructure, 
including transportation linkages, warehousing capacity and wholesale market facilities. 
 
Component C: Market-led Production and Resilience Enhancement 
 
23.  The focus of this component is to enable farmers in the targeted districts to take advantage of 
the rapidly changing consumer demand and ensuring resilience of agriculture production systems 


in order to better manage increasing production and risks associated with climate change.  This 
would be done by diversification of their farm production; and introduction of climate resilient 
solutions. 
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Learning 
 
24. This component will ensure effective implementation of the project activities and monitor and 
evaluate project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes, building on implementation 
experience of AACP.  The component will support: (i) establishment and operations of a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), which will oversee and coordinate activities of the implementing 
agencies of the project; (ii) establishment and operations of Project Implementation Units in the 
respective implementing agencies; and (iii) setting up of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system for the project, including a project management information system, and contracting an 
external M&E agency to monitor project activities and impact. This component will also finance 
dedicated staffing for the project activities, consultancies, training and related material, office 
equipment, and incremental operational costs. The Project will provide investment and technical 
support for the establishment of a sound management information system and information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems and accompanying capacity strengthening of key 
personnel. 
 
25.      Green House Gas (GHG) Accounting: In accordance with guidelines for IDA 17 projects, 
GHG accounting for the proposed Project will be undertaken during the preparation phase. This 
analysis will help to measure the impact of the project on the GHG footprint and also guide 
investments that contribute to climate mitigation, given that world-over agriculture investments 
account of 25% of the GHG emissions. The conceptual framework of the proposed project 
indicates there could be reduced GHG emissions and carbon sequestration benefits as a result of 
interventions such as adoption of improved cropland management, plant nutrient management and 
conservation farming practices, soil health/fertility enhancement, whereas increased emissions 
and decreased carbon stocks could result from cropland expansion and increased electricity and 
fuel consumption during past harvest management, processing and transportation.  There is a 
paucity of specific carbon accounting data for the agri-horticulture sector.  The implementing 
agency will coordinate with the relevant departments to collect the relevant data for these 
analyses.  Furthermore, the recently concluded AACP and other government and donor-aided 
projects will provide a basis for developing carbon balance estimates for the proposed project.  
This accounting exercise will be undertaken using established methodologies that are consistent 
with the international best practice to measure GHG emissions in the proposed project.  The ex-
ante carbon balance tool developed by FAO has been selected as the primary tool for GHG 
accounting in agriculture. The analysis will be carried out by a World Bank team during the 
project preparation phase in close collaboration with state government counterparts and will be 
finalized by project appraisal.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
Though the project location and boundaries are yet to be established, it is expected to cover most of 
the state, and would comprise of critical landscape features, ranging from hills and mountains on the 
one hand and floodplains and wetlands on the other. Water quality in Assam has often come under 
scrutiny for presence of natural fluorides, iron and arsenic. Assam is also endowed with a good forest 


cover and rich biodiversity that is well protected with several designated Protected Areas. The 
project will support small infrastructure development including rural roads that may require land and 
leading to minimal adverse impact on people including those who belong to Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste and other vulnerable groups. Proposed agri-infrastructure development under the 
project could have adverse impacts on natural features, such as, wetlands, if not sited and built 
appropriately. Disposal of construction waste would require monitoring, as it could block natural 
drainage channels if dumped casually. Such impacts would necessitate an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) and management plans and/or framework for managing adverse environmental 
and social impacts and risks.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The state is well versed with the Bank’s safeguard policies, as it has, over the past several years, 
implemented the World Bank funded projects including the recently concluded Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (AACP) wherein the safeguards have been rated as Highly Satisfactory in 
the Implementation Completion and Results Report. The ARIAS society, earlier supported under 
AACP would be responsible for implementing the project’s environmental and social safeguards. 
ARIAS Society would be suitably staffed for this purpose. An ESA will be undertaken that would 
identify the potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The ESA would develop 
and include an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would have 
appropriate mitigation guidance for complying with the Bank’s safeguard polices. The proposed 
ESMF would draw from the experience of implementing the existing one for AACP and build upon 
new activities that would be supported under this project, including wider dissemination and use of 
the Integrated Pest Management Plan developed under AACP. A good reporting mechanism on 
safeguards already exists in AACP and will be continued. At present all project locations are not 
known, therefore the use of framework is proposed. The ESA would be undertaken based on a 
sample of locations covering most of the proposed investment activities under the project. Therefore, 
even though the nature and scope of investment activities would be known, it may so happen that 
actual physical locations may not be known until an advanced stage of preparation. Therefore, an 
ESA will be done during preparation but an ESMF would be used during implementation. As far as 
possible and as the project design evolves, the borrower would ensure that some of the sampling 
locations and sites for the ESA are actual locations/sites proposed for project interventions. In 
addition, the proposed ESMF would include a screening mechanism that would allow for preparation 
of specific EMPs to mitigate adverse impacts of infrastructure investments, once exact location and 
design of infrastructure activities are identified. These would be particularly required for rural feeder 
roads, rural markets and supply chain infrastructure. At this stage, neither the scope and nature of 
infrastructure investments nor the locations are known. By appraisal, the borrower will develop site-
specific EMPs for infrastructure whose locations have been determined and detailed technical 
designs completed.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Mridula Singh (GSU06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes An ESA is required as the project is likely to support 

new activities that were not included in the recently 



OP/BP 4.01 completed AACP.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The State has a widespread network of naturally 
occurring wetlands (beels) and would require 
mapping of potential impacts through project 
supported infrastructure and other agricultural 
investments.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is unlikely to bring any management 
changes to the State’s forest resources that are 
governed under a robust national law.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes There is likelihood of use of pesticides and other 
agrochemicals once project investments are realized. 
The project would promote the wider use of the Pest 
Management Plan and Integrated Pest Management 
Plan that was developed under AACP.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not impact any physical, cultural 
and/or religious sites and will be implemented in 
areas where agriculture is already practiced.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

Yes The policy is triggered, accordingly a Tribal 
Development Framework will be prepared to address 
impact. It will also include an action plan to ensure 
that equal opportunities are provided to access 
benefits.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The policy is triggered as land may be required for 
the small infrastructure and rural roads. Resettlement 
Policy Framework including Social Management 
Framework will be prepared.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not support construction, 
refurbishment and replacement of equipment etc. of 
any dams. It also does not support rehabilitation of 
existing or building any new irrigation schemes 
originating from existing dams in the State.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD During project preparation applicability of this policy 
would be determined based on a technical analysis.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No Project activities do not fall in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The safeguards documentation would require four to six months for completion from the time it is 
started. We expect it to be ready by September 2016.

















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































































47181-002: Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project


LOAN NUMBER 3434-TAJ(SF) GRANT NUMBER 0498-TAJ(SF)

FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

between

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED hex'

TAJ 47181



FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

FINANCING AGREEMENT dated between REPUBLIC OF
TAJIKISTAN (“Beneficiary”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Beneficiary has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;

(B) the Beneficiary has also applied to the Government of Japan, through 
the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”), for a grant of three million Dollars 
($3,000,000) to assist in financing Part B of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon 
terms and conditions set forth in a grant agreement between the Beneficiary and ADB 
(“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(C) ADB has agreed to provide financing by making a loan and a grant to 
the Beneficiary from ADB’s Special Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth 
herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations and Grant Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan 
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable 
to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth 
herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Loan Agreement", wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.

(b) The term “Borrower”, wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.02. All provisions of the Special Operations Grant 
Regulations of ADB, dated 7 February 2005 (“Grant Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Grant Agreement”, wherever it appears in the Grant 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.



2

(b) The term “Recipient”, wherever it appears in the Grant Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.03. Wherever used in this Financing Agreement, the 
several terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations have the 
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise 
requires. Additional terms used in this Financing Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ALRI” means the Beneficiary’s Agency of Land Reclamation and 
Irrigation;

(b) “CIS” means the Chubek Irrigation System;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time);

(d) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Financing Agreement;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, and agreed to between the Beneficiary and ADB;

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant; and including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding 
Consulting Services;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Beneficiary and cleared by 
ADB;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time);

(k) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(I) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Beneficiary and ADB;

(m) “Part" means a part of the Project as described in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;



3

(n) “PIO” means each any of the project implementation offices referred to 
in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(o) “PMO” means the project management unit referred to in paragraph 6 
of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations, means the ALRI or any 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Beneficiary to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and 
compliance with the EMP, including any corrective and preventative actions;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Works" means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project 
related services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but 
excluding Consulting Services; and

(v) “WUA” means water users’ association.

ARTICLE II

The Loan and the Grant

Section 2.01. ADB agrees to provide to the Beneficiary from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources, on terms and conditions set forth in this Financing Agreement:

(a) a loan in various currencies equivalent to thirteen million seven 
hundred fifty-eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR13,758,000) 
(“Loan”); and

(b) a grant in the amount of five million eight hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($5,850,000) (“Grant”).

Section 2.02. (a) The Beneficiary shall pay to ADB an interest
charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time.



4

(b) The term “grace period” as used in paragraph (a) of this Section 
means the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the 
amortization schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.04. The Beneficiary shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan and the Grant

Section 3.01. The Beneficiary shall cause the proceeds of the Loan 
and the Grant to be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance 
with the provisions of this Financing Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan and the Grant shall be 
allocated and withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Financing 
Agreement, as such Schedule 3 may be amended from time to time by agreement between 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Section 3. 03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grant in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022, and the Grant Closing Date for the purposes 
of Section 8.02 of the Grant Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or, in each case, such other 
date as may from time to time be agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Beneficiary shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Financing Agreement.



5

Section 4.02. (a) The Beneficiary, through the ALRI, shall (I)
maintain separate accounts and records for the Project, including separate accounts and 
records for the Loan and the Grant; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan and the Grant 
proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of 
the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Beneficiary shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Beneficiary’s financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Beneficiary, unless the Beneficiary shall 
otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Beneficiary shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Financing Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 9.01(e) of the Grant Regulations, respectively: the JFPR Grant 
Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Beneficiary 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Financing Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.02(c) of the Grant 
Regulations, respectively, to be included in the opinion or opinions to be furnished to ADB: 
the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of 
the Beneficiary, and is legally binding on the Beneficiary in accordance with its terms.



6

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Financing 
Agreement is specified for the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement for the purposes of 
Section 9.04 of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.04 of the Grant Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Beneficiary is designated 
as representative of the Beneficiary for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 11.02 of the Grant Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations and Section 11.01 of the Grant Regulations:

For the Beneficiary

Ministry of Finance
3, Akademikov Rajabovikh Avenue
734025 Dushanbe City
Tajikistan

Facsimile Numbers:

(992)372 213-329
(992)372 216-237

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6, ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2017.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Financing Agreement to be 
signed in their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be 
delivered at the principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

By <4
ABDUSALOM K( QURBONIYON 

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

__J/j7
CH^(G CHINGYU 

Country Director 
Tajikistan Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural production in the CIS
area of the Pyanj River Basin in the territory of the Beneficiary.

2. The Project shall comprise the following parts:

Part A - Modernization and operationalization of climate-proofed CIS water 
resource management infrastructure, including:

(a) modernization and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure and its climate-proofing;

(b) construction of sediment-excluding basin;

(c) modernization and rehabilitation of at least two cascade irrigation 
pumping systems (Urtaboz and Janubi); and

(d) capacity development of the ALRI staff through provision of equipment, 
training and development of monitoring and evaluation system;

Part B - Improvement of farm management capacity and water use skills, 
including:

(a) promotion of profitable farm management and efficient water use;

(b) production of high-quality seeds; and

(c) establishment and possible reorganization of WUAs and capacity 
development of WUAs and beneficiaries.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided to support the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2021.




11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds

General

1. The tables attached to this Schedule set forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant. Table 1 sets forth 
the allocation of the Loan proceeds to each such Category. Table 2 sets out the allocation of 
the Grant proceeds to each such Category (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set 
forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category 3 of Table 1 is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of the Loan proceeds and the Grant proceeds
and the withdrawal percentages set forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively,

(a) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant allocated to any Category 
appears to be insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that 
Category, ADB may, by notice to the Beneficiary, (i) reallocate to such 
Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, 
amounts of the Loan or the Grant which have been allocated to 
another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet 
other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot fully meet the 
estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such 
Category may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have 
been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant then allocated to any Category 
appears to exceed all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, 
by notice to the Beneficiary, reallocate such excess amount to any 
other Category.

Disbursement Procedure

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Financing Agreement and except
as ADB may otherwise agree, no withdrawals shall be made from the Loan Account and the 
Grant Account until the Beneficiary has issued a resolution authorizing (a) the PMO set up 
under the Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin Project financed through 
Grant No. 0352-TAJ(EF) to serve as the PMO for this Project; and (b) enhancing the PMO 
and establishing PIOs in Hamandoni, Farkhor and Vose.



13
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE 1

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
(SDR) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan 

Account

1 Part A (Civil Works; Vehicles, 
Pumps, Motors and
Auxiliaries)**

11,802,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed*

2 Part A (Office Equipment; 
Office Accommodation; 
Supplies and Others)**

319,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed

3 Interest Charge 502,000 100% of amount due

4 Unallocated 1,135,000

Total 13,758,000

‘Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary. 
“Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



14
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

TABLE 2

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF GRANT PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Grant Account

1 Part A (Machinery; PMO and 
PIO Salaries; Consulting 
Services)**

5,079,145 100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2 Part A (Survey, Study and 
Design; Trainings and 
Workshops; Office/Vehicle 
Operation and Maintenance)**

234,360 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3 Unallocated 536,495

Total 5,850,000

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary.
**Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Financing
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

3. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

4. The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The Beneficiary may 
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of 
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Beneficiary and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Beneficiary’s national 
competitive bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any 
modifications or clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB 
shall be set out in the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed 
modifications and clarifications shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Beneficiary shall not award any Works contracts until:

(a) the Beneficiary has granted the final approval of the IEE; and

(b) the Beneficiary has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP
into the Works contract.



16
Schedule 4

Consulting Services

7. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary shall apply Quality- and
Cost-Based Selection for selecting and engaging Consulting Services.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Good, Works and Consulting Services

11. Good, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project and Operation of 
Project Facilities; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project is implemented In accordance
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Beneficiary and ADB. In the 
event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Financing Agreement, the provisions of 
this Financing Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Beneficiary shall ensure that:

(a) the implementation of the Project does not affect, or be affected by, 
any of obligations and commitments of the Beneficiary under the 
international treaties entered into with regard to the Amy Darya River 
and the Pyanj River; and

(b) contractors, suppliers, and consultants under the Project have smooth 
and timely access to necessary construction, design, study, and 
survey sites, free of charge, including timely access to up to date 
information regarding security situations and arrangements at the 
international border with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

Environment

3. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities 
comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary relating to environment, 
health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project does not have any indigenous
peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS. In the event 
that the Project does have any such impact, the Beneficiary shall take ail steps required to 
ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary 
and with the SPS.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

5. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for
Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



18
Schedule 5

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Beneficiary with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the I EE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Prohibited List of Investments

6. The Beneficiary shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan and the Grant are
used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

7. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the core labor standards and the
Beneficiary’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Beneficiary shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Beneficiary's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of 
contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding 
the Project area, particularly women.

8. The Beneficiary shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set
forth in paragraph 7 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB.



19
Schedule 5

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Beneficiary shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to 
the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the 
right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and 
implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

12. The Beneficiary shall ensure that updated information on the Project is
provided on ALRI’s website, including information on the performance of the Project, 
business opportunities, bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings and summary 
progress reports of the Project.

Operation & Maintenance

13. The Beneficiary shall ensure that after the Project completion necessary funds
are made available for full O&M of the CIS through annual budgetary allocations and 
irrigation service fees. The Beneficiary shall ensure that, (a) no later than 1 year before the 
Project completion, the ALRI develops an Asset Management and O&M Plan for the CIS, 
satisfactory to ADB, which will, among other things, set out the required increases of annual 
budget allocations and the irrigation service fees, and stipulate that the irrigation service fees 
will be used exclusively for O&M of the CIS, including expenses for the services provided by 
local district offices of the WUA Support Unit under the ALRI; and (b) by the Project 
completion, the agreed O&M Plan is approved by the government resolution.

Counterpart Support

14. The Beneficiary shall ensure that necessary funding is made available for the
period from 1 January 2019 through the Project completion to fully finance staff of the Pyanj 
River Basin Organization and its sub-office in Gorno Badakhshan Autonomous province of 
the Beneficiary.

15. In addition to the foregoing, the Beneficiary shall ensure that the ALRI has
sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting 
Services contract.

Refund

16. If ADB determines that any amount of the Loan and the Grant has been used
in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Financing Agreement, the Beneficiary 
shall, upon notice by ADB to the Beneficiary, promptly refund such amount to ADB. Except 
as ADB may otherwise determine, ADB shall cancel all amounts refunded pursuant to this 
provision.







