























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21011

Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional 
Financing (P154238)

Parent Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Moldova
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, 

marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154238
Parent Project ID P118518
Borrower(s) Government of Moldova
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 04-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

30-Mar-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Economic growth and poverty reduction gains achieved over the last decade in Moldova have been 
fueled by strong remittance flows that triggered increased, import-served consumption. The decade-
long growth has not been accompanied by an increase in employment. On the contrary, total 
employment in Moldova declined by 27 percent over the period 2000-2010. Agriculture released 
most of the labor that found jobs through internal and external outward migration. Another 
macroeconomic negative resulting from a consumption-led growth model was the buildup of an 
alarming trade deficit. With the value of imports more than triple to that of exports, the trade gap 
has reached over 50 percent of GDP in 2008. The fallout from the global crisis of 2008, as well as 
the lingering crisis in Europe and the Russian Federation in 2014 (key migration labor destinations), 
exposed the fragility of this growth model. As remittances declined, domestic demand fell by 10 % 
and the real economy contracted by 6% in 2009. Moldova’s quick recovery from the crisis in 2010 
and 2011 has been again largely based on the restored supply of remitances, but also on increased 

agricultural prices and growing exports. Remittance flows have not grown much in 2014, and are 
expected to stall in 2015 primarily due to the marked depreciation of the Russian Ruble, tighter 
labor migration controls and a slowing economy in the Russian Federation.  
 
The lessons from Moldova’s development pattern over the past decade, have underlined the critical 
need for a second engine of growth – the revival of exports. As Moldova’s working population 
declines, export-led growth needs to come from investment and improvements in productivity and 
competitiveness. The Government of Moldova recognizes the need for an investment- and export-
led engine of the growth based on on increased capital investments, innovation and 
competitiveness.  The National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020”, reinforces the 
Government's commitment to a development paradigm based on a dynamic model driven by 
domestic and foreign investment and export-oriented sectors. In addition, the Government's reforms 
in 2011-2014 focused on achieving closer trade integration with the European Union, which 
culminated in the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and 
the European Union, complemented by a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement which 
came into effect on August 1, 2014. The latter, has brought about new and exciting opportunities 
for market diversification of the country's agro-food exports.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Recently, the country's shift to an export-led growth model has suffered a number of setbacks due 
to uncertainties with supply to the Russian market. Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the 
Russian Federation have been subject to various trade restrictions through 2013 and 2014 - starting 
with a ban on wines, followed by ban on meat and a nearly complete ban on fruits and vegetables, 
and canned goods. The most affected export items were wine, apples and plums. In 2013, prior to 
the bans, approximately thirty percent of the country's wine exports (valued at US$350 million), 
ninety three percent of apple exports (valued at US$43.7 million) and eighty percent of plum 
exports (valued at US$21.1) went to Russia.  The loss of the Russian Federation market represented 
a significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food 
produce, especially for apples and plums. There is very limited potential for meaningful import 
substitution. Moldovan imports of apples were only about 1,500 tons in 2013 (valued at US$1.34 
million) and imports of plums are negligible. Un-utilized processing capacity for apples and plums 
in the country is limited and has only absorbed additionally approximately 60,000 tons of apples 
and 40,000 tons of plums in 2014 (15% and 35% of output respectively). The resulting supply glut 
of apples and plums, compounded by an existing large stock of processed products has led to a 50% 
drop in the domestic market price for apples and plums. Similarly, as a result of the wine ban, and 
accumulating stocks in 2014, grapes are traded at 40% of the 2013 price.   
 
In recent years there have been significant productivity gains in the Moldovan horticulture sector 
due to significant investments and, these gains could easily be lost because of the impact of the 
Russian embargoes.  Productivity gains have contributed to a steady  increase in output and are 
likely to have come from stricter application of growing technologies, and/or replacement of old 
orchard/vineyards, more intensive production and use of modern technologies. This is a result of 
increased investment in the sector, which is a very positive development given Moldova’s 
comparative advantage in high value agriculture.  This transformation has been the result of a fairly 
long-drawn struggle, which is finally showing results. The embargos have the potential to have a 
major negative impact on fruit growers’ competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, 
modernization, as a result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.   


 
The majority of fruit growers is represented by small peasant farmers (66% for apples, 69% for 
plums, 70% for vineyards) and provides significant rural employment and incomes, for an 
estimated 350,000 people. A large share of these jobs now are either at risk or are yielding 
significantly lower pay due to the impact of the embargo. The resulting social consequences could 
be severe, as the highest poverty rates are already registered among the agriculture-related 
population: 21.7 percent of farmers and 31.3 percent of agricultural workers have been found poor 
in 2013, these two categories accounting for 31 percent of country's poor.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by 
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access for 
farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Compensatory Sales Support Grants
Comments (optional)
The new component will finance targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 
hectares, who sold apple, plums and grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will 
compensate the difference between the potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, 
with an aim of avoiding possible de-capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving 
it a much needed respite for reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 12.00 Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 12.00
Total 12.00

V. Implementation
The parent - Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) was approved by the Board on May 1, 
2012. It is financed by (i) an IDA credit in the amount of US$18.0 million; (ii) a fully-blended GEF 
grant of US$4.4 million; and (iii) a SIDA grant of US$3.0 million. The PDO is: to enhance the 
competitiveness of the country's agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety 
management system, facilitating market access for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental 
and sustainable land management practices. The ACP has the following components: Component 1: 
Enhancing Food Safety Management; Component 2: Enhancing market access potential; 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. The project 


became effective on September 24, 2012. The closing date for the ACP is June 30, 2017. 
 
The project was designed to contribute to the realization of the economic growth model described in 
the 2011-2014 Government Program aimed at enhancing export competitiveness, attracting 
investment and achieving closer trade integration with the EU. More specifically, the ACP is 
supporting the Government's ambitious efforts in reforming the food safety management system, 
efforts to improve farmers’ market opportunities through investment support (to bring about 
upgrades in post-harvesting infrastructure) and institutional development support (creation and 
strengthening of productive partnerships), and efforts to mainstream the use of good agricultural 
practices and sustainable land management.  
 
Project performance is currently rated “moderately satisfactory” for Implementation Progress (IP), 
“satisfactory” for the PDO, and “satisfactory” for procurement and financial management . Current 
commitments for the IDA credit stand at 70% , and generally progress continues to be solid across 
the project's three components at this phase of implementation.  Currently, disbursement under the 
IDA Credit is at US$3.6 million (20%), under the GEF grant at US$2.1 million (48%), and the 
SIDA grant at US$0.25 (8%). Disbursement rates under the IDA Credit are expected to reach 45% 
by the end of FY15. Procurement of goods, works and consulting services has considerably picked 
up in pace in 2014; calls for proposals for matching investment grants supporting the emergence of 
productive partnerships have been carried out and awards were made; capacity building activities 
have been increasing in scope and complexity. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing food safety management. There is solid progress in the implementation of 
this component. The country's Food Safety Agency, is a relatively new institution (established in 
2012) which has largely become functional due to the support of the project. Two major civil works 
activities are under way - the rehabilitation of the Food Safety Agency (FSA) building and the 
construction of the Border Inspection Point in Tudora on the country's Southern-Eastern border with 
Ukraine. Procurement of civil works for another three border inspection points - Leuseni (West), 
Giurgiulesti (South) and Criva (North) has been completed and works are expected to commence in 
the spring of 2015. Procurement of works for the construction of the country's national reference 
laboratory for safety of products of vegetable origin (Balti) has been completed. Capacity 
strengthening activities at the national reference laboratory for safety of products of animal origin 
and animal health aimed at future international accreditation are in full swing. Additionally, the FSA 
continues to receive support for legislative and regulatory improvements, capacity building 
activities, training and knowledge sharing with various European food safety institutions. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing market access potential. Progress in the implementation of this component 
has been very strong. One call for proposals for matching investment grants from emerging 
productive partnerships has been completed in the summer of 2014, and 8 producer groups received 
matching investment grant awards in an amount of US$2.1 million for a variety of investments in 
post-harvest processing of apples, table grapes and berries. A second call for proposals is currently 
under way until January 30, 2015. In parallel, outreach activities are under way to raise awareness 
about the project's opportunities for fruit and vegetable growers especially in light of on-going 
difficulties Moldovan agro-food exports have on the traditional Russian market, and a stringent need 
for reorientation of trade flows to different, more stable markets. 
 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management.  
Implementation of this component is progressing well. All activities related to the rehabilitation of 



protective shelter-belts are on schedule, and the equipment which was procured for these purposes is 
being utilized efficiently by two mobile mechanized agro-forestry squads. The component's 
sustainable land managed grant scheme has been launched and a first call for proposals yielded 
more than 80 applications that are currently under review. It is expected that about 30 awards will be 
made in the next few weeks, for an amount of approximately US$0.6 million.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC10068

Project Name National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
Region SOUTH ASIA
Country India
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- 
Education (5%), Information technology (5%)

Theme(s) Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development 
results (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor 
markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151072
Borrower(s) Republic of India
Implementing Agency Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

17-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

17-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

07-Aug-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

27-Oct-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
India is a lower middle-income country with per-capita GDP of US$ 1,499 (2013).  From 2001 to 
2011, India’s economy performed well, with sustained annual GDP growth of 8%.  High rates of 
investment and savings contributed to this growth, as did strong exports. Yet more than 400 million 
people in India still subsist on less than US$ 1.25/day.  India faces challenges in reducing extreme 
poverty, curbing high malnutrition and achieving shared prosperity.  The Government of India has 
emphasized increased farm productivity as fundamental to India’s poverty reduction and growth 
strategy. Building relevant skills sets has been a persistent challenge across the economy.  
Educational institutions, particularly at the tertiary level, are critical to accelerate India’s emergence 

in global markets, yet teaching is poorly linked with labor market demand, research and 
development, thereby producing graduates with limited problem-solving skills.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture in India employs 52% of the labor force and is the main source of livelihood for 80% of 
the rural poor, but contributes only 14% to GDP and 10% to total exports. Women constitute about 
60% of the economically active population in agriculture and livestock. The Green Revolution in 
the late 1960s and 1970s, with investment in new seeds, production technologies, cultivation 
methods and irrigation practices, improved agricultural productivity and made India food-secure.  
Where the Green Revolution flourished – Haryana and Punjab – are today among the higher income 
states in the country.  However, agricultural productivity growth declined in the 1990s, rebounded 
in the 2000s, and today still remains low. Moreover, this growth has been largely price driven and 
heavily reliant on inputs rather than efficiency gains.  
 
At current Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, India’s domestic agricultural output will meet 
59% of the country’s 2030 projected food demand (GAP Report 2014).  Agricultural higher 
education can be the engine for increasing productivity through better skilled technicians, 
innovative research and extension linked to technologies and practices, common under the Land 
Grant model.  A 2014 Bank agricultural sector study argues that while India doubled investment in 
agricultural research and extension (0.4% of AgGDP in 1981 to 0.96% in 2011), the quality of 
innovation has suffered along with institutional capacity to adapt and remain relevant.  
Reawakening the “research-education-extension nexus” intrinsic to the Land Grant model can 
propel India’s agricultural innovation, farmers’ technology adoption and agriculture’s overall 
transformation.  In Brazil, for example, the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education 
Personnel (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) have worked together to build and maintain high-quality faculty in universities nationwide. 
 
The National Agricultural Education System comprises 56 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 
one Central Agricultural University, and four Research Institutes with deemed-to-be university 
status.    The first SAU – G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantanagar – was 
established in 1960 based on the US Land Grant model emphasizing the integration of research, 
education and extension.  Under the Indian Constitution, statutory control of agriculture (including 
agricultural education) lies with the respective State Governments while the Union Government 
coordinates and sets educational standards. In 1996, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) began voluntary SAU accreditation to establish norms and quality standards for agricultural 
higher education.  ICAR continues its financial support to SAUs for accreditation; to date, ICAR 
has accredited 43 SAUs.   
 
The face of Indian agriculture has changed.  Women producers must participate in and benefit from 
agricultural research, education, and extension. There is also growing private sector demand for 
skilled labor in all aspects of agriculture, particularly high-value agro-industry, food processing, and 
specialized knowledge-intensive areas such as water efficiency, food safety, and trade.  A 2014 
assessment of human resource requirements shows an annual deficit of 14,000 in satisfying the 
demand for degree holders in agricultural and allied sciences.   A 2010 National Academy of 
Agriculture Research Management study found a jobs deficit of 50% in agriculture and allied 
sciences relative to the anticipated demand in 2020.   SAUs must adapt to the rapidly changing 
agricultural sector and its increasing knowledge intensity, and prepare the high-quality human 
resources essential for any technology and innovation system to succeed.   



 
Yet the once-impressive SAUs established during the Green Revolution have become less effective 
and less relevant in stimulating transformative change in Indian agriculture. The research-education-
extension synergy — strong in earlier years — has waned substantially and academic inbreeding 
has stunted teaching curricula, eroded faculty quality and weakened research and extension 
outcomes.  As a result, the SAU system is not attracting high-quality students to equip the next 
generation of talent to lead India’s agricultural growth, principally in the private sector. 
ICAR has taken the lead in analyzing the challenges facing agricultural higher education in India.  
This has led to an ambitious reform agenda for SAUs, spelled out in the 2013 Bhubaneshwar 
Declaration, emphasizing: (a) transparent governance; (b) financial and academic autonomy; (c) 
adequate and consistent funding; (d) standards and accreditation; (e) public-private partnerships; (f) 
revamped teaching curricula and methodologies; and (g) international cooperation.   Several 
challenges confront SAUs, among these: 
 
• Poor governance: Vice-chancellors tend to be political appointees and often have little role 
in setting budget priorities or allocations.  Overall accountability is weak and not linked to desired 
academic outcomes. 
• High faculty vacancy rates and pervasive academic inbreeding: Some 56% of SAU faculty 
positions are vacant, with minimal recent recruitment, leading to heavy workloads, poor teaching 
performance and scarce time available for research or extension. Limited contacts with national or 
international centers of excellence and weak linkages with industry, farms and the private sector 
have led to academic stagnation, at a time when competitiveness requires more such interaction. 
There are few incentives to spur faculty productivity in teaching, research or extension. 
• Disconnect between agricultural education and employment: The private sector generates 
nearly one-half of agricultural employment, yet curricula remain focused on the shrinking 
opportunities in the public sector. Importantly, curricula lack a problem-solving orientation. SAUs 
must strengthen job-driven programs, including entrepreneurship-focused courses, to build avenues 
for off-farm work and facilitate technology transfer from lab-to-land.  
• Capital development and financial management:   Salaries comprise up to 90% of SAUs’ 
budgets, funding is almost entirely sourced from the public sector and has not kept pace with 
increasing student admissions.  In contrast, Michigan State University, a model for Indian SAUs, 
sources 10% of its annual budget from public funds. SAUs must begin to raise their own resources 
through fee-based/market-oriented programs, sales of proprietary seed/planting material, 
consultancies and capital development initiatives. 
• Meeting globalization: Greater infusion of frontier science subjects (e.g., biotechnology, 
nanotechnology, precision and climate-resilient agriculture, information and communication 
technology), good trade practices, ethics of intellectual property rights and genetically modified 
crops, and market intelligence have become critical to promote efficiency, awareness, equity, and 
competitiveness in agriculture as India strives to cement its role as a global player in agriculture. 
• Forging service market development: Staffing of Agricultural Technology Management 
Agencies (ATMAs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras-KVKs (Agriculture Science Centers) and other 
professional private and public agricultural service providers will require business and technical 
skills to meet the knowledge demanded by farmers, particularly women.  
 
The World Bank and ICAR have a long and fruitful collaboration, most recently through the 
National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP), National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) 
and sector work.  The current ICAR reform priorities require further refinement and focus, and 
ICAR has requested World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed project. 

The challenges faced by SAUs mirror those faced in general by higher education in India.  The 
needs of the agricultural sector resonate with other sectors, i.e., highly trained workforce and 
relevant cutting-edge research.  The Bank’s Agriculture and Education Global Practices are 
collaborating on the proposed project to ensure that the SAU reform process benefits from 
innovations in both sectors across India and internationally.  Through strategic priority interventions 
at the Central and State levels, the proposed project would have far-reaching and long-term impacts 
on agricultural higher education in India.  The project would also incorporate disbursement-linked 
Indicators (DLIs) to build time-bound financial incentives for SAUs and ICAR in pursuit of the 
proposed reform agenda.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project supports the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013-17 and addresses the 
three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion. These engagement areas 
foresee increased agricultural productivity and also support quality improvements of higher 
education to create a more skilled workforce that continuously improves the productivity of key 
sectors, including agriculture.   Further, by working with SAUs in low-income states, the proposed 
project supports the CPS strategy of improving their economic performance.  
 
The proposed project is a multi-Global Practice collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is 
expected to support activities and results directly related to cross-cutting strategic areas of climate 
change, jobs, gender and public-private partnerships.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to increase educational relevance and quality in selected State 
Agricultural Universities. 
 
Equity, especially gender and caste-based equity, is a cross-cutting theme of the proposed project 
and would be tracked through the key performance indicators.

Key Results (From PCN)
The following key performance indicators are proposed: 
 
1. Percentage change in SAU faculty scientific effectiveness as measured by h-index [quality]; 
2. Percentage change in level and source(s) of SAU revenue [quality]; 
3. Increased awareness and uptake of locally-relevant agricultural research [relevance];  
4. Increased student retention rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST [quality, relevance 
and equity]; and  
5. Increased satisfaction rates of students, farmers and agribusinesses with SAU curricula and 
service provision [quality and relevance].

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project addresses strategic reforms in agricultural higher education at the state level 
(targeting SAUs) and the central level (focused on ICAR).  Selected SAUs would pilot a range of 
innovations in education, research and extension under diverse settings.   In so doing, these SAUs 


will test options to create 21st century educational institutions to successfully meet the current and 
future challenges facing India’s agricultural sector. These institutions will attract a diverse cadre of 
high-quality students, train them with labor-market relevant skills, nurture research talent and 
ensure knowledge flows between lab and land. The second set of reforms will empower ICAR by 
strengthening its capacity to provide strategic support to SAUs nationwide.     
 
The project would likely consist of three components: 
 
Component 1 – Support to State Agricultural Universities – addresses the need to raise educational 
quality and relevance in SAUs and create knowledge and technology hubs for priority themes in 
support of agricultural transformation.  The component, which would absorb most of project 
finance, would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 1a – Investments toward 21st Century State Agricultural Universities – would 
target reform-ready SAUs and States (applying verifiable criteria) and support Institutional 
Development Plans (IDPs), developed through multi-stakeholder processes, that undertake key 
governance reforms, finance new and refurbished research and teaching facilities, curricula and 
faculty development, training for administrators, strengthening locally relevant research, student 
placement and technical assistance. Supported IDPs would also emphasize universities’ exploring of 
alternative income streams, such as: tuition; alumni contributions; competitively-selected research 
projects; patents; joint ventures; extension services; consultancy services; and special courses for 
mid-career professionals. These diverse activities would not only generate own financial resources 
for SAUs, but also link them to the national and global knowledge economy, thereby further 
enhancing their relevance.  By focusing on income-earning capacity, SAUs would also create 
openings for sustained private sector participation.  Suitable twinning arrangements with foreign 
universities would also be explored, as would innovative pilots for research dissemination and 
mechanisms for internal revenue generation.  
 
Sub-component 1b – Investments in Centers for Advanced Agricultural Science and Technology – 
would support SAUs in establishing interdisciplinary centers for teaching, research and extension on 
critical agriculture and rural development topics (e.g., agricultural adaptation to climate change; 
land and water use efficiency, scalable technology and mechanization, agro-industry, agro-
entrepreneurship).  Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform the selection of geographic 
locations and core themes under the sub-component.  The sub-component would finance research 
and teaching equipment, faculty and scientist development fellowships, scholarships, and costs 
associated with twinning arrangements with similar centers outside and within India. 
 
Component 2 – Investments in ICAR for Leadership in Agricultural Higher Education – would: (a)  
empower ICAR by financing its own internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness in coordinating, 
guiding and managing agricultural research and education nationwide; and (b) support ICAR in its 
interactions with SAUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that increase the 
quality and relevance of agricultural education.   The component would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2a – Investments in ICAR to support excellence in SAUs – would leverage ICAR’s 
comparative advantage in assessing systemic challenges ac ross all SAUs and incubating solutions.  
Among the interventions financed would be: (a) digital information systems for SAU data collection 
and analysis to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher education; (b) an improved curricula 
review process to tighten its relevance in today’s dynamic job market; (c) enhanced methods to 



consolidate and disseminate global best-practices (e.g., benchmarking) in agricultural higher 
education; and (d) institutionalization of stakeholder and advisory inputs to better inform research, 
education and extension across the SAU system.          
Subcomponent 2b – ICAR innovation grants to SAUs – would be open to all SAUs nationwide and  
support interventions that would include: (a) quality assurance (e.g., accreditation); (b) next-
generation management information and financial management systems to increase transparency 
and administrative efficiency; (c) campus student placement offices to facilitate stronger linkages 
between academics and future employment opportunities; (d) theme-based competitive grants to 
students, faculty and academic departments to promote inter-state and international collaboration, 
including matching funds from the private sector; and (e) needs-based equipment, training and 
technical assistance.  
 
Component 3 – Project Management and Learning – would support ICAR’s project management, 
primarily through its Education Division, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall 
project implementation.  The component would also support the formation of an external advisory 
board to guide ICAR throughout project implementation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 165.00 Total Bank Financing: 82.50
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 82.50
 International Development Association (IDA) 82.50
 T

























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC27800

Project Name Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s) Other rural development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), 

Rural markets (40%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153892
Borrower(s) PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Implementing Agency Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

29-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

30-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

30-Jun-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

15-Dec-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track I - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Background. China's success in reducing extreme poverty during the economic reform period 
(1978?2014) is widely recognized. Over the last three decades, China has lifted over 750 million 
people out of poverty, which represents 89 percent of global poverty reduction during that period. 
World Bank estimates show that the number of absolute poor (that is, those people consuming less 
than $1.25 per day in PPP terms) in China declined from 84 percent in 1981 to 6.3 percent in 2011. 
Based on different poverty lines, official government estimates confirm a similar sharp decline in 
poverty over these years, and the number of the people who lived on less than US$2 per day was 
approximately 367 million or 27.2 percent of the total population. Using China's rural poverty line 
of annual per capital net income below CNY 2,300 (2010 constant process and which is slightly 
above the 1.25US$/day in PPP terms), the number of poor people living in rural areas declined to 
70.2 million in 2014. This represents continued decline of rural poverty from 17.2 percent in 2010 
to 8.5 percent in 2013. 

 
Economic growth has been a key driver for poverty reduction in China. From 1981 to 2011, real 
GDP per capita grew at average annual rate of 9.1 percent. The relationship between annualized 
GDP growth and poverty reduction during this period suggests that poverty headcount index 
(measured by US$ 1.25 per capita PPP line) fell annually by 0.99 percentage points for each 
percentage point increase of the GDP per capita. Improvements in access to public services, such as 
education and health, has been another driver of poverty reduction. All levels of education, 
employment in non-agricultural activities, and migration have been identified as critical forces 
driving poverty reduction. 
 
Geographically, the remaining pockets of poverty, including chronic poverty, are largely 
concentrated in rural areas, especially in mountainous and remote areas in western provinces of 
China with ethnic minorities. These areas are usually characterized by challenging natural 
environment with water scarcity, low soil fertility and poor endowment with natural resources. The 
Government has classified 14 zones (crossing provincial boundaries) as the focus for its poverty 
alleviation efforts. The 14 zones contain 680 nationally designated poverty counties which benefit 
from special financial support under the government??s rural poverty alleviation programs. Majority 
of these poverty counties are concentrated in mountainous areas of central and western China and 
among ethnic minority and other disadvantaged groups, including people with disabilities and 
elderly.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Guangxi ranks the fifth province in the nation in terms of the absolute poor numbers.  Out of its 
total population of 52.4 million in 2013 there were 6.3 million poor people Guangxi which gives 
poverty incidence rate of 14.9 percent.  Majority of these poor live in rural areas and over 80 
percent of the poor people are from ethnic minority groups. Some 17.1 million people belong to 
various ethnic minority groups, making it a largest ethnic minority population in China. The 
province has 28 national level designated poverty counties and it is a recipient of a significant 
portion of national poverty reduction funds from the central government. In 2013, the net income 
per capita in these counties remained 59.6 percent of the national average.  The main causes of the 
poverty are low levels of human capital (poor education attainment levels and lack of skills needed 
to participate in modern economy) in particular in mountainous rural areas; poor natural resources 
base and limited infrastructure (roads, water and electricity). 
 
China has seen a rapid growth in the number of farmer cooperatives since the Law on Specialized 
Farmer Cooperatives promulgated in 2006. In March 2015 there were about 1.3 million specialized 
cooperatives in China. In some of the proposed project counties, formally registered cooperatives 
were almost non-existent before 2009. Their numbers are now growing rapidly and cooperatives are 
allowing both enhanced presence of the agribusiness sector and small entrepreneur initiatives. 
However, while most cooperatives are now recognized as economic entities, they are often small-
scale and lack management skills. The project is expected to benefit from the national legal 
framework for farmer cooperatives, which is expected to be updated in 2015.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), approved in 2012.  
The project would support the CPS's strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 


enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China's Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed PDO is to increase income opportunities for rural households in selected poverty 
counties of Guangxi.

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by: (a) the number of project beneficiaries joining 
a new organizational arrangement decomposed by poverty levels and gender; and (b) the number of 
project supported cooperatives making profit.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Area: The proposed project areas are located in the rural areas of the Dian Gui Mountain 
Degraded Area. Within this area 10project counties under the two cities of Baise and Hechi are 
proposed. These include: Tiandong, Tianlin, Leye, Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, and Pingguo 
County, and Yizhou City. All of the selected counties/city are characterized by a particular high 
level of poverty combined with poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water management, 
limited availability of farm land,low levels of technology and a high percentage of ethnic minorities. 
 
Proposed Project Components: The proposed project would consist of the following four 
components with a preliminary cost estimate of US$182 million including a Bank loan of US$100 
million and counterpart funding of about US$82 million equivalent implemented over five years: 
 
a) Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. The component aims to address 
market failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key 
industries with a particular focus on linking poor rural households with higher value markets. The 
component would finance the Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), which would provide grant 
financing to newly or existing cooperatives. It would also aim to establish Competitive Grant Fund 
for Enterprises which would provide matching grants to finance enterprise investments in order to 
demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor farmers/households.  
 
b) Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services. The component would support 
the establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value 
chain/key industry development under the Component 1. It would provide financing for rural 
infrastructure such as rural roads, small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure, small water 
storage facilities, land levelling, IT infrastructure, public market facilities, etc. The component 
would also support public services, such as product certification, developing and registration of 
local/regional brands, branding and protection of ethnic minority product features, market and 
production risk management as well as strategic product marketing and promotion.  
 
c) Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. The component would improve and 
facilitate investments in poor areas by existing and new entrepreneurs and business entities such as 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives through establishing 



business incubation centers and risk management instruments.  
 
d) Component 4: Project Management and M&E. The component would strengthen and 
develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices. It 
would aim to establish a monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 182.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 82.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
 Total 182.00

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Contact: Licheng Yao (Mr.)
Title: Director, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 86-10-68552064
Email: yaolicheng@sina.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center






























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA15898

Project Name Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Myanmar
Sector(s) Irrigation and drainage (40%), Agricultural extension and research 

(30%), Crops (30%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development 

(20%), Climate change (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147629
Borrower(s) Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 22-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

24-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

23-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Myanmar is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia with a land area of about 654,000 
square km. It is located between Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, and Thailand, with more than 
2,800 miles of coastline. It is also one of the poorest countries in East Asia, with an estimated 
poverty headcount between 26 and 37 percent, depending on the methodology used, among its 
population of around 52 million. The new government which took in office in March 2011 has 
introduced sweeping political and economic reforms. Myanmar is now embarking on a triple 
transition: from an authoritarian military system to democratic governance; from a centrally 
directed economy to a market-based economy; and from 60 years of conflict to peace in the border 
areas. From a strategic point of view, agriculture is of central importance for achieving the twin 
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The sector accounts 
for about 36 percent of the GDP, which is largest share of GDP among ASEAN members. Rice 
production constitutes about 30 percent of agricultural GDP and covers 70 percent of cultivated 
land. The sector generates about 53 percent of total employment and is source of livelihoods for 
about 70 percent of population who live in rural areas. The poverty headcount, which ranges from 
26 to 37 percent depending on methodologies, is highest in upland areas, but in absolute terms most 

rural poor live in the Dry Zone (34 percent), followed by the Delta region (25 percent), according to 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic carried out by the World Bank Group in 2014. In the lowland 
areas of the Delta and the Dry Zones where population densities are highest, poverty is associated 
with landlessness or limited farmland holdings. The rural poor in these areas depend primarily on 
farm income generation and on-farm seasonal and other informal labor opportunities. Among the 
rural households who own land persistent poverty stems from a combination of low productivity of 
farming systems and high vulnerability of these systems to adverse weather events, especially 
drought in areas featuring limited or unreliable access to irrigation services. The government places 
high priority on the development of the agriculture sector and sees it as the basis for food security, 
poverty reduction, job creation, and export promotion.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Myanmar has a favorable agricultural potential. It has abundant water resources -- 20,870 m3 per 
person compared to the Asia-wide average of 3,948 m3 per person -- and relatively abundant 
agricultural land, which translates into the highest agricultural land per worker in the East Asia and 
Pacific (EAP) region of about 1.1 ha/worker, compared to 0.8 ha/worker in Thailand and Cambodia 
and less than half of Myanmar figure in Vietnam and Indonesia). According to the Myanmar 
Census of Agriculture (2010), the average farm area is 2.6 hectares, which is the second largest in 
EAP after Thailand (3.1 ha) (and about five times of that prevailing in Vietnam’s Mekong Delta 
region). Finally, it has diverse agro-ecological conditions which would allow it to produce a wide 
range of temperate, sub-tropical and tropical crops. The current agricultural productivity is 
constrained by under-supply of public services (extension, basic education), low levels of 
technology adaption and farm mechanization, insecure irrigation water supply, limited access to 
affordable credit suitable for agricultural production cycles, and rising labor costs that have trapped 
farmers in poverty even within double cropping systems in irrigated areas. There is a lack of an 
overarching and clear agricultural sector strategy in Myanmar to guide public sector and donor 
spending programs. The effectiveness of current public spending programs is also affected by the 
nature of agricultural services provided to smallholders. Too often, public goods and services 
provided to farmers, such as irrigation and extension, are supply driven with little consideration of 
farmer interests.  For example, farmers’ crop choices could be sometimes restricted by local 
authorities at regional and district level who make decisions on water allocations. The limited 
extension services are often focused on the promotion a single crop rather than helping farmers to 
overcome problems they are facing in their farming systems, such as soil infertility and fertilizer 
use, pest management, increasing labor cost, etc. At the same time, farmers’ incentives to invest in 
better water, soil and crop management technologies may be constrained by their lack of security on 
water and land use rights, as well as issues related to the underdeveloped marketing systems and 
high volatility of agricultural prices. Many irrigation schemes function below their potential 
because of inappropriate operation of reservoirs and a lack of responsive irrigation system 
management.  For example, while about 2 million hectares are equipped with irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure, a second crop is being grown on only about 28 percent of this area 
(2011/12). This may reflect both technical deficiencies as well as uncertainties farmers are facing in 
marketing their crops. While primary irrigation structures (dams, canals) seem in general in good 
shape there are problems in getting water to farmer fields. With improved management and a 
change in cropping patterns, including to non-rice crops, it is possible to expand the cropping areas 
and cropping intensity. This may necessitate minor structural alterations to the irrigation schemes to 
improve drainage and, for some fields, to which improves in-field drainage through land leveling. 
However, improving irrigation management is not sufficient to increase farm incomes. This is 

because farmers often do not possess the necessary agronomic technologies and skills to take 
advantage of an improved access to irrigation. The current public extension system is under-
resourced and extension personnel rarely visit farmers to provide advice on the correct fertilizers 
rates to use improved technologies such as improved seeds. There is also some reluctance by 
farmers to change from growing rice to more water efficient crops, such as legumes and sesame. 
This may be partly caused by the rigidity of irrigation systems which does not offer enough 
flexibility in on-field water delivery and thus result in a lack of control over water levels on 
individual farm plots. The general under-capitalization of smallholder farming systems in Myanmar 
caused by decades of public under-investment and policy inefficiency fuels the risk of a vicious 
cycle of declining terms of trade. The development of smallholder agriculture in Myanmar thus 
requires significant public investments in institutional development, technology generation and 
dissemination, rural infrastructure, and human capital for years to come.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) has made significant investments in irrigation infrastructure bet 
ween the 1980s and 2000s which can serve as platform for development of smallholder farming 
systems. Many of these schemes host large numbers of smallholders who have the potential to 
respond to public investments under a supportive environment. These schemes would offer good 
opportunities for landscape-based rural development approaches that address agricultural, natural 
resource management, and social development goals.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the selected 
existing irrigation sites in Bago East, Nay Pyi Taw, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions.

III. Project Description
Component Name
1. Irrigation and Drainage Management
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance more responsive and reliable provision of irrigation and drainage 
services in the project areas to enable an increase in irrigation area coverage, a resulting better farm 
productivity and better distribution of benefits between upstream and downstream users. It will 
initiate institutional change required for the provision of farmer-responsive irrigation services and 
finance the improvement and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure covering about 
35,000 ha within up to 8 selected schemes in the project regions and will pilot 2-3 small land 
improvement sites in these schemes. The component would support also inclusive land 
administration activities in the selected project irrigation sites.

Component Name
2. Farm Advisory and Technical Services
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance MOAI technology development and farm advisory services at 
target townships which host selected irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase 
farm productivity. It will support quality seed production, soil nutrition management, integrated pest 
management, agricultural extension services, and farm mechanization.

Component Name
3. Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)


This component seeks to support the project coordination, technical support, communication 
activities, monitoring, and evaluation.

Component Name
4. Contingent Emergency Response
Comments (optional)
This component allows a rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components to provide 
emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an eligible crisis or emergency.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 100.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 100.00

V. Implementation
The MOAI will be the implementing agency of the project. The Project will be governed at the 
Union level by the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and at the township level by the 
Township Agricultural Coordination Committees (ACC). The project will be managed by the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be integrated within the existing structures of 
Department of Irrigation (ID). The PMU will be located in Nay Pyi Taw in MOAI headquarters. 
PMU would be responsible for day-to-day management and coordination of the project. It will be 
responsible for the project financial management and procurement functions.  It will ensure that 
annual work plans are prepared, budgeted and implemented in a timely manner, and that 
management of project funds is in line with the provisions of the project’s eligibility guidelines. The 
PMU will be responsible for management of the Designated Accounts; disbursement of project 
funds and replenishment of the project bank accounts and preparing and submitting withdrawal 
applications; and consolidation of annual work plans, budget planning, arrange for project annual 
audit, project reporting and M&E.  
 
Implementation of the project activities will be carried out by five technical departments 
(Department of Irrigation/ID, Department of Agriculture/DOA, Department of Agricultural 
Research/DAR, Agricultural Mechanization Department/AMD, and Settlements and Land Records 
Department/SLRD) through their central, regional, district and township level structures. ID will be 
the lead agency for the implementation of the Component 1, with technical inputs from SLRD and 
AMD, and DOA would be the lead agency for Component 2, with technical inputs from DAR and 
AMD. The implementation of filed activities will be done by respective township level staff with the 
supervision and technical backstopping from the team of central/regional/district level Subject 
Matter Specialists (SMS). The implementing departments are responsible for the initiation of the 
procurement activities as per work plan, provision of technical specifications and TORs to PMU and 
serve as members of the evaluation committee; accounting for funds on their respective Operating 
Accounts and at district level accounts and provision of financial information to PMU for the 
compilation of the financial documents; and preparation of the annual work plans of their respective 
sub-components and activities, and provision of information and indicators for the PMU for the 


consolidated project reporting. The ACCs are township level structural coordination bodies, which 
are responsible for the coordination of crop planning and extension activities, and makes irrigation 
water allocation and distribution decisions. The main function of the ACC under the project would 
be to provide a platform for joint (MOAI-farmer) planning and monitoring of project activities in 
targeted irrigation schemes. Implementation of the project activities at the township level will be 
done by the Project Implementation Committees, which is a sub-committee under ACC, and it 
includes township level staff of the implementing MOAI departments.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

Comments (optional)

VII. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Contact: U Maung Maung Win
Title: DG, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 9567410450
Email: maungmaungwin58@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Contact: U Khin Zaw
Title: Deputy Minister
Tel: 9567413778
Email: deputyminister.irrigation@gmail.com




























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC974

Project Name Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor 
Areas Project (P133326)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and 
research (10%)

Theme(s) Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural 
policies and institutions (20%)

Lending Instrument Specific Investment Loan
Project ID P133326
Borrower(s) International Department, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency State Council's Leading Group for Poverty Reduction(LGPR), Foreign 

Capital Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-May-2013

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

28-May-2013

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

20-Feb-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Aug-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Chinese Government has always made poverty reduction an important goal and task of national 
development and China’s success in reducing poverty has been remarkable, an achievement that is 
acknowledged worldwide.  In the mid-1980s, the Government started the development-oriented 
poverty reduction programs in rural areas. Subsequently, the Government formulated and 
implemented the Seven-year Priority Poverty Reduction Program (1994-2000) and the Outline for 
Poverty Reduction and Development of China’s Rural Areas (2001-2010). After three decades of 
successful poverty alleviation and strong economic growth that has lifted some 600 million people 
out of poverty, the rate of poverty reduction, however, is beginning to show signs of becoming less 

responsive to broad-based growth. In addition, with increasing rural-urban disparities and diverging 
living standards, the Government recognized that the number of remaining rural poor was likely to 
be underestimated and adjustments to the previous poverty reduction policy were needed to better 
understand the patters of the remaining rural poverty and to integrate traditional rural poverty 
reduction with rural-urban transformation and urbanization policies.  
 
Consequently, in 2011, the Government revised the rural poverty line from CNY1,196 (2009) to 
CNY2,300 (US$361) which increased the number of rural poor from 27 million in 2010 to 128 
million in 2011. In addition, the State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and 
Development released the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural 
Areas (2011-2020) to provide a new strategic direction for addressing rural poverty. The strategy 
complements the traditional geographical targeting of designated poverty counties with the concept 
of adjacent destitute mountain areas of which 14 are prioritized for comprehensive regional 
development investments. The new strategy aims to eliminate hunger and elementary needs by 
2020, achieve a growth rate in rural per-capita income in poor areas that is above the national 
average, and promote the convergence of human development indicators and public services 
coverage across rural and urban areas. To narrow the rural-urban gap, the strategy lays out a broad 
approach that includes rural industrialization based on comparative advantage, infrastructure 
development, relocation and village consolidation, rural-urban integration, comprehensive public 
service provision and expansion of household-based social protection programs, such as the 
minimum living allowance (dibao), rural pension, and healthcare, and education, family planning, 
and environmental management.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The project is proposed to be implemented in Gansu, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces.  The three 
provinces face the common challenge of persistent rural poverty in remote rural areas.  Many of the 
project areas are traditional semi-subsistence areas where the poverty rate ranges between 30 to 50 
percent.  Agriculture remains an important source of local employment and income but geographic 
and climatic conditions, labor migration, underinvestment, and underdeveloped infrastructure pose 
challenges to future agricultural development.  In all three provinces, a gradual restructuring of the 
agricultural sector is needed to allow productivity and farm income to increase and to overcome 
constraints to agriculture modernization.  
 
Gansu Province.  Project counties are situated in the Liupan Mountains of Gansu in northwestern 
China.  Project areas have comparative advantages in horticulture, and several counties have 
successfully developed advanced production and marketing bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal 
herbs, and potato.  Still, rural poverty is high, often above 40 percent.  Poverty appears not so much 
rooted in poor production potential but more in the dominance of enterprises in the horticulture 
sector which appear to capture a considerable share of revenue in the value-chain while relatively 
little value is reaching the household or farm level.  One of the challenges in Gansu under this 
project is to strengthen the institutional environment for smallholders through the promotion of 
effective farmer cooperative arrangements that allow farmers to participate effectively in the 
modernization of the sector and to benefit from the high-value agricultural production chains. 
 
Sichuan Province.  Project areas are located in the Wumeng and Wuliang Mountains of southern 
Sichuan.  They are characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and very limited flat 
or terraced land for farming.  Per capita farmland is often less than half a mu or about 0.03 hectares.  
Altitudes within one county range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and 


agro-climatic conditions vary widely.  Alpine meadows and shrublands are generally used of 
livestock grazing, often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At 
lower elevations, steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. 
 
Local communities belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority.  Yi language is used widely while 
only few people speak Mandarin Chinese in rural areas. Due to the remoteness of these areas, the 
unique cultural background of the population, as well as low education levels, communities are not 
well integrated into the mainstream society and labor mobility is limited as compared to other areas. 
Development opportunities are limited as well; and investments in public service expansion appear 
to be prohibitively expensive in many remote locations.   The development challenge in Sichuan is 
to identify and focus on those project areas with long-term development potential and to promote 
agricultural production systems that can generate income and are environmentally sustainable. 
Opportunities exist for producing and primary processing of higher value and niche-market 
products, such as walnuts, medicinal herbs, and fruits, and for restructuring the high altitude 
livestock sector to become environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
Guizhou Province.  Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. Out of Guizhou’s total 
population of 40 million, 11.5 million live below the national poverty line. About 80 percent of the 
province belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains in which 
sixty-five poor counties and 85 percent of Guizhou’s poor are located.  These areas are 
characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil 
erosion and management problems.  The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability 
of productive farmland, combined with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, represent 
significant challenges to agricultural development.  Recent improvements in transportation 
infrastructure, both highways and village access roads, however, are providing potential 
opportunities to reach large urban markets in Chongqing and Guiyang.  These remain un-tapped to 
date because of the limited investment into the agricultural sector itself. For the future, modern 
agricultural production systems that build on: (a) more sustainable land use; (b) improvements of 
the organizational level of farmers, and (c) carefully designed land consolidation programs offer 
promising ways to overcome technology constraints, attract investment, and link agricultural value 
chains to urban markets.

Relationship to CAS
The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 
enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the Project Development Objective would be measured through the following 
key performance indicators, namely the:  
 
a)       The generation of incremental net value of agricultural production through project 
investments;  
b) The fair and equitable distribution of the net production value among the various  
stakeholders in the value chain; 
c)  Additional private sector investment leveraged through project investments; and  
d) Viability and sustainability of the project models and potential for up-scaling.  
 
Additional component-specific performance indicators as well as sector core indicators will be 
formulated and included into the results framework during project preparation

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and 
mountain areas.  The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income 
generation that are based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain 
development, institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor 
farmer households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and 
capacity building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments.   
 
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the 
following components and activities: 
 
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development.  The objective of this component would be to 
develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar 
industries in each project county.  This would be achieved through the restructuring and 
modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each 
pillar industry.  The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more 
viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household 
groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in 
the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.  The component would also support the 
establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer 
household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and 
market-based approach. 
 
Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support.  The objective of this component would be 
to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate restructuring of 
the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1.  The component would support investments in: (a) 
production road infrastructure; (b) irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc. (c) communications and 
information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and equipment; and (d) public market 
facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and complement farmer 
and private investments.  In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting 
public services, such as food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, 
marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer. 
 
Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support.  The objective of this 
component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and 


cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under omponent 1.  Specific 
investments would include:  (a) a conditional grant program to poor households and households 
groups to encourage the self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of 
agricultural and other inputs to allow them to participate in new production arrangements; (b) 
training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for community-based 
economic groups in ethnic minority areas; (c) training for government officials on the roles of 
government and private sector and on how to built public-private partnership arrangements; in 
addition, training on appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas; (d) technical 
assistance to value-chain operators; (e) policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good 
governance, and fair benefit-sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and (f) marketing 
studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and agricultural sector 
development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector 
support in rural areas.  
 
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  The component would 
establish the project management and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, 
transportation and technical assistance services. It would support the coordination between 
implementation agencies at all levels and with other government programs and institutions and the 
capture of implementation lessons from value chain development.  It would also include support to 
establishing and operatingthe project’s progress and impact M&E system.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  300.00 Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Total Cofinancing:  Financing Gap:  0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 150.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 300.00




















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC11855

Project Name Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II 
(P149553)

Region SOUTH ASIA
Country Bangladesh
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), 

Crops (20%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), 

Rural markets (25%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P149553
Borrower(s) Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

04-Sep-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

09-Sep-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

05-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

26-Feb-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the last 20 years, Bangladesh 
aims to become a middle income country by 2021; to achieve this will require among other that the 
GoB overcomes considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic growth. 
The country’s GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent between 2000 and 2010, accompanied by a decline 
in the national poverty headcount rate from 48.9 percent to 31.5 percent over the same period, 
effectively lifting some 16 million people out of poverty. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million 
inhabitants, has also made noteworthy gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most 
of the MDGs.  
Bangladesh remains a predominantly agricultural country and growth and development 
achievements in rural areas must be brought on par with those in urban areas. Agriculture occupies 


some three-quarters of the scarce land space of the country and supports the livelihoods of the 
majority of the population. While overall poverty has significantly declined over the 2000 to 2010 
period, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still 35.2 percent) has not declined as fast as in urban 
settings; moreover, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three 
times higher than in urban areas. The contribution of agriculture to the country’s economic output 
has declined over the past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries still combine for almost 
one-fifth of GDP. Moreover, with some 70 percent of the population living in rural areas and over 
43 percent of the country's total labor force engaged in agriculture, achieving further economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction will require 
policies and investments conducive of lasting transformational changes in rural areas – including 
through technological innovations in agriculture.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
To eliminate the country’s extreme poverty by the year 2030 and to promote shared prosperity for 
the poorest 40 percent, agriculture  must continue to grow (in ways that are sustainable and adapted 
to climate change) and rely on a more diversified production base. Poverty reduction in rural areas 
depends crucially on growth in agricultural productivity, which is driven by investment in 
infrastructure, generation of new or improved technologies adapted to changing climate, and their 
adoption by farmers and other value chains actors (e.g. processors). Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination and adoption). This needs to 
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through smallholder participation in 
emerging/established supply chains for higher value agriculture. To achieve these strategic goals, 
the GoB has been seeking the support of development partners such as the Bank, to develop and 
finance activities aimed at boosting agricultural production through productivity enhancement, and 
increasing smallholders’ income.   
In Bangladesh, while the performance of the NARS has been impressive in contributing to food 
security (in particular with rice), research in some key sub sectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet 
to reach its potential productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations 
(including a range of new climate smart technologies for production and post-harvesting). The 
extension system has still extremely limited reach into the myriad communities of the nation (in 
particular for the fisheries and livestock subsectors were local level public extension workers are 
absent), and worse, hardly communicates with the NARS, or the relevant private and non-
government entities also engaged in technological advance. In short, the national agricultural 
innovation system is far from exploiting the systemic interactions that should drive it to success, and 
the insufficiencies pervade the system both within the subsystems, the all-too disconnected and in 
some instances less than strong elements of the NARS: public-private links are disturbingly absent, 
and links between research entities public and private with the higher education sector are sparse 
and severely underexploited. To enable agriculture and stakeholders to adapt readily when 
challenges occur and to respond readily when opportunities arise, the proposed project will seek to 
overcome some of the key constraints to increasing the efficiency and performance of the national 
agricultural innovation system. 
The National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012) and the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council Act (BARC, 2011) provide the sector policy framework for the proposed 
NATP-2. NAEP advocates inter alia the development of decentralized, integrated, demand-driven 
agricultural research and extension services. Support is now required for the Department of 
Agricultural Extension (MoA) towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAEP and as well 

as technical assistance for the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of Fisheries 
(both MFL) for the completion of their respective sector extension strategy/policy. The 2012 BARC 
Act aims at fostering the coordination of research activities conducted by the twelve NARS 
institutes, making BARC responsible for the allocation of resources among the NARS institutes and 
for the approval of the institutes’ research programs; it is among other things expected to reduce 
duplication of research efforts and enhance accountability. Implementation of the BARC Act 
remains a challenging process and requires additional financial and technical assistance. Further, 
there are some significant differences in the institutional capacity and performance among the 
various NARS institutes (with livestock and fisheries lagging behind), and the project is expected to 
strengthen the research agenda and outcomes for livestock and fisheries given the importance of 
these sub sectors for rural economic growth and rural livelihoods.

Relationship to CAS
Agriculture has long occupied a central place in the Bangladesh development agenda and in the 
CPSs of the WBG. In the CPS for FY11-14 (subsequently extended to FY15), agriculture is 
highlighted in Pillar 3, Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, although the sector surely 
contributes to the growth Pillar 2, and benefits from initiatives under the 4th Pillar of Governance. 
As the CASPR (Report No. 73983-BD) of November 20, 2013 notes concerning Pillar 3 Outcome 
3.1 on Agriculture and Food Security, program implementation has been ramping-up and is showing 
significant improvements in agricultural productivity as measured in crops and livestock 
performance. Recurrent natural disasters and deficiencies in technology remain the basic threats to 
improvements in agricultural production, and are therefore the focus of Bank interventions in the 
sector. IFC, with financing from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, is also assisting by 
supporting the climate resilience of agribusiness companies and their supply chains, and is 
exploring availability of low-cost housing and livestock protection structures in flood-prone coastal 
areas. Furthermore, IFC’s investment climate and advisory services include activities in agriculture 
that are complementary to NATP-2 (e.g. development of Seed Act and National Seed Policy, 
strengthening of sanitary and phyto-sanitory registration and certification system, development of 
the dairy value chain). The proposed follow-up to NATP Phase 1 was retained in the revised CAS 
for FY15 implementation.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
6. The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the 
agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their 
market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will 
support a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote 
market-oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for 
smallholder farmers by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to 
increased farm income and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed 
by the project. The following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: 
Comp.1: Promoting Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: 
Supporting Livestock Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: 
Project Management and Coordination. 
7. NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the 
extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups 

and producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification 
and diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains 
and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1.

Key Results (From PCN)
(i) Client satisfaction (including for female-led households) with the agricultural extension and 
advisory services provided by the agricultural innovation system has increased  
(ii) New technologies generated by the agricultural innovation system have been adopted by 
producers (including by female-led households) and other value chain actors targeted by the project  
(iii) The increase achieved in agricultural productivity (for crops, fisheries and livestock) is 
larger for farmers supported by the project  
(iv) The proportion of smallholder agricultural production marketed relative to total smallholder 
farm output has increased 
(v) The women-led Common Interest Groups for homestead gardening are making a significant 
contribution to improving nutrition in participating households

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and 
extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer 
organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value 
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for 
the vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the 
interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to 
include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up) . 
The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under 
NATP-1 and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. NATP-2 includes a 
broader component that addresses the multiple dimensions required for decentralized, demand-
driven agricultural research as a core pillar of an agricultural innovation system in the country 
context. The project further includes three sub sector components, each tackling specific constraints 
to the development of selected commodities from technology generation to transfer and adoption at 
farm level, to market-oriented production and agro processing. This value chain approach is 
expected to lead to a better integration of research and extension, which was regularly reported in 

NATP-1 as an area requiring further improvement. Finally, the project includes a component that 
covers most cross-cutting activities as well as regular project management tasks. Project 
components, their objectives and contribution to the PDO, as well as the core activities covered, are 
described below. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System 
This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation 
support from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and 
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity 
enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of 
rural markets, technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes  
(NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory 
service centers. The component will also include the window for competitive research and matching 
grants under the Agricultural Innovation Fund.   
 
Component 2: Supporting crop development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production 
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of 
smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). 
This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g. 
smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary 
certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of 
smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the 
adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support 
to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) 
will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.  
 
Component 3: Supporting fisheries development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of 
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate 
the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps, 
and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and 
fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value 
chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and 
post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro 
entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the 
corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 4: Supporting livestock development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, 
and facilitate the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat 
meat). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance 
in e.g.: laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial 
insemination, fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, 




food safety, and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing 
technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected 
value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination 
Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall 
day-to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project 
PIUs from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational, 
safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The 
PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led 
activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a 
national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact 
evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and 
dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project 
management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination 
of all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of 
NATP).

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 3.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 150.00
 US  Agency for International Development (USAID) 25.00
 Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change 0.00
 International Fund for Agriculture Development 22.00
 Total 200.00




















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for the National Agricultural
Technology Programme – Phase II Project


People’s Republic of Bangladesh

National Agricultural Technology Programme – Phase II
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: World Bank

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$214 million (net of beneficiary contributions)

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.8
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Government of Bangladesh, World Bank, United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)

Amount of cofinancing: World Bank loan: US$176 million
USAID grant: US$7.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$6.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.5 million

Appraising institution: World Bank

Cooperating institution: World Bank



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan to the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project for the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the past 20

years, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh aims to become a middle-income
country by 2021; achieving this will require that the Government of Bangladesh
overcome considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic
growth. The country’s annual GDP growth averaged about 6 per cent between 2000
and 2013, accompanied by a decline in the national poverty headcount rate from
48.9 to 31.5 per cent over the first decade of the century, effectively lifting some
16 million people out of poverty.

2. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million inhabitants, has also made noteworthy
gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Despite these gains, it remains a poor country, with a 2013
GDP per capita of about US$1,000. Bangladesh is regularly hit by natural disasters
that severely impact the economy, disproportionally affecting the infrastructure
and agriculture sectors, as well as vulnerable groups. Nutrition outcomes have not
kept pace with the progress achieved with most social and economic indicators.

3. Agriculture covers about three quarters of the country’s scarce land and supports
the majority of the population’s livelihoods. While overall poverty has significantly
declined over the last decade, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still around 35
per cent) has not declined as fast as in urban settings; and the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three times higher than in
urban areas.

4. Agriculture’s contribution to the country’s economic output has declined over the
past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries still account for 17 per cent
of GDP. Some 67 per cent of the population live in rural areas and over 43 per cent
of the country’s total labour force are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, achieving
further socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty
reduction will require policies and investments conducive to lasting
transformational changes in rural areas – including through technological
innovation in agriculture.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

5. While the performance of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) has
been impressive in contributing to food security (particularly with rice), research in
some key subsectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet to reach its potential
productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations
(including a range of new climate-smart technologies for production and post-
harvest). The proposed National Agricultural Technology Programme (NATP) – the
second phase of three projects initially planned – will seek to overcome some of



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the key constraints still holding back the NARS, and to add greater value to the
output of the agricultural sector.

6. The NATP phase two (NATP-II) project is fully aligned with the government’s
priorities, in particular with: (i) the Perspective Plan 2010-2021 outlining the
strategy for achieving food security, making adequate infrastructure available and
pursuing environmentally friendly development; (ii) the Sixth Five-Year Plan (6th
FYP) identifying focal sectors for pro-poor growth, including agriculture, livestock,
community-based fisheries and rural finance; (iii) the policy framework of the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012); and (iv) the Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Council (BARC, 2011).

7. Being agriculture-centric, the NATP-II project will complement the ongoing IFAD-
funded portfolio in Bangladesh and is fully aligned with the country strategic
opportunities programme’s (COSOP) objectives of achieving: (i) better adapted
livelihoods of poor people in vulnerable areas to climate change; (ii) greater
market access and improved value chains for small producers and entrepreneurs;
and (iii) economic and social empowerment for marginalized groups, including poor
rural women.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The three-phase programme will cover all of the 64 districts by the

third phase. In this context, NATP-II will cover 57 districts (including the 25
covered by NATP-I) and span a broad range of agroecological zones across
Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in up to 270
subdistricts (or upazillas); this includes 120 already covered under NATP-I, plus up
to 150 new upazillas. New upazillas will be selected following the multicriteria
approach successfully applied under NATP-I (including poverty incidence, high
prevalence of marginal farmers and agroecologically stressed areas).

9. Target group. In compliance with government policies and strategies, the primary
target group for NATP-II will be smallholder farmers: particularly small, marginal
and landless farmers. Special emphasis will be placed on targeting women.

B. Programme development objective
10. The development objective of this project is to increase agricultural productivity of

smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected
districts. This will be achieved by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the NARS and
the extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at
increasing farm productivity and reducing post-harvest losses; and (ii) promoting
the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and producer
organizations by facilitating their linkages with markets.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Enhancing agricultural technology generation. Component 1

will improve the performance of NARS through the support to agricultural
technology development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions
(institutional and human capacity). Research will be funded through competitive
grants. The component will also finance a number of activities (including specific
studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and others) in support
of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.

12. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes – embedded in the
different project components – an agricultural innovation fund (AIF). The AIF is at
the core of the NATP-II scale-up strategy; it aims to provide grant funding for
eligible research and microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project
beneficiaries. The AIF is fully aligned with the holistic approach to agricultural
innovation promoted by the project. In order to effectively contribute to achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the project development objective, the AIF includes the following three funding
windows: (i) AIF-1 (US$26.2 million) will promote agricultural technology
generation through a programme-based research initiative (AIF-1 PBRG) and a
competitive research grant programme (AIF-1 CRG); (ii) AIF-2 (US$17 million),
through matching grants, will promote farmers’ adoption of innovative technologies
generated by the research community; and (iii) AIF-3 (US$4.6 million),
through matching grants, will support private operators in developing business and
market opportunities for farmers, as well as in providing relevant private services
to farmers. NATP-II will use calls for proposals, scientific and technical peer-
reviewing and transparent selection mechanisms for the allocation of all grants
under the AIF; disbursement against the AIF is subject to the Bank’s approval of an
AIF Manual of Operational Guidelines and Procedures. NATP-II will explore
synergies between its AIF and the access to rural financial services promoted under
IFAD’s new project for Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
(PACE).1

13. Component 2: Supporting crop development. Component 2 will increase farm
yields, diversify agricultural production, and improve market linkages for
smallholder farmers by: (i) improving the outreach and quality of crop extension
and advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers from
the Department of Agricultural Extension; (ii) promoting information and
communication technology (ICT) in agricultural extension services and supporting
farmer-to-farmer extension; (iii) developing farmers’ skills to scale up the
dissemination of good agricultural practices including those developed under NATP,
as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable production of safer food;
(iv) promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm
output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce
post-harvest losses and support processing; (v) facilitating stronger collaboration
with the private sector for agribusiness development on agroprocessing, market
access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
services; and (vi) strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through
capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure.

14. Component 3: Supporting fisheries development. Component 3 will promote
productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a
better access to market opportunities for fish farmers. NATP-II will provide support
for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small-scale aquaculture
ponds) and inland capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beels [a lake-like
wetland with static water] and haors [a hoar may host several beels]) by (i) scaling
up NATP good aquaculture practices for the production systems prevailing in the
project area; (ii) promoting community-based fisheries management; (iii)
supporting the participation of fisheries common interest groups (CIGs) and
partner organizations (POs) in value chains; (iv) reinforcing research-extension-
farmer linkages; and (v) strengthening the capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-
II will explore linkages with fishery activities under the ongoing IFAD-supported
operations in the haors.

15. Component 4: Supporting livestock development. Component 4 will promote
productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service
delivery, as well as better access for livestock farmers to markets. Activities under
this component will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry
farming, and focus on: (i) strengthening livestock institutions, improving livestock
extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programmes to a larger number of

1 PACE aims to enhance the livelihoods of rural women and men by improving profitable business opportunities for
microentrepreneurs, and creating wage employment for extreme and moderatly poor people. PACE will provide NATP-II
finance groups with business planning/development services to prepare business plans for funding through PACE's
microenterprise loan programme. In addition, crop, fisheries and livestock farmers unable to access NATP-II matching
grants could be referred to PACE loan schemes.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers; and (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected
livestock markets.

16. Component 5: Project management. Activities under this component will:
(i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish
liaison mechanisms between the World Bank and the project, and between the
project and the Government of Bangladesh, and (iii) coordinate the implementation
of selected overarching project activities with the support of external technical
assistance.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
17. NATP-II will build on and scale up successful interventions and address important

lessons learned from NATP-I. The integrated approach to reaching the project
development objectives will include a foundational component that contributes
towards decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research, as the basis for an
enhanced agricultural technology system. The project will include a further three
subsector components (crops, livestock and fisheries) to address a range of
constraints to technology generation, technology transfer and adoption at farm
level, and farmers’ access to markets. This approach is expected to lead to an
enhanced linkage between agricultural research, extension, and production – an
area regularly reported under NATP as requiring further improvement.

B. Organizational framework
18. The representative of the borrower is the Ministry of Finance. NATP-II will be

implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. It will be fully
integrated into the Government of Bangladesh administration, and project
implementation is designed to promote the use of existing government structures
at the central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

19. A joint steering committee, composed of senior representatives from the
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
involved in project implementation, as well as representatives from the farmers
and private sector, who will provide strategic guidance, approve annual budget and
activity plans, monitor overall implementation progress, facilitate interagency
coordination and resolve any outstanding issues requiring high-level decisions.

20. Project management unit. A small project management unit (PMU) will be set up
to oversee implementation of project activities, carry out day-to-day project
management functions, facilitate coordination among components, and liaise with
the World Bank on all project implementation-related aspects. The PMU will also be
in charge of project monitoring and evaluation, producing a project implementation
manual (PIM) that is acceptable to the development partners, detailing the
operational, financial and administrative procedures of NATP-II. The PMU will also
be responsible for the implementation of component 5.

21. Project implementation units. All other project components will be integrated in
the corresponding line department (or agency); each department/agency will set
up a component-specific project implementation unit (PIU). Under the Ministry of
Agriculture, BARC and the Department of Agricultural Extension will each set up a
PIU; BARC for the implementation of component 1 (agricultural technology
generation) and the Department of Agricultural Extension for component 2 (crops).
Under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, the Department of Fisheries will set
up a PIU for the implementation of component 3 (fisheries) and the Department of
Livestock Services will set up a PIU for component 4 (livestock). Using project
funds, the Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock Services and BARC
will recruit service providers (e.g. international institutions, agro-consulting firms,



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

academia or others) to deliver the technical assistance needed for strengthening
their institutional capacity and supporting their PIUs with the implementation of
component-specific activities.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Planning. The PMU will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and
budget, getting it approved by the Ministry of Finance and cleared by the World
Bank. The plan will include planned activities along with targets and expenditures
and will reflect the general project targets and activities.

23. Monitoring and evaluation. NATP-II will have a multi-tier results monitoring and
impact evaluation system that will inform on the progress made towards achieving
the development objective. Results will be sex-disaggregated reported as much as
possible to capture the gender dimension of NATP-II.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge sharing and learning is a
key activity throughout all of NATP-II’s components. The project will utilize ICT for
extension and capacity-building purposes, and further aims to build an agriculture
knowledge repository and a knowledge platform under its ICT initiative. Another
important tool will be the farmers information and advisory centres that will serve
as fully equipped agricultural technology and knowledge-sharing centres.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. A fiduciary assessment of NATP-II was carried out during design, and follows World

Bank procedures. The fiduciary assessment rated the risk in financial management
(FM) as “substantial”, due to (i) the involvement of multiple PIUs and accounting
centres; (ii) the timeliness of consolidation of FM reports; and (iii) compliance with
the requirements of multiple donors. Risk-mitigating measures have been
incorporated into the design of the FM implementation arrangements, and a
number of additional measures will be taken to ensure overall FM capacity and
performance.

26. NATP-II will hire an experienced consultant for the PMU (a senior financial
management specialist), with qualifications acceptable to the Bank and IFAD, to
lead and coordinate FM activities. The consultant will support the project in
strengthening budgeting practices, internal controls, fund reconciliations, and other
relevant financial functions, including coordination with the FM staff at the PIUs.
The current manual system of accounting will be enhanced within 12 months of
project effectiveness by a computerized FM information system to facilitate easy
and timely access to financial information and its consolidation. In order to ensure
that clear practices are harmonized across the project, the PIM will include all the
relevant parts of FM operations, donors’ compliance and financial disclosure. Prior
to effectiveness, the project will also adopt an online, off-the-shelf, web-enabled
accounting software. Annual external audits of all project components will be
conducted by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate and will be supplemented
by additional internal audits from an independent audit firm (twice in the project
lifetime).

27. Flow of funds. Financing from the International Development Association (IDA),
IFAD and a USAID trust fund will be disbursed through three separate designated
accounts. These will be opened and operated by the PMU. All PIUs will maintain a
designated operating account to receive funds from the PMU. The IFAD loan will be
administered by the World Bank under a cooperation agreement with IFAD. An
initial advance will be provided and will be replenished based on regular statements
of expenditure. The same method will be applied between the PMU and PIUs. After
the first year of implementation, the Bank will review the FM performance and, in
consultation with IFAD, may recommend converting the disbursement modality to



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

one based on interim unaudited financial reports, including a six-monthly forecast
of fund requirements.

28. Project-related transactions relating to all funding sources (IDA, USAID, IFAD and
the Government of Bangladesh) will be accounted for separately in the PMU
following double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a cash basis. The key project
accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible are as follows:
(i) budget preparation and monitoring; (ii) payments for eligible project
expenditure to third parties; (iii) disbursement of project funds to various agencies,
as per approved work plan; (iv) maintenance of books and bank accounts; (v) cash
flow management; (vi) financial reporting to the Government of Bangladesh, the
World Bank, IFAD and other stakeholders; (vii) preparation of withdrawal
applications to claim funds from the World Bank and IFAD; and (viii) assistance to
the external auditor and ensuring appropriate follow-up of audit. Details on the
proposed FM and disbursement arrangements can be found in annex 3 of the World
Bank’s Project Appraisal Document.

29. Procurement. Procurement financed under the project will be carried out in
accordance with the World Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and
Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Procurement Guidelines) and “Guidelines:
Selection and Employment of Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Consultant
Guidelines), and the provisions stipulated in the financing agreement. The
procurement method will depend on the nature of the expenditure and the value of
the contract. The PMU and all PIUs will preserve all procurement records and
documents in accordance with provisions of the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA
2006).

30. Procurement under NATP-II will be guided by the World Bank-approved
procurement plan and processed through pooled procurement by the PMU for
selected goods and services (e.g. ICT equipment and peripherals, furniture and
office equipment, consultant services to be provided across various components,
and others) under component 5, and by the four PIUs and the PMU for all other
component-specific goods, works and services. To mitigate procurement risks from
low in-house capacity, the project will contract six procurement specialists
(consultants): two for the PMU and one for each PIU. An acceptable procurement
plan covering the first 18 months of project implementation is available.
Institutional procurement approval will be provided by the respective Head of
Procurement Entities (HOPE) or his/her delegate as per delegation of financial
powers of the four agencies (departments’ Director General and BARC Chairman);
the HOPE for the PMU is the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency).

31. Audit. The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate of the Comptroller and Auditor
General will conduct an audit of the project’s annual financial statements within six
months from the end of the fiscal year. The project director will be responsible for
audit follow-up and taking remedial actions. Internal audits will include prepayment
audits and independent appraisals of the financial, operational and control activities
in the sector. The responsibilities of the internal auditors will further include
reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and
the level of compliance with financial procedures and government laws and
regulations. The first audit will be due by the end of the second year of
implementation.

32. Governance. Lessons learned over the last five years to improve project
implementation and safeguard against potential governance issues have been
incorporated in the project design, implementation arrangements and monitoring



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures. The project design allows for full and distinct accountability with a
single line agency (BARC, Department of Fisheries and Department of Livestock
Services) for each component. Project monitoring and impact evaluation will be
carried out in collaboration with the PMU and the PIUs by an independent entity
recruited competitively and operating with national and international consultants.
An independent assessment (technical and financial audit) of the AIF will be carried
out for project midterm review to improve the grant system’s performance
accordingly. Beneficiaries’ feedback will be obtained through IT apps tailored to the
project’s needs and channelled directly to the NATP-II management information
system’s area coordinated by the third-party monitoring firm. The project will also
set up project-level grievance redress mechanisms with local communities being
consulted early in the process. In addition, in line with the Bank’s Disclosure Policy
and the country’s Right to Information Act, all information in the project shall be
made public.

33. Several risks and risks mitigation measures related to procurement, financial
management, and environmental and social safeguards compliance have already
been described in the corresponding parts of the project appraisal document. In
order to further minimize governance and corruption risks, NATP-II will follow a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). This plan outlines a framework
for action, institutional arrangements, specific responsibilities, and additional
measures to facilitate effective and appropriate use of project funds. It is based on
the Bank’s and IFAD’s experiences in addressing governance and anticorruption
issues. The GAAP will be adjusted as necessary during implementation to reflect
governance issues that may emerge and/or to strengthen or add actions.

E. Supervision
34. The IFAD loan will be administered and supervised by the World Bank.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
35. The total estimated cost of NATP-II amounts to US$214 million (net of beneficiary

contribution), inclusive of contingencies and taxes.

B. Programme financing
36. Of the total cost of US$214 million, US$23.8 million will be financed through an

IFAD loan on highly concessional terms. The World Bank will be providing a loan of
US$176 million and USAID will contribute a grant of US$7.4 million. The
contribution of the Government of Bangladesh, in the form of parallel cofinancing,
will cover all vehicles purchased for NATP-II, as well as the salaries of civil servants
assigned to work full-time on the project, and other expenses.2 The financing of
taxes on eligible expenditures will be permitted with IFAD funds, to harmonize with
IDA practice and simplify the project’s accounting and disbursement procedures.

2 As per the table, the Government of Bangladesh contribution reported amounts to US$6.65 million (or 3 per cent of
project costs). This is likely to be underestimated, as it does not include the hiring by DOF and DLS of upazilla-level
extension staff. However, since this process is underway and has not yet been submitted to the Manpower Committee
(Finance Division/Ministry of Finance), the final number of staff that actually will be recruited is not yet known. Hence, the
exact amount to be added to the reported government contribution is not yet available.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan World Bank loan
USAID Gov't of

Bangladesh Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Goods, works,
services and
operating costs

19.0 11.5 140.0 84.5 6.7 4.0 165.7

2. AIF-13 2.3 8.8 16.5 63.0 7.4 28.2 26.2
3. AIF-2 2.0 11.8 15.0 88.2 17.0
4. AIF-3 0.5 10.9 4.0 87.0 4.6
5. Project
preparation
advance (World
Bank)

0.5 100.0 0.5

Total 23.8 11.1 176.0 82.2 7.4 3.5 6.7 3.1 214

37. In addition, beneficiaries will be required to provide cash contributions towards the
matching grants. Beneficiary contribution is expected to amount to US$6.5 million.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. Project benefits. It is estimated that over one million farming households will

directly benefit from project activities, including from improved extension services,
stronger linkages with research, on-farm demonstrations of new technologies,
capacity enhancement through training and skills development, as well as
cofunding productive assets. Based on previous experience, significant spillover
effects and knowledge transfer to farmers who are not members of groups
supported by NATP (the CIGs) can be anticipated. Therefore, all members of the
supported farming communities will potentially benefit from the technologies
generated, the improved extension services provided, as well as from the market
linkages developed. Up to three million farmers in the project area are expected to
benefit from NATP-II. The project will promote gender mainstreaming and women’s
empowerment to ensure that a significant proportion of direct beneficiaries is
female.

39. Economic analysis. The parameters used in making these projections were based
on the NATP-I experience and impact. On this basis, the NATP-II internal rate of
return is calculated at 28 per cent, the project’s economic rate of return (ERR) at
31 per cent, and the corresponding net present value at US$49.9 million. This ERR
remains robust under hypothetical scenarios of a 10 per cent decrease in expected
net revenues and/or a 10 per cent increase in project costs.

D. Sustainability
40. To ensure the durability of the model for technology transfer and delivery of

advisory services to farmers, NATP-II will promote a pluralistic extension system
that supports various complementary elements (e.g. public extension staff, local
private extension agents, lead farmers, Farmers’ Information and Advice Centres,
ICT connectivity, gender focus).

41. Improved access to knowledge, markets, market and price information and
financial services will help contribute to the sustainability of CIGs and POs
supported by the project. To further increase smallholders’ voices and economic
strength in the selected value chains, NATP-II will establish producer organizations
for farmers. In addition, bankable CIGs and POs will be linked up with financing
institutions involved in other programmes/projects supporting access to finances.

3 For explanation of AIF-1, AIF-2 and AIF-3 see para. 12.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

42. The sustainability of NATP-II outcomes will further be supported by the institutional
capacity and skills development agenda of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overall risks of NATP-II not achieving the project development objectives and

targets, and for NATP-II activities to have a negative impact on the people and the
environment are considered substantial.

44. The substantial risks identified with regard to policies and sector strategies refer to
the potential for lack of operationalization of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research
Council Act; delays in hiring public extension workers by the Ministry of Fisheries
and Livestock; and the lengthy approval process for the validation of the NAEP.
Under NATP-II, these will be addressed through: (i) strengthening the BARC
institutional capacity in the area of research management by hiring an international
service provider; (ii) expanding the use of private community-based extension
agents for livestock and fisheries with the aim of developing sustainable models for
private extension (e.g. scaling up fee-based services for livestock, promoting
additional sources of revenues for local extension agents for fisheries; and
(iii) adopting in NATP-II some of the core pillars of the NAEP (e.g. promoting a
group approach, complementary farmer-to-farmer extension; promoting private
extension services, etc.).

45. The substantial risk identified with respect to institutional capacity for
implementation refers to the challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two
different ministries and their capacity to implement the respective components. As
shown in the previous project, the coordination challenge can be adequately
addressed through a neutral PMU that has strong leadership. The recruitment of a
senior project director and a team of technical experts (consultants only, no civil
servants) at the PMU level will be a key factor for the successful coordination
across line agencies. An important mitigation measure in the implementation
arrangements for NATP-II (different from the previous project) is the support from
service providers recruited internationally for each line agency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
46. NATP-2 is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and with the

current RB-COSOP for Bangladesh, focusing on market access and value chains,
and on the economic empowerment of marginalized people. The project design
adheres to IFAD policies on private sector participation, environment, targeting and
gender. It further complies with the World Bank’s safeguards on indigenous people.
In terms of environmental impacts, the project is classified as “B”.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. The project, whose design has seen the close involvement of the Government of

Bangladesh, will support the Government’s strategic priorities in agriculture, i.e.
increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate
change, and enhancing nutrition through safer and more diversified food. NATP-II
will support the decentralization process already under way for agricultural
research and extension services.

48. Project implementation will be done through existing government structures at
central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

49. NATP-II will be cofinanced by the World Bank and USAID. It benefits from the
experience of all three partners and will link up with existing and relevant projects,
such as the IFAD-supported PACE project and the Haor Infrastructure and
Livelihood Improvement Project.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Innovations and scaling up
50. With the Agricultural Innovation Fund, NATP-II offers a tool to promote research

efforts for new and innovative technologies. The AIF is at the core of the NATP-II
scaling-up strategy; it aims at providing grant funding for eligible research and
microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project beneficiaries. The
AIF promotes a competitive research grant programme; farmers’ adoption of
innovative technologies generated by the research community; and will support
private operators in developing business and market opportunities for farmers and
by providing relevant private services to farmers (through matching grants).

D. Policy engagement
51. With its contributions to the agricultural technology development, NATP-II is

expected to support policies that create an enabling environment for smallholder
farmers. This work will include commodity-specific market and value chain
analyses, and the preparation of sector policy notes for senior decision makers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing
to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in an amount equivalent to seventeen
million special drawing rights (SDR 17,000,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan for the
Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme


Kingdom of Bhutan

Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Bhutan

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests

Total programme cost: US$31.59 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 5.89 million (equivalent to approximately
US$8.27 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.76 million (equivalent to approximately
US$1.06 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.58 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.02 million)

Financing gap:1 US$6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL)

Amount of cofinancing: US$4.81 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.77 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) allocation or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Located on the southern slopes of the Eastern Himalayas, Bhutan is mostly

mountainous and heavily forested, with 70 per cent of its geographical area
covered in forests, 10 per cent with shrubs and only 3 per cent cultivated.
Elevations range from 160 to 7,000 metres above sea level, with 31 per cent of the
agricultural land on steep slopes – greater than 50 degrees.

2. Bhutan’s economy has experienced growth averaging 7 per cent per year, with
GDP per capita increasing from US$1,387 in 2006 to US$2,363 in 2013, and
poverty declining from 23 per cent in 2007 to 12 per cent in 2012. While
approximately 62 per cent of the population depends on agriculture (mostly
subsistence farming) for their livelihoods (95 per cent of the rural poor are
employed in agriculture), the share of agriculture in real GDP declined by more than
half, from 25 per cent in 2002 to 12 per cent in 2012. The share of spending on
agriculture also declined from 22.5 per cent in 1982 to 9.8 per cent in 2013.

3. Poverty in Bhutan is a distinctly rural phenomenon. Poverty also varies by region,
with the eastern parts of Bhutan significantly poorer than the rest of the country.
Many villages are still isolated: those with limited roads and market access tend to
have higher poverty rates. Lack of access to technology, business development
services, fair markets and suitable financial products constrain rural enterprise.

4. The challenges affecting agricultural production include natural disasters, declining
productivity, human-wildlife conflict, a shortage of farm labour, insufficient
irrigation and limited post-harvest management.

5. In addition, climate change is projected to have a major impact on agricultural
productivity as a result of changes in water availability, soil fertility and incidence of
pests and disease. Considering that the nation’s socio-economic well-being depends
largely on agriculture, water resources and forests, the impacts of climate change
have the potential to undermine development efforts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP)

6. Bhutan’s Government has accorded highest priority to agricultural development in
its Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013-2018) in order to: (i) stimulate climate-resilient
production; (ii) build value chain systems for vegetables and dairy, and a
comprehensive marketing system to enhance the commercial viability of other
agricultural products; and (iii) facilitate institutional linkages and policy dialogue
towards the commercialization of agriculture.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

2

7. The programme is therefore designed in alignment with the Eleventh Five Year Plan
as a strategic value chain programme with focused product interventions, taking
into consideration the Government’s priorities and gaps left by previous projects.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. The programme will initially be implemented in the six poorest eastern districts of

Lhuentse, Mongar, Pemagatshel, Samdrup Jongkhar, Trashigang and
Trashiyangtse. Upon midterm review, it will be scaled up to include districts in
central and south-western Bhutan.

9. The programme will follow an inclusive approach to reach all households living in
target communities. It will involve 21,860 households in six districts in establishing
sustainable agriculture production and an additional 7,115 households in building
vegetable and dairy value chains. Within the target districts, the programme will
work in areas that have been identified based upon: (i) demonstrated production
potential in select commodities; (ii) relative accessibility to roads and marketing
channels; and (iii) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities and
farmers’ organizations. Targeting will also focus on the inclusion of women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
10. The goal of the programme is to sustainably increase smallholder producers’

incomes and reduce poverty through commercialization of production by
programme households. The objective is increased returns to smallholder farmers
through climate-resilient production of crops and livestock products in nationally
organized value chains and marketing systems. The goal and objective are both in
line with Bhutan’s poverty strategy.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The programme’s three main components are: (i) market-led sustainable

agricultural production; (ii) value chain development and marketing; and
(iii) institutional support and policy development. There will also be a management
component.

12. Component 1: Market–led sustainable agricultural production. This
component aims to bring about a sustainable increase in agricultural production by
rural households and enhance the resilience of agricultural production systems to
climate-induced shocks. It consists of three subcomponents:

(i) Increased production resilience and diversification in agriculture. This
subcomponent will promote integrated agricultural production and
management through: (a) strengthening existing farmers’ groups and
establishing new groups; (b) strengthening extension services, including the
lead farmers outreach model, and increasing their reach; (c) supporting
agricultural inputs, including seeds and seedlings; (d) developing efficient
irrigation; (e) promoting agricultural system innovations; and (f) piloting an
initiative on strengthening local institutions for increased climate resilience.

(ii) Intensification and expansion of vegetable production. In order to
ensure an adequate volume of acceptable quality produce and planned and
timely production, the programme aims to: (a) expand and intensify
vegetable production by rural households; (b) strengthen existing vegetable
producers’ groups and promote new groups; (c) provide vegetable production
inputs; and (d) promote vegetable seed research.

(iii) Intensification and expansion of dairy production. To ensure that an
adequate volume of high-quality milk is produced by smallholder dairy
farmers, the programme will: (a) strengthen existing smallholder dairy farmer



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

3

groups and establish new groups; (b) improve outreach services for livestock;
(c) support fodder and feed production; (d) provide dairy production inputs;
and (e) install bio-gas units.

13. Component 2: Value chain development and marketing. By building value
chains and marketing systems for vegetable and dairy products, the programme
will increase the incomes of smallholder farmers through their participation in
commercial farm production through three subcomponents:

(i) Development of resilient vegetable and dairy value chains. The
programme will support the design and implementation of vegetable and dairy
value chains, increasing climate resilience and strengthening the capacity of
the Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL) for value chain development and
business plan design and implementation.

(ii) Strengthening agricultural commercialization and enterprise
development. Support will be provided for: (a) agriculture enterprise
development; (b) facilitating access to finance, including a social inclusion
fund and production support fund; and (c) development of multi-stakeholder
platforms and networks.

(iii) Development of community-driven market infrastructure. The
programme will support the creation of value chain infrastructure at the local
level, with ownership and management by communities, farmers’ groups,
cooperatives and small-scale entrepreneurs. Support will include the design
and construction of necessary infrastructure and equipment for vegetable and
dairy value chains.

14. Component 3: Institutional support and policy development. This component
aims to build an institutional and policy environment that fosters the collaboration
necessary for climate-resilient, market-led production and value chain development
in the renewable natural resources (RNR) sector for addressing structural
development constraints. The subcomponents include:

(i) Strengthened value chain and marketing knowledge and
communication. The programme will capture and document knowledge and
best practices from programme implementation, especially related to climate
resilience and value chain and market development by: (a) strengthening
market information systems; and (b) developing a curriculum for RNR training
institutes.

(ii) Mainstreaming climate change resilience and value chain lessons into
agricultural policies and sector strategies. This subcomponent will
involve: (a) participatory policy development and monitoring; (b) support to
Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) in mainstreaming
agricultural policy; and (c) developing a regulatory framework that is
conducive to private-sector development and public-private partnership (PPP).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The programme will be implemented over seven years, from 2015-2022. It will
adopt a flexible, non-prescriptive, process-oriented approach that enables
stakeholders to determine the scope of activities aimed at agricultural and livestock
diversification for climate-resilient livelihoods. Vegetable and dairy intensification
activities will follow a more selective approach to value chain and marketing
development.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. Programme implementation responsibility. MoAF will be the lead agency, with

overall responsibility for the programme and specific responsibility for achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

4

outcomes 1 and 3 (see the logical framework in appendix II). FCBL is the
implementing partner responsible for achieving outcome 2. The national
programme steering committee and regional programme implementation
committee will advise the office of the programme management (OPM), which will
be responsible for the delivery of results. A liaison office under the direction of the
OPM will be established within the MoAF secretariat.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. Programme activities will be reflected in
the Government’s planning and monitoring system. The OPM will establish a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) unit to ensure that all outputs, outcomes and
impact indicators are included in the planning and monitoring system, and will
design tools to capture critical field-level data not included in the planning and
monitoring system. The annual workplan and budget will be the main planning tool,
and will be used to review programme performance and progress.

18. Learning and knowledge management. A knowledge management strategy will
be prepared to facilitate engagement in policy development related to resilient
agriculture and dairy production, and marketing support. It will include strategies
for strengthening market information systems and developing RNR training
curricula. A strong knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be built through the
use of participatory tools and knowledge from M&E, and the development of
knowledge products.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
19. Financial management. The financial management assessment for this

programme concluded that the arrangements made by the MoAF are adequate. In
view of the low fiduciary risk, the country’s public financial management systems
will be utilized provided they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures.
Qualified finance staff will be in place at the OPM and liaison office. Financial
reporting will follow national accounting standards on cash-basis accounting in line
with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The programme’s
financial accounts will be maintained with computerized accounting software and
customized to generate financial reports.

20. Fund flow mechanism. IFAD will make funds available to the Government under
the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. Programme funds will flow
from IFAD via designated accounts established in the Royal Monetary Authority, or
another commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated accounts will be
administered following imprest account arrangements. Advances from the IFAD
loan must be segregated from other funds for the programme.

21. Internal controls and external audit. Internal controls will be established to
ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with IFAD’s
requirements. The Government’s Royal Audit Authority has been mandated to audit
all foreign-funded loan programmes following standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. External auditing arrangements will be
established by the Royal Audit Authority.

22. Start-up costs. Expenditures for programme start-up that are inccured after the
entry into force of the financing agreement but before the satisfaction of the
conditions precedent to withdrawal, shall not exceed an aggregate amount of
SDR 25,000.

23. Procurement of goods, works and services. Procurement of goods, works and
services financed by IFAD under components 1 and 3 will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Government’s Procurement Rules and
Regulations (revised June 2014). Under component 2, procurement will be carried



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

5

out according to FCBL Procurement Rules and Regulations, provided they are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.

24. Governance. A national programme steering committee will provide policy
direction to facilitate implementation and guide programme management. A
regional programme implementation committee will steer design and
implementation of the annual workplan and budget at the local, district and regional
levels. The national programme steering committee will resolve all programme
management issues and disputes concerning implementation; unresolved issues
may be referred to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests. The governance
framework will ensure that the programme includes: (i) mechanisms for regular
internal audits at the OPM and implementing offices; (ii) annual independent
audits; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during supervision; (iv) independent
impact assessments; (v) efficient public financial management systems and efforts
to ensure transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions; and
(vi) community involvement in decision-making, planning, implementation and
monitoring.

SupervisionE.
25. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. A midterm review will be

conducted halfway through the implementation period and will provide
opportunities for programme realignment and scaling up based on the availability of
funds.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total programme cost is estimated at US$31.59 million over seven years,

including contingencies. The total base costs equal US$24.18 million and physical
and price contingencies account for US$1.86 million and US$5.55 million
respectively (8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of total base costs).
Investment costs are estimated at US$26.18 million (83 per cent of the total cost)
while recurrent costs are estimated at US$5.41 million (17 per cent of the total
cost).

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap* IFAD grant
ASAP
grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Market-led
agricultural
production 4 196.0 4 808.7 4 268.6 399.8 3 024.6 658.8 - 17 356.7
2. Value chain
development and
marketing 598.5 3 150.1 1 662.3 173.9 1 729.1 - 4 281.0 11 594.9
3. Institutional
support and policy
development 13.6 144.0 65.7 34.0 268.9 - - 526.1
4. Programme
management,
coordination, M&E 965.7 170.6 - 452.9 - - 521.5 2 110.7

Total programme
cost

5 773.8 8 273.4 5 996.6 1 060.6 5 022.6 658.8 4 802.4 31 588.3

* Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 performance-
based allocation system (PBAS) allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

6

B. Programme financing
27. The programme will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately

US$8.27 million (26.2 per cent of the total programme cost); (ii) an IFAD grant of
approximately US$1.06 million (3.4 per cent of the total cost); (iii) an ASAP grant
of approximately US$5.02 million (15.9 per cent of the total cost); (iv) a mainly
in-kind beneficiary contribution estimated at US$0.66 million (2.1 per cent of the
total cost); (v) a contribution by the Government of approximately US$5.77 million
(18.3 per cent of the total cost); (vi) cofinancing from FCBL of US$4.81 million,
mainly through recurrent costs (15.2 per cent of the total cost); and (vii) a
financing gap of approximately US$6 million (19 per cent of the total cost) subject
to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the
2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing. The Government will
finance taxes and duties, most of the recurrent costs, re-training (in line with the
mandate of the MoAF) and dairy inputs.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.1

6

7

Table 2 a

Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap b IFAD grant ASAP grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 580.2 10.0 2 952.1 50.9 2 046.0 35.3 - - 185.2 3.2 38.6 0.7 - - 5 802.1

2. Equipment and
materials 675.1 10.0 2 298.5 34.0 2 587.6 38.3 204.4 3.0 90.2 1.3 432.7 6.4 462.3 6.8 6 750.7

3. Vehicles 7.3 10.0 - - - - 65.8 90.0 - - - - - - 73.1

4. Goods, services and
inputs 1 241.7 34.8 826.4 23.2 727.3 20.4 47.1 1.3 533.4 15.0 187.5 5.3 - - 3 563.4

5. Consultancies 13.2 0.5 761.4 28.7 206.8 7.8 260.3 9.8 1 413.9 53.2 - - - - 2 655.6

6. Workshops 0.0 - 192.6 34.1 190.5 33.8 166.2 29.5 14.9 2.6 - - - - 564.1

7. Training 2 238.5 34.7 969.9 15.0 238.3 3.7 215.9 3.3 2 785.0 43.2 - - - - 6 447.6

8. Fund - - 272.7 83.3 - - 54.5 16.7 - - - - - - 327.3

9. Operating costs 446.7 29.0 - - - - - - - - - - 1 091.1 71.0 1 537.8

10. Salaries and
allowances 571.2 14.8 - - - - 46.3 1.2 - - - - 3 249.0 84.0 3 866.5

Total programme costs 5 773.8 18.3 8 273.4 26.2 5 996.6 19.0 1 060.6 3.4 5 022.6 15.9 658.8 2.1 4 802.4 15.2 31 588.3
a The final disbursement categories will be decided based on IFAD procedures and will include a maximum of five cost categories to maximize efficiency.
b Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. All crop and farm models analysed are profitable, yielding positive net present

value. Economic analysis of the programme based on financial models and using
economic prices shows it to be profitable, with an estimated net present value of
404 million Bhutanese ngultrums or US$7.3 million, and an internal rate of return
of 16 per cent at a discount rate of 10 per cent.

29. The programme will directly benefit 28,975 households.

30. Immediate benefits include: (i) increased vegetable and dairy production;
(ii) greater use of sustainable agricultural practices; (iii) increased access to
extension and market information; (iv) sustainable extension services; (v) market
access through consolidation of production; (vi) enterprise establishment; and
(vii) greater employment opportunities. Indirect benefits include enhanced rural
employment, strengthened climate resilience and improved household nutrition.

D. Sustainability
31. The programme incorporates many features designed to promote long-term

sustainability. By selecting a limited number of value chains, production support is
area-specific and tailored to value chain planning needs, allowing subsequent
chains to be established. The programme will also build target communities’
ownership through village-level planning and implementation, including
investments in the development of operation and maintenance groups for assets.
Links between production, marketing and enterprise development will be forged to
promote the sharing of benefits between farmers and the private sector.
Accountability and ownership by farmers will be built to allow for demand-driven
services. Finally, the programme will strengthen grass-roots institutions and their
support services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. A major risk relates to the limited capacity of the implementing partner, FCBL, for

value chain and enterprise development, and PPPs. This has been mitigated by the
allocation of additional resources for strategy development, capacity development
support and targeted technical assistance. Strengthening climate change resilience
will be a challenge at the farm and community levels, and within value chains,
where risks, interests and values are diverse; success depends upon joint action
from an understanding of interdependent relationships. This risk has been mitigated
by strengthening climate-smart agriculture and farm management practices
through targeted technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

33. The programme conforms to IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting, gender,
environmental and natural resource management, and knowledge and innovation.
In terms of its environmental impact, the programme falls under Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
34. The programme is in line with the Government’s Eleventh Five Year Plan

(2013-2018) and will specifically contribute to expanding agriculture service
outreach to remote and vulnerable populations, and increasing smallholders’
resilience to climate change and shocks. The MoAF has developed a market-led
agriculture development strategy to facilitate the transition from subsistence to
commercial agriculture; the programme supports this strategy.

35. To enhance efficiency and reduce redundancies among government stakeholders,
the programme will aim to achieve complementarities among partners. Synergies
with the World Food Programme and the World Bank have already been identified.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Innovations and scaling upC.
36. The programme will support the following innovations: (i) the lead farmer model for

agricultural development; (ii) animal health service models; (iii) an e-agriculture
platform; (iv) permaculture approaches; and (v) linking smallholder market
development to the Bhutan commodity exchange. Although none of these
innovations is new, their integrated application in Bhutan through the proposed
programme is innovative. In addition, efforts to strengthen local institutions’
capacity for improved outreach and sustainability in collaboration with government
service networks have not previously been undertaken in Bhutan in an integrated
manner. Linking technical innovation with the development of new models is a
significant innovation in Bhutan.

37. In its second phase, the programme will also include areas with high production
and marketing potential for vegetable value chains in the south-central and
south-western districts, adding 7,500 direct beneficiaries (1,500 households).

Policy engagementD.
38. The programme will facilitate government linkages and policy dialogue towards the

commercialization of agriculture. This includes addressing RNR institutions and
policy issues to build strong agricultural institutions and sound policies for improved
and sustainable agricultural and marketing practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A programme financing agreement between the Kingdom of Bhutan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Kingdom of Bhutan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Kingdom
of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred ninety
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,890,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Bhutan in an amount equivalent to seven hundred sixty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 760,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 3,580,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups Empowerment and Livelihoods
Improvement Programme

Republic of India

Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department, Government of Odisha

Total programme cost: US$130.39 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 36.4 million (equivalent to approximately
US$51.20 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 25 years, including a grace period of five years, with
interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed
rate of 1.25 per cent per annum plus a service charge
of 0.75 per cent

Contribution of borrower: US$76.18 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.00 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme, as contained in
paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihoods Improvement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite its middle-income status, poverty reduction remains an important

challenge for India: 33 per cent of the world’s poor live in the country and poverty
has not fallen at the same pace as economic growth. Nutritional levels are
unacceptably low, with 42.5 per cent of children underweight for their age, being
one of the highest rates globally. Prevailing social inequality and the low
nutritional, educational and social status of women are considered key factors
contributing to the prevalence of malnutrition in children below the age of five.

2. India’s population is composed of several ethnic groups, speaking diverse
languages and more than 1,000 dialects. Poverty is particularly severe among
tribal populations. These groups identify themselves in more than 5,400 castes and
tribes and follow five major religions. India’s tribal populations are officially
registered as Scheduled Tribes (STs) according to distinct cultural and ethnic
features. STs, numbering 104.3 million in the 2011 census, constitute
approximately 8.6 per cent of India’s population. Unlike Scheduled Castes (SCs),
which are dispersed throughout the country, STs have traditionally been
concentrated in specific parts of the country characterized by forests, hills and
undulating inaccessible areas. This results in reduced access to basic services and
fewer opportunities for economic development. The decline in the poverty rate is
much slower for ST populations than for the general population. Of the total ST
populations, approximately 2.6 million (2.5 per cent) belong to Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). This classification is reserved for the most
disadvantaged of all ST communities. Currently, 75 identified PTGs are spread
across 17 Indian states and union territories.

3. The proposed Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP) will work in Odisha State, which has
one of the highest number of PTGs. Odisha is geographically the 8th largest state
and the 11th most populous among Indian states. Poverty rates of rural populations
are double those of their urban counterparts.

4. Odisha is home to 62 STs including 13 PTGs, which are concentrated in the Eastern
Ghats and the Northern Plateau. Both these regions are characterized by rugged
hilly terrain and high rainfall. Together they account for most of the state’s forests.
PTGs living in Odisha derive their livelihood mainly from shifting cultivation, rainfed
agriculture and the gathering of non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The incidence
of landlessness is high and farming practices have remained primitive, with rainfed
paddy and millets being the main crops.



EB 2015/114/R.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Several provisions in the Indian Constitution seek to ensure better quality of life for
PTGs. Yet their economic status has not improved. They rank poorly on all
development indicators, such as food and nutrition security, literacy and health.
Given their high dependence on an ecologically complex natural resource base,
they are also highly vulnerable to variability in weather and climate shocks. Owing
to poor farming systems and a lack of focus on the development of rainfed areas,
PTG areas have suffered widespread land degradation. Efforts are thus needed to
reverse this downward spiral of low productivity and a declining resource base.

6. To deliver services to the 17 PTG areas, the Government of India has established
microproject agencies (MPAs). However, a consolidated high-intensity, integrated
programme of support through these institutions – with clear targets and time
frames – is still missing. The OPELIP will deliver this by capitalizing on institutional
development that has already taken place, and will provide a range of services to
PTGs through appropriate development initiatives.

7. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the IFAD-supported Orissa Tribal
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme (OTELP), which has successfully
demonstrated an integrated development package in tribal areas. OTELP set up
village-level bodies and involved tribal groups in planning and implementation of
various development initiatives, especially development of the natural resources.
Encouraged by the success of OTELP, the Government of Odisha has requested
IFAD to scale up the approach into PTG areas. This is the first time an external
development partner has been asked to work in these most remote and difficult
areas of the state.

8. The programme is closely aligned with the priorities and strategies of both the
Government of India and the State Government of Odisha and will particularly
support the objective of achieving “faster and more inclusive growth”. It is
compatible with and supportive of other donor initiatives and will directly address
the strategic objectives of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP). The current RB-COSOP became effective in April 2011
and is jointly reviewed by IFAD and the Government of India annually to ensure full
alignment with national priorities and policies.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. OPELIP interventions will be implemented in 17 MPA areas located in 12 districts of

Odisha (Angul, Deogarh, Gajapati, Ganjam, Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keojhar,
Malkanagiri, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada, Rayagada,and Sundergarh). This will cover
13 PTGs living in some 1,019 villages and hamlets and 84 gram panchayats (the
local self-governing institution at the village level). Overall, the programme will
cover 62,356 households.

10. In line with IFAD’s policy on targeting, the OPELIP will target marginalized groups:
women, children, unemployed youth, hill-area cultivators, the landless among
PTGs, and other tribal peoples. Based on geographical targeting, it will work in a
predefined number of MPA gram panchayats. Some programme interventions –
such as village development planning and the associated village institutions, and
infrastructure such as rural roads – will benefit 100 per cent of the population living
in these gram panchayats. To ensure precise targeting of marginalized groups, a
specific targeting strategy has been developed for each component.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of the OPELIP is to achieve enhanced living conditions and reduced

poverty in target group households. It will support improved livelihoods and food



EB 2015/114/R.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and nutrition security for 32,090 PTG households, 13,970 other tribal households
and 10,810 other poor and 5,486 SC households. This will be achieved, in turn, by
building the capacity of target households, securing their entitlements to land and
forest, improving their agricultural practices to enhance production, promoting
income-generating microenterprises for alternate livelihoods, ensuring access to
services such as education and health, and improving community infrastructure. To
achieve the objective of empowerment, the programme will promote women’s self-
help groups (SHGs), organize village development committees (VDCs) for the
planning and implementation of programme interventions and train community
resource people (CRPs) to provide needed services in production, marketing and
legal assistance.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The OPELIP will have four components: community empowerment; natural

resource management (NRM) and livelihood improvement; community
infrastructure and drudgery reduction; and programme management.

13. Component 1: Community empowerment. Empowerment is the key
prerequisite to developing PTGs. It will be addressed through a series of capacity-
building initiatives, entry point activities and mobilization of community-based
organizations. Accordingly, the component will have two subcomponents:

(i) Community institutions. Promotion of village development associations
(VDAs) for the planning and execution of need-based community activities
that cover natural resource management, community-based paralegal
services, community-based health, hygiene and nutrition education, and
community infrastructure. Major activities will include: (a) engaging the
services of 17 NGOs supported by about 360 CRPs; (b) training of trainers
and capacity-building of CRPs; (c) mobilization of VDCs and capacity-building
of VDC members; (d) implementation of entry point activities in all 1,019
villages, as identified by VDCs; and (e) preparation of village development
plans (VDPs) and facilitation of VDCs in implementing activities identified in
VDPs.

(ii) Strengthening SHGs and rural finance. Promotion of SHGs and rural finance
services to enable social development of SHG members through facilitating
group savings and credit, and through building capacity. Key interventions
will include formation and strengthening of 3,800 SHGs, training of
microfinance CRPs, formation of 84 gram panchayat cluster-level forums
(GPLFs), provision of pro-poor and vulnerability reduction funds to SHGs and
community investment funds to GPLFs, and piloting of two cooperative
societies.

14. Component 2: Natural resource management and livelihood improvement.
Historically, PTGs have lived deeper inside forests than other STs, and some PTGs,
such as the Birhor and Mankirdia, were nomadic until recently. To support the
transition from hunting-gathering to shifting cultivation and eventually to settled
farming, this component will have three subcomponents:

(i) Natural resource management. Key interventions will include: (a) services of
an NGO specialized in land surveys and the issuing of land titles to PTGs;
(b) treatment of 20,000 hectares of arable land and construction of
900 irrigation structures; (c) capacity-building of 18,000 farmers in crop
development and horticulture; and (d) support to horticulture development
and cereal food crops, including oilseeds, pulses and tubers, in all villages.

(ii) Food and nutrition security. This will include: (a) training of school children
and SHG members in malnutrition, locally available nutritious foods,
preparation of nutritious food using local materials, sanitation and
alcoholism; (b) focus on cultivating locally available traditional food crops;



EB 2015/114/R.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

(c) nutrition-intensive interventions such as kitchen gardens, backyard
poultry- and goat-rearing; and (d) promotion of “convergence” to address
gaps in the areas of food availability, health, water and sanitation.

(iii) Livelihood improvement. The programme will support: (a) selection and
training of community service providers (CSPs); (b) household production
support; (c) market access support for producer collectives; (d) support for
NTFP marketing; and (e) vocational training and strengthening of PTG culture
and traditions.

15. Component 3: Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction. PTG
villages are characterized by poor housing, limited or no access to potable water
year round, absence of sanitation facilities, limited or no access to electricity and
limited or no road infrastructure. Some villages in the programme area have no
school buildings and, in those that do, in many cases the buildings are dilapidated
and without drinking water and sanitation facilities. Many villages do not have
paved roads or drainage inside the settlements, and children play in extremely
unhygienic conditions, especially during the rainy season. Though NTFPs constitute
a major livelihood source for PTGs, there are no platforms for drying and sorting
these commodities or for storage to facilitate collective marketing. This will be
addressed through two subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. The programme will support construction of:
(a) 300 drinking water schemes and 542 school toilets; (b) 4,000 housing
units and habitat development; (c) 500 km of roads and 50 km of
electrification; and (d) infrastructure for 542 drying yards, 84 market yards,
250 aggregation centres and 250 SHG worksheds; and will provide power
tiller units, 2,000 irrigation pump sets and 84 hydram units. Operation and
maintenance of these facilities will be through VDCs, and village volunteers
will be trained as community mechanics.

(ii) Drudgery reduction. Under this subcomponent, the programme will support:
(a) construction of 35,000 smokeless wood stoves; (b) installation of
20,000 solar lanterns; (c) maintenance of fuelwood reserves in 540 villages;
and (d) construction of 84 milling units for hulling rice, millet, etc.

16. Component 4: Programme management. This component will have three
subcomponents: (i) a programme management unit (PMU) will be set up within the
lead programme agency; (ii) the programme will strengthen the 17 existing MPAs
through staffing and facilities; and (iii) a programme monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and knowledge management (KM) unit will be set up within the PMU. The
programme will make an effort to strengthen existing systems within the MPAs,
rather than creating parallel ones.

17. Major outcomes of the OPELIP will include: 1,019 VDCs organized and functional;
3,800 SHGs and 84 GPLFs organized and functional; at least a 50 per cent
reduction in rural indebtedness; 100 per cent of PTG households holding
homestead titles and 75 per cent of them land titles; 43,000 households receiving
land and water management treatment measures; 19,000 households accessing
irrigation and an almost equal number of households planting fruit and spice crops;
31,000 households increasing cereal, millet, pulse and oilseed production;
9,000 households starting an income-generating activity; all households accessing
a water supply, and market and road connectivity; and 32,000 PTG households
having kitchen gardens, smokeless wood stoves and access to community fuelwood
reserves.



EB 2015/114/R.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
18. The OPELIP has been designed to follow the successful bottom-up planning

approach of OTELP. Success under OTELP was attributed to the fact that the
implementation process was owned by tribal peoples. With local community
institutions at the heart of the programme, the new design focuses on scaling up
activities that have already been tested and proven successful in Odisha. The
programme will adopt an integrated approach involving support for improved
access to land, natural resources, agricultural technologies, financial services,
markets, productive and social infrastructure, and essential social services. Gender
empowerment will be mainstreamed in all activities. Given the extremely severe
malnutrition situation in PTG villages, the design has also piloted an approach to
mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities across all components.

B. Organizational framework
19. At the national level, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance

will be the nodal agency for the programme. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be
involved in overall policy guidance.

20. At the state level, the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department (STSCDD) will be the lead programme agency. Overall policy guidance
will be provided through a programme steering committee under the Chief
Secretary. A PMU set up within STSCDD will have overall responsibility for day-to-
day management of the programme and the functions relating to planning, funds
flow, M&E, gender mainstreaming, policy dialogue and KM.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. The programme will follow the planning process undertaken by the
respective MPA, taking the specific objectives and purposes of the OPELIP into
account. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be drawn up by the
PMU, consolidating all microplans, in consultation with the respective MPAs and
partner NGOs.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will measure progress and
performance, and will be a learning and decision-making tool at various levels. The
PMU will establish an M&E unit, which will support progress monitoring by
programme field implementation units and partner NGOs. The M&E unit will also
monitor programme outcomes and impacts through, among other tools, annual
outcome surveys and by applying the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS) in accordance with IFAD guidelines. Semi-annual and annual reports will
also contain sections on analysis, interpretation and recommendations from
process monitoring, lessons learned and best practices.

23. Learning and knowledge management. Information generated by the
programme will be disseminated through IFAD websites, newsletters, thematic
reports and at learning events. The programme will develop a KM strategy and
appropriate action plans. KM will be used as a tool for internal learning by
programme stakeholders such as the staff of various implementing agencies, and
participating villagers and farmers, both women and men. Activities will include
regular review meetings at village/cluster, MPA and state levels and the production
of knowledge products such as newsletters (in local languages), briefs, training
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc.

24. The OPELIP will also use audio/video systems to disseminate information from
farmer to farmer and village to village. It will build on the KM culture and practices
of OTELP and on the Digital Green programme to amplify knowledge through
combining technology and social organizations for community transformation.



EB 2015/114/R.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the ongoing

OTELP. During implementation, the PMU will consolidate the AWP/B, including the
annual action plan for conservation-cum-development1 of microprojects, and
submit the consolidated AWP/B to the programme management committee for
approval. Financial accounting for the OPELIP will be done through computerized
accounting software at all levels. The software will be customized to generate
financial reports for the national and state governments and for IFAD according to
specific requirements. After programme start-up, the PMU will enter into a
subsidiary agreement with each MPA. Each MPA will submit a monthly progress
report to the PMU electronically. Strong internal control procedures will be
introduced, including adequate segregation of duties, especially at the MPA level.
Detailed procedures for recording, management and safeguarding of fixed
programme assets will be detailed in the programme implementation manual. An
internal auditor will be hired to provide continuous monitoring and review of
financial systems and procedures.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing of the programme will be routed through an
account designated to receive funds in advance (designated account), denominated
in United States dollars and maintained at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Controller, Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of
Finance, Government of India), will administer the designated account. Funds will
flow from STSCDD to the PMU bank account as non-lapsable funds in one or two
tranches, and funds from the PMU will be transferred to MPAs as grants-in-aid.
IFAD’s share of funds reimbursed to the Government of Odisha will flow to that
Government through the prescribed national procedures for budgetary support to
state governments. The PMU will release funds to the microprojects based on the
approved AWP/B for implementation of programme activities. The PMU will open a
separate bank account in a bank mutually acceptable to IFAD and STSCDD. Each
MPA will open a separate bank account, in any bank mutually acceptable to the
Government of Odisha and IFAD, to receive funds from the PMU and carry out
eligible expenditures.

27. Audit. The external auditing arrangements for the OPELIP will be established in
two tiers: (i) independent external audit; and (ii) compliance and performance
audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India. As the
OPELIP PMU will be a part of STSCDD, CAG will undertake compliance and
performance audit of the department, in addition to the independent external
audit.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines and procurement handbook, 2010. Procurement
will be undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted
by the PMU and approved by the programme management committee and IFAD.

29. Governance. An intregrated framework for good governance has been developed
to ensure: (i) information transparency in the public domain; (ii) accountability in
the use of resources; and (iii) participation of the communities in decisions that
may affect them. The involvement of affected communities at all stages of
programme implementation can simultaneously improve development of outcomes
and reduce the scope for fraud and corruption. Key features of this governance
framework include, among others, use of a computerized financial management
system; setting up of a complaints and remedies mechanism; rotation of group
leaders of VDC, SHG, GPLF and social audit of group programme accounts; and
regular IFAD implementation support and supervision missions.

1 From the “Conservation-cum-Development Plan for PTGs” (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India).



EB 2015/114/R.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
30. The OPELIP will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the programme’s start-up

phase, IFAD will attend the state-level start-up workshop and participate in
discussions on the programme’s approach and strategy. It will field annual
supervision missions, which will review progress with regard to physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations,
and will result in agreed actions to further enhance progress and performance.
Government of Odisha representatives will participate in these supervision
missions. IFAD will also field implementation support missions on specific technical
issues.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs are estimated at 7,954.15 million Indian rupees (Rs)

(US$130.39 million), including contingencies (US$6.30 million), over an eight-year
period. Key assumptions used in estimating programme costs include: (i) price
contingencies assumed at 5 per cent and applied on all items, except for grant and
subsidies categories and staff salaries financed by IFAD; (ii) an exchange rate of
Rs 61 per United States dollar; (iii) taxes and duties of 5 per cent on training, staff
and operating costs, of 15 per cent on service provider contracts and civil works,
and of 10 per cent on goods and equipment; (iv) all unit costs input in the local
currency unit (i.e. Rs); and (v) taxes excluded from IFAD financing.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Borrower/

counterpart IFAD Beneficiaries Total

1. Community empowerment
Community institutions 6 449 9 653 - 16 102
Strengthening SHGs and rural finance 602 5 654 - 6 256

Subtotal community empowerment 7 051 15 307 - 22 357

2. Natural resource management and livelihood improvement
Natural resource management 13 718 8 584 2 116 24 418
Food and nutrition security 961 4 574 - 5 534
Livelihood improvement 1 313 7 565 559 9 437

Subtotal natural resource management and livelihood
improvement

15 991 20 723 2 676 39 390

3. Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction
Community infrastructure 40 641 1 126 69 41 836
Drudgery reduction 826 4 333 257 5 416

Subtotal community infrastructure and drudgery reduction 41 467 5 459 327 47 253

4. Programme management
Programme management unit 1 861 2 547 - 4 408
Microproject agency unit 9 615 6 369 - 15 984
M&E and KM 201 803 - 1 004

Subtotal programme management 11 677 9 719 - 21 396

Total cost 76 185 51 209 3 002 130 396

B. Programme financing
32. The programme will be funded through IFAD financing and Government of Odisha

counterpart financing from state budgetary resources, from funds under article
275(1) Special Central Assistance to Tribal Peoples Sub Plan, from the
conservation-cum-development fund and through beneficiary contributions. IFAD
will provide a loan of about US$51.20 million. The Government will provide



EB 2015/114/R.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

US$76.18 million, including staff costs, operating costs and the annual budget
allocation for development of PTGs and other STs. Beneficiaries are expected to
make an in kind contribution of labour equivalent to US$3.00 million.
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure, category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
Borrower /

counterpart Percentage IFAD Percentage Beneficiaries Percentage Total

1. Civil work 47 043 84.9 7 131 12.9 1 246 2.2 55 420
2. Traininga 2 423 16.4 11 761 79.8 559 3.8 14 744
3. Goods, services
and inputs 15 978 43.9 19 187 52.8 1 197 3.3 36 362
4. Grants - - 7 149 100.0 - - 7 149
5. Operating costsb 10 741 64.2 5 981 35.8 - - 16 721

Total programme
costs

76 185 58.4 51 209 39.3 3 002 2.3 130 396

a Training and capacity-building.
b Includes staff salaries.

33. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring that the OPELIP start-up proceeds
smoothly, preparatory activities related to the NRM and livelihood improvement
component, certain staff costs, and preparation of a baseline survey and manuals
are proposed to be undertaken from April 2014 to entry-into-force of the financing
agreement. Accordingly, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing, approval for IFAD retroactive financing for expenditures up
to US$406,240 is recommended. These proposed expenditures will fall under two
expenditure categories: (i) goods, services and inputs; and (ii) training and
capacity-building (table 3). The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the programme enters into force.
Table 3
Indicative retroactive financing by component, cost category and financier
(United States dollars)

Component
Disbursement account
category

Estimated
expenditure

Amount to be
reimbursed by IFAD

1. Community empowerment
Wages to multipurpose workers Goods, services and inputs 72 000 36 000

2. NRM and livelihood improvement
Engaging the services of a rural
organization

Training and capacity-building 320 000 256 000

4. Programme management
Baseline survey Training and capacity-building 134 400 107 520
Preparation of finance manual Training and capacity-building 8 400 6 720

Total 534 800 406 240

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Programme investments have an overall internal rate of return of 23 per cent, with

a net present value of Rs 7,840 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.85. The
programme remains viable if costs increase and/or benefits decrease by
25 per cent. Farm model analysis shows significant increases in food production
from 510 kg to 1,020 kg per household, with net incomes increasing several fold
over existing levels.

35. A total of 62,356 households (comprising 32,090 PTGs; 13,970 other ST
households; 5,486 SC households; and 10,810 others) would benefit directly from
the programme.



EB 2015/114/R.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. Immediate benefits from the OPELIP include: (i) increased productivity through the
introduction of better management practices and improved farming practices;
(ii) minimized soil erosion; (iii) reduced runoff and increased infiltration;
(iv) enhancement of organic content of the soil; (v) greater social cohesion among
target group communities due to greater interaction with VDAs and SHGs;
(vi) security of land tenure due to recognition of the usufruct rights of PTGs and
restoration of alienated land; and (vii) increased recognition of and participation by
women.

D. Sustainability
37. The land survey and land allocation, with land title rights, provided to PTGs is

expected to trigger sustained improvements in land use and overall productivity.
Quality of the produce will be ensured through provision of quality seed and
seedlings by the programme and through capacity-building. Marketing could be a
constraint in the initial years, but would be overcome through the operations of
producers’ collectives and the provision of market infrastructure, as demand is
increasing for produce from the programme area. Increased capacity of the target
groups to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises through programme
support will enhance the sustainability of livelihoods.

38. The programme will contribute to environmental and NRM sustainability. Planting of
fruit trees in the current shifting cultivation areas will help protect soils and
improve productivity. The fruit trees and spice crops will provide PTGs and other
STs a regular and more reliable source of income and will reduce the temptation to
encroach on forest lands. In addition, programme participants will receive technical
training in good agricultural practices, improved soil fertility and soil health
management, eco-restoration techniques, planting along contour lines to prevent
erosion, and organic farming.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. There are a number of risks associated with the programme as detailed in the

logical framework. The goal-level risk of lack of support by the Government is
reduced by the Government commitment to continue tribal development
programmes and to enhance investment. The development-objective-level risk of
social instability is addressed by promoting and supporting local governments and
community institutions in building a coalition facilitating stability and economic
growth. The risk of a complex, challenging institutional setting involving 17 MPAs
will be reduced by additional, qualified staffing and staff incentives. Output-level
risks, such as crop production adversely affected by changing weather patterns,
will be reduced through a number of measures to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Other risk mitigation measures include: (i) promoting interventions that
are profitable for PTGs; (ii) enhancing communication links for better access to
markets and services; and (iii) ensuring community participation in programme
planning and implementation to ensure community support for the programme and
insulation from the left-wing insurgency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The OPELIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

supports both strategic objectives of the IFAD RB-COSOP for India. It is also
directed to one of the main target groups identified in the COSOP – indigenous
tribal groups. The programme design adheres to IFAD policies for poverty,
targeting and gender, indigenous peoples, climate change, scaling up, good
governance and the environment. The programme is classified as a category B
operation; thus no further environmental assessment is considered necessary.



EB 2015/114/R.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The State Government has been actively involved in formulation and appraisal of

the OPELIP. The programme is built on the success of OTELP as well as on lessons
learned from other IFAD-supported projects in India. The OPELIP is aligned with
the India COSOP 2010-2015 and is compatible with and supportive of other state
government initiatives. It is also in line with strategies and policies of the
Governments of India and Odisha for the development of tribal and vulnerable
communities. The programme goal and objective are aligned with the objective of
“faster and more inclusive growth” of the Governments of Odisha and India.

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The OPELIP represents a scaling up of the successful interventions of OTELP, and it

is expected that the OPELIP, itself, will be scaled up in time. As this is the first
externally funded development intervention targeted to PTGs, it offers an
opportunity to refine a model for PTG areas, which can then be scaled up to PTG
areas in other states with large PTG populations, such as Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh.

43. The OPELIP will undertake case studies of innovations and success stories on a
regular basis and will report on them through annual progress reports and in the
India country newsletters.

D. Policy engagement
44. The policy engagement of the programme will support the Government of Odisha’s

efforts to address a number of policy issues relating to the development of tribal
populations. The programme will also provide funding for studies on key policy
issues and dissemination of the findings, and will engage in dialogue with the State
Government on other unresolved policy areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to thirty-six million four hundred thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 36,400,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Indonesia for the
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

Republic of Indonesia

Integrated Participatory Development and Management
of the Irrigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institutions: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Borrower: Republic of Indonesia

Executing agency: Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR),
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH)

Total project cost: US$802.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 93.15 million
(equivalent to approximately US$98.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 1.41 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$600 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower: US$102.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Indonesia for the Integrated Participatory Development
and Management of the Irrigation Project, as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Indonesia for
the Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Indonesia has made significant progress in reducing poverty and promoting

economic growth. Agriculture remains an important sector as a pathway for rural
transformation and poverty reduction. Yet Indonesian farmers face new threats
from volatile food prices, erratic agricultural markets and policies, growing
insecurity of access to land, degradation of natural resources and the worsening
effects of climate change. Ensuring inclusive economic development through
strengthened agriculture-sector performance is a key priority for the Government of
Indonesia, which has recently prioritized issues of food sovereignty and rural
development. Food security is challenged by a declining rural infrastructure – a
consequence of inadequate financing and delivery of operations and maintenance
(O&M) that limits increased productivity for rice and other high-value crops. High
transport and logistics costs are a serious constraint on business operations and
undermine the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. In addition, increased
higher-value cropping and commercialized agriculture are needed to improve rural
livelihoods. Technical and administrative capacity constraints hamper effective
planning, management and development as Indonesia’s decentralized government
structure heightens capacity challenges. Climate change is expected to further
worsen water scarcity in some areas, result in more-frequent extreme weather
events and less-favourable rainfall patterns for agriculture. It is recognized that
improved integration of irrigation management and agricultural development is
needed if the country is to achieve the desired impact on food security and rural
livelihoods.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. As part of its National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019, the
Government aims at self-sufficiency in key staple foods, including rice, by 2017. In
support of this target, it has committed to rehabilitating 3.2 million hectares (ha) of
degraded irrigation systems to enhance rice and other food production. This has
placed considerable focus on agriculture and water, with calls for both the public
and private sectors to consider comprehensive and collaborative responses to
national development targets. Earlier attempts to enhance the productivity of
irrigated agriculture through a largely infrastructural focus have achieved
suboptimal longer-term results, mainly owing to: (i) failure to empower farmers
and strengthen a farming system response that maximized their opportunities to
capture sustainable economic benefits from infrastructure investments; and (ii)
failure to ensure that all parts of the new or rehabilitated irrigated schemes were
well maintained.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

2

3. The project builds on these lessons and on learning from previous and ongoing
investments in irrigated agriculture. It is strongly aligned with government policies
and expenditure plans.

4. The Integrated Participatory Development and Management of the Irrigation Project
(IPDMIP) will significantly contribute to achievement of government priorities to: (i)
increase rice production for food security; (ii) develop higher-value cropping to
improve rural nutrition and livelihoods; and (iii) promote more productive irrigation
infrastructure and its sustainable management through the delivery of an
integrated package of infrastructure, institutional reforms and capacity
development to catalyse sector advances. Importantly, the project will complement
– and provide a robust framework for promoting – more-effective public and private
investment in irrigated agriculture.

5. By integrating a focus on irrigation rehabilitation into strengthened support for
agricultural and farmer livelihood development, the project provides an innovative
approach to investing in irrigated agriculture. It will introduce strengthened
mechanisms to promote more-effective cross-sectoral coordination and institutional
and policy development.

6. IPDMIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, the current
interim country strategy and the forthcoming results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for Indonesia (April 2016), which will focus
on productivity enhancement, market access and institution- and capacity-building
for rural women and men.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Project area. The proposed project area will cover an initial 16 provinces

(5 in Sumatra, 4 in Java, 2 in Kalimantan, 3 in Sulawesi and 2 in Nusa Tenggara),
comprising 74 districts and up to 1,800 irrigation schemes, covering a total area of
some 450,000 ha (approximately 14 per cent of the 3.2 million ha national target).
Importantly, it will pursue a scaling-up strategy to promote the replication of
project activities in other villages in the targeted districts and in other districts and
provinces. It is estimated that the project model could be replicated in
approximately 10,000 subprojects covering some 2.2 million ha. This would
increase potential coverage to 6 million households or some 24 million individuals.

8. Target group. The project design adopts an inclusive targeting approach at the
irrigation scheme level to benefit all active farmers in the scheme. Within targeted
communities, categories of poor rural people consist of poor, near-poor and
better-off people. An explicit poverty and targeting strategy will be employed to
reach the most marginal households, including ‘poor people’ (i.e. moderately poor,
poor and very poor people), women, youth and those farmers at the tail end of the
irrigation schemes, who are normally the most vulnerable. The total number of
project beneficiaries is estimated at 900,000 households or 4 million individuals, of
whom approximately 50 per cent are women.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of the project is to improve food security and livelihoods in rural

Indonesia. Its outcome objective is to increase the value and sustainability of
irrigated agriculture.

C. Components
10. Component 1. Increased irrigated agriculture incomes will focus on improving

farm and market systems and on providing appropriate service support, including
financial services, mainly for rice and high-value irrigated crops.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

3

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Improved farm productivity and services focuses
on on-farm activities and comprises: support to improved farmer extension
services available to smallholder farmers; farmer-to-farmer knowledge
dissemination; access to and storage of sufficient good-quality seed and other
inputs; and mechanization, including support for enhancing on-farm systems
for crop intensification and diversification and ensuring that farmers acquire
the necessary knowledge, skills and confidence to adopt improved agronomy
and better risk-management practices.

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Improved market access and services focuses on
promoting better value addition and post-harvest activities and comprises
facilitating public and private investment through combined funding
instruments, supported by consultation platforms and capacity development
initiatives for rice, vegetables and technology access. For rice, support will be
provided to improve post-harvest activities and value addition. For
vegetables, support will build on existing and emerging production clusters,
following an iterative process to facilitate and develop links between buyers,
producers and service providers. It will prioritize innovation in local value
chains and actively promote development of local private-sector markets. As
with subcomponent 1.1, initiatives will be taken to encourage partnership
with private input suppliers.

(c) Subcomponent 1.3. Improved financial access and use of services is
based on facilitating better access to and leveraging mainstream financial
services. It will include savings, credit and, subsequently, other innovative
rural financial services (e.g. digital financial services and agriculture
microinsurance) by sustainable financial service providers, enabling seasonal
finance needs to be met through inclusive and pro-poor services. The
approach will build on existing structures and will develop partnerships with a
small number of existing financial service providers that demonstrate a clear
social inclusion performance and business strategy in expanding their
smallholder agricultural portfolio, and that have existing, proven financial
service schemes broadly aligned with the project’s objectives and aspirations
for rural financial services.

11. Component 2. Improved irrigation systems infrastructure will focus on
support to rehabilitation or upgrading of primary and secondary irrigation systems
and drainage infrastructure, and will include modernization of these systems for
one or several larger schemes.

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Preparatory assessments comprises: activities to
provide reliable information regarding water availability in the basin, in
relation to the needs of the irrigation scheme – to be taken into account to
ensure that the scheme has adequate water to meet irrigation requirements;
and participatory rapid rural assessments, pre-design and drafting of overall
scheme intervention plans. Hydrological assessments will also take into
account the possible impacts of climate change.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Irrigation systems rehabilitation, upgrading
and/or modernization comprises activities to design and implement civil
works with respect to irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Detailed
engineering designs for civil works will cover primary and secondary irrigation
infrastructure, tertiary irrigation infrastructure and drainage works. To
address the water/food/energy nexus, the project will equip irrigation canals
with hydropower turbines – on a pilot basis – for management by WUAs
where technically, economically and institutionally feasible.

12. Component 3. Improved irrigation systems management will focus on
strengthening irrigation water delivery at the scheme level.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

4

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Empowerment of WUAs comprises activities to
facilitate the organization of irrigating farmers into empowered WUAs/WUAFs
capable of investing in and managing tertiary irrigation infrastructure, to
ensure adequate water supply and access to all farmers in the tertiary
irrigation scheme. Specifically, this will support training and capacity-building
of WUAs/WUAFs at the institutional level. Institutional support activities will
establish, reorganize and complete the WUA organizational structures in the
targeted irrigation systems, following government policy and procedure and
introducing the lessons of international experiences. This will also include
legal registration of WUAs/WUAFs, development of by-laws by their members,
appointment of board members and assignment of roles and responsibilities
in agreement with all involved farmers.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Improvement of irrigation systems field
management comprises activities to support central, provincial and district
governments in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water
management through activities such as: irrigation system performance
assessments; preparation of irrigation management plans and irrigation
service plans; volumetric discharge measurement and water accounting;
improvement of irrigation service performance; needs-based planning and
budgeting; and refurbishment of existing offices, equipment and facilities
within the context of the preparation of O&M. To achieve sustainable
improvement of irrigation system performance, this will include establishment
and start-up assistance to irrigation management units (IMUs) for selected
irrigation schemes under the project.

(c) Subcomponent 3.3. Operationalization of a national asset
management system comprises activities in support of operationalizing
such a system, including aerial surveys – using remote sensing technology –
of primary, secondary, tertiary and other infrastructure, as well as
hydrological and agricultural data. These data will also be used to further
inform hydrological assessments under subcomponent 2.1 and to assist
project management and implementation under subcomponent 4.4.

13. Component 4. Strengthened policy and institutional frameworks for
irrigated agriculture will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacity of government
institutions and staff; and (b) supporting executing and implementing institutions at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision. Improving
coordination among the different government institutions will be an important
element of these aspects.

(a) Subcomponent 4.1. Strengthened local-level policy, regulatory and
institutional framework comprises: supporting government line agencies
at provincial and district levels in identifying specific policy issues and
reflecting on how these could be tackled; supporting Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (BAPPEDA), the provincial and district planning agency,
in undertaking analysis and synthesis of knowledge from various sources and
in informing policy dialogue; and supporting both the line agencies and
BAPPEDAs in identifying policy options and actions.

(b) Subcomponent 4.2. Establishment of water resource management
and knowledge centres. Sixteen such centres will be established or
strengthened at the provincial level – including through recruitment of
personnel and procurement of office and training equipment and facilities –
for training on technical and institutional aspects of irrigation planning,
development and management.

(c) Subcomponent 4.3. Improved policy coordination for irrigated
agriculture comprises support for establishing and supporting a knowledge
management centre (KMC) in the National Development Planning Agency



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

5

(BAPPENAS), which will coordinate support for smallholder irrigated
agriculture, promote policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and
strengthen national and local policy processes. The KMC’s remit would be
related to knowledge management and policy development, enabling the
Government to: foster continuity between development projects and policies
for smallholder irrigated agriculture by drawing out lessons; unify knowledge
from diverse initiatives; promote coordinated approaches to policy dialogue
among domestic stakeholders; and support national and local policy
processes.

(d) Subcomponent 4.4. Project management and implementation support
comprises support to executing and implementing agencies (EA and IAs) at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision and
strengthening the planning, implementation and management capacities of
IAs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project adopts a menu-based programmatic approach: identifying and
packaging a strategic set of interventions in order to achieve the desired outcomes
and development objectives. Menu items will essentially consist of the
subcomponents and activities attributed to each output.

15. The implementation approach builds on the recently completed Asian Development
Bank (ADB) supported Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Adjustments have
been made based on lessons learned from ADB’s and IFAD’s project implementation
experiences in Indonesia. These seek to strengthen linkages between agriculture
and the irrigation rehabilitation interventions, to strengthen poverty targeting, and
to respond to the need to expedite project implementation, with a view towards
contributing to national development targets for agriculture and for irrigation
rehabilitation.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Steering Committee on Water Resources (NSCWR), chaired by the

Deputy Minister of Maritime and Natural Resources, Ministry of National
Development Planning/BAPPENAS, will be responsible for the overall coordination of
the project. The Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR) in the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) will be the executing agency. A national project
management unit (NPMU) will be established under the Directorate of Irrigation and
Lowland in DGWR to ensure overall coordination of implementation of the project. A
total of four national project implementation units (NPIUs) will be established: one
in the Directorate of Irrigation and Swamps (DoIS) in DGWR, responsible for
implementation of the irrigation infrastructure systems and related activities; one in
DoIS, responsible for implementation of O&M-related activities; one in the
Directorate General of Regional Development in the Ministry of Home Affairs
(MoHA), responsible for overall guidance of the BAPPEDAs; and one in the Agency
for Agricultural Extension and Human Resources Development (AAEHRD) in the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), responsible for implementation of agricultural and
related activities, in cooperation with provincial and district agriculture agencies.
The IFAD grant will be administered by the Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

17. Planning. The NPMU, in consultation with the NPIUs, will prepare and submit an
overall annual workplan, showing supporting (general) and subproject activities, to



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

6

ADB and IFAD for review and no objection. In addition, each participating district
and province will prepare an overall work plan and budget.

18. Monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will serve three
distinct functions strengthening management, accountability and learning. A project
performance monitoring system will consolidate the M&E functions into a unified
system. Building on lessons learned under the IFAD-supported Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP), it will comprise both a comprehensive list of
performance indicators at impact, outcome, output and suboutput levels, derived
from the project Design and Monitoring Framework (appendix II), and impact and
post-completion performance data. Data will be disaggregated by component and,
where possible, by district, gender and other dimensions. The indicators used will
include those contributing to IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The project will undertake baseline, midterm and impact studies and
conduct annual outcome surveys.

19. Learning. The M&E system will also seek to inform on issues that can improve the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the project. The M&E unit, in collaboration
with the NPMU and other key project stakeholders, will identify specific topics that
need particular analysis – technical, institutional and policy-derived – and will
conduct snapshot studies. For each study topic, a learning plan will be developed to
ensure that the study feeds into a larger process of reflection at the project level
and, where appropriate, beyond.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The NPMU will be responsible for the overall consolidation

and coordination of project financial reporting and audit. The four NPIUs will be
responsible for financial management of expenditures under the respective project
components and/or activities. The roles and responsibilities of the implementing
entities will be clearly defined in the project implementation manual.

21. Financial management implementation arrangements will be aligned to national
public financial management (PFM) systems, which have been strengthened in
recent years. PFM modernization initiatives include an integrated financial
management information system, consolidation of the Treasury single account,
government accounting and reporting, strengthened audit institutions, accrual
accounting and adoption of international accounting and auditing standards. A
financial management assessment of the project has been prepared in accordance
with IFAD and ADB’s guidelines for financial management of projects. This
assessment finds that the overall project financial management risk is moderate,
and identifies mitigating actions, including strengthening financial management
capacity at all levels (EA, IAs and PIUs) in terms of staff training and technical
assistance, automated accounting systems, and internal and external audits.

22. Flow of funds. Donor funding will flow through three designated accounts
managed by the Ministry of Finance for the IFAD loan, IFAD grant and ADB loan
respectively. Three types of disbursement mechanisms will be adopted for the
project, consisting of: (i) replenishments of both the IFAD and ADB designated
accounts; (ii) reimbursement of prefinanced expenditures by both IFAD and ADB;
and (iii) direct payments.

23. Flow of funds for the project will be determined by the implementation strategies
adopted by IAs. These will consist of a combination of: (i) reimbursement from
Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (the national revenue and budget
agency) funded activities, which would then be passed on to local governments
through the deconcentration mechanism (Dekonsentrasi/Tugas Pembantuan); and
(ii) reimbursement for activities implemented under prefinancing agreements.

24. Audit. Internal audits will be conducted by the internal audit units of IAs, in
accordance with their mandate and annual workplans. As regards external audit



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

7

arrangements, the consolidated project accounts, prepared by the NPMU, will be
audited by the national auditor, in accordance with international standards for
these institutions. Audited project financial statements will be submitted to IFAD
and ADB within six months of the end of each fiscal year, in line with IFAD and ADB
audit guidelines. The audit reports will provide opinions, for IFAD and ADB funding
respectively, on the financial statements, use of designated accounts, statements of
expenditure and financing agreement covenants. The audit report will include a
management letter assessing the project’s internal control framework at diverse
implementing levels and making recommendations for improvement. The resolution
of audit observations will be monitored by the NPMU, the NPIUs and the national
auditor.

25. Procurement. The procurement of goods and works for IFAD financing will be
undertaken in accordance with the borrower/recipient procurement regulations to
the extent they are consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.

26. Governance. In line with their respective policies, IFAD and ADB will investigate,
directly or through their agents, any violations of the anticorruption policy relating
to the project. All contracts shall include provisions specifying the right of ADB and
IFAD to audit and examine the records and accounts of the EA and all project
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.

27. In addition, ADB’s accountability mechanism and IFAD's complaints procedure
provide independent processes through which people adversely affected by
ADB- and IFAD-assisted projects can voice and seek resolution of their problems,
as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s and IFAD's operational policies and
procedures.

28. Supervision. Supervision will be undertaken by IFAD in collaboration with ADB. A
formal supervision plan covering the period up to the midterm review will be agreed
upon at project start-up. In addition, IFAD will adopt a continuous supervision and
implementation support approach through the newly opened country office. An
extensive review will be carried out after two years of project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The project is estimated to cost US$802.4 million, including physical and price

contingencies of US$49.17 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

1. Increased irrigated agriculture
incomes 97 473 97 473

2. Improved irrigation systems
infrastructure 434 592 434 592

3. Improved irrigation systems
management 1 038 85 448 156 86 642

4. Strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for irrigated agriculture 1 489 79 960 102 265 183 714

Total project cost 98 511 1 489 600 000 102 421 802 421

Interest during implementation 49 917 49 917

Commitment charges 524 524

Total disbursement 98 511 1 489 600 000 152 862 852 862



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

8

B. Project financing
30. The Government has requested financing of US$100 million from IFAD, consisting

of a loan of US$98.5 million and a grant of US$1.5 million. The IFAD loan and grant
will finance component 1 and some activities under components 3 and 4. The
Government has further requested a loan of US$600 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources. The ADB loan will finance components 2, 3 and 4. The
Government contribution to project costs is estimated at US$102.4 million.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 362 805 100 362 805
2. Vehicles and equipment 4 663 5 150 10 14 991 3 19 804
3. Consulting services - international 2 709 3 3 798 1 6 374
4. Consulting services - national 18 154 19 361 24 44 586 7 63 231
5. Term staff 5 342 5 5 342
6. Service contract 1 038 1 10 141 2 11 179
7. Workshop, training, socialization 29 014 30 271 18 36 956 6 66 243
8. Survey and studies 777 1 327 22 101 032 17 102 136
9. Institutional capacity-building 13 293 2 13 293
10. Safeguard/land

acquisition/resettlement 1 260 0.2 1 260
11. Incremental administration cost 380 26 11 139 2 102 421 100 113 940
12. Materials 15 297 16 15 297
13. Finance and credit 21 516 22 21 516

Total project cost 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 75 102 421 13 802 421
Interest during implementation 49 917 100 49 917
Commitment charges 524 100 524

Total disbursement 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 70 152 862 18 852 862

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. Benefits. Benefits would accrue from: (i) improved extension delivery; (ii) use of

improved seed; (iii) adoption of better water management techniques; (iv) access
to mechanization; (v) access to finance; (vi) enhanced access to and more-reliable
irrigation; and (vii) enhanced productivity in agriculture. Yet, in addition to on-farm
investments, higher returns are also generated by other important factors,
including: (i) an improved tertiary irrigation system; (ii) more-functional WUAs;
(iii) improved access to farm roads; and (iv) farmer training in water budgeting and
in financial literacy.

32. Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
project is estimated at 17 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the
net benefit stream, discounted at 10 per cent, is 4,944 billion Indonesian rupiah.
The EIRR was subject to sensitivity analysis to measure the impact variations in key
variables due to unforeseen factors. The results indicate that the most significant of
these risks would be overestimation of the achievable with-project rice yields or a
two-year (or more) delay in achieving project benefits. The former is considered a
low risk, as the yield potential is well known for available rice varieties genetically
superior to the varieties normally used by farmers at present. The latter will only be
a risk if there are delays once the project has started, and mitigation measures are
already being implemented to ensure a timely achievement of project benefits.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) impact of capacity-building

activities on the formation of social and human capital among the identified target



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

9

groups (farmer groups and government officials); (ii) impact on relevant policy
frameworks and compilation of knowledge stock within the Government; (iii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iv) linkages built among different
actors within the value chain.

34. Moreover, the project has an explicit scaling-up strategy to enhance the impact and
sustainability of achieved results.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Although this is a very large and geographically dispersed project, its overall

premise is simple. The main risk of lack of support by the Government is reduced,
given the close alignment of project activities with national development priorities.
Already, prior to implementation, stakeholders across government agencies are
collaborating closely in preparing project implementation. The risk of lack of
coordination among stakeholders and limited understanding of project activities is
thus considered manageable. Assessments with regard to risks related to financial
management and procurement have been conducted and mitigation measures
identified. Environmental risks have been identified as manageable. The project
approach includes an additional mechanism to assess and mitigate risks at the
localized, subproject level.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The project design adheres to relevant IFAD policies for microfinance,
private-sector participation, the environment, targeting and gender. The project is
categorized as environmental category B, in accordance with ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement 2009.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The project is set within a number of key government policy documents. The

National Long-Term Development Plan 2005-2025 and the related National
Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019 give prominence to: agriculture-sector
development, in particular ensuring food security, self-sufficiency and food
sovereignty through increased domestic production capacity; and the improved
provision of food which is sufficient in quantity and diversity, and which meets the
requirements of food safety, quality and nutrient content at an affordable price. The
project will support implementation of the participating ministries’ strategic plans
and priorities.

38. The project will complement and provide a robust framework for government
expenditure plans: MoPWH will invest almost US$25 billion over the period
2015-2019, including more than US$5 billion for irrigation rehabilitation works. MoA
has allocated US$219 million in 2015 through UPSUS for nationwide investments in
priority areas (i.e. agricultural infrastructure, seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery
and extension services). Overall investments of almost US$15 billion are foreseen
for 2015-2019, including more than US$3 billion for improvements in agricultural
irrigation infrastructure and almost US$3 billion for improvements in productivity
and production. Both investments are for rice and food crops and are intended to
contribute to achieving food self-sufficiency by 2017. Thus the project enables more
effective and more efficient coordination of public investment in irrigated
agriculture.

Innovations and scaling upC.
39. The project adopts an innovation and scaling-up agenda responding to the

Government’s expectation that externally financed projects offer innovative
solutions that can be scaled up and that they assist learning through
implementation experience and the development of new policies, institutional
arrangements and programmes at the national level. The project will: (i) facilitate



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

10

piloting of innovations through subprojects, as well as at the overall project
management level; (ii) conduct evaluations or studies to review experiences gained
with the innovations promoted; (iii) analyse evidence, discuss findings with
stakeholders and synthesize conclusions; and (iv) support the scaling up of
successful approaches, methods and technologies – both within the project and
beyond it, through public policies, institutions and practices.

Policy engagementD.
40. In response to the Government’s request for strengthened policy-level support for

irrigated agriculture, the project will focus on strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff at national, provincial and district levels to
conduct consultative policy dialogue and design and to implement evidence-based
policies, regulations and strategies for participatory irrigation management and
irrigated smallholder agriculture. It will strengthen the local-level policy and
regulatory framework for supporting smallholder irrigated agriculture, building on
the participatory irrigation principles of the Government and ensuring that these
are operationalized. It will also strengthen the capacity of those institutions
responsible for coordinating irrigation development and delivering services, and will
build farmers’ understanding of their rights and responsibilities under national/local
policies. Moreover, the project will support the establishment and initial operation
of irrigation knowledge and training centres at the provincial level and will establish
a KMC within BAPPENAS to coordinate support for irrigated agriculture, promote
policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and strengthen national and local
policy processes.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as
appendix I.

42. The Republic of Indonesia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Indonesia in an amount equivalent to ninety-three million one
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 93,150,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Indonesia in an amount equivalent to one million four hundred and ten
thousand euros (EUR 1,410,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project

Eastern States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$65.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20 million (equivalent to approximately US$27.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1.1 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM)1

Amount of cofinancing: US$29.2 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of borrower: US$4.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to successful negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and KEXIM.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

1

11

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendations for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project, as contained in paragraph 57.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Eastern States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive

path of political and economic reforms. These aim to introduce elements of popular
representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and inclusive social
development, improve the business environment, attract foreign investment and
reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar is the largest country in South-East Asia, with rich endowments of land
and water, and favourable conditions for agriculture. Its population was estimated
at 51.5 million in 2014, with an annual growth rate of 1 per cent. Some 67 per cent
of the population is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic
groups and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being rich in resources, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-
East Asia. An estimated one third of the population lived below the poverty line in
2005, decreasing to one fourth in 2010. The 2014 Human Development Report
ranked the country 150th among 186 nations rated, with a human development
index of 0.524. In 2013, Myanmar's GDP amounted to US$53 billion, with an annual
growth rate of 6.8 per cent.

4. The agriculture sector constitutes the core of the economy, representing 38 per
cent of GDP and employing about 70 per cent of the working population. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty in Myanmar, and there is
significantly greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also greater
among diverse ethnic groups compared with the majority ethnic population.

5. While, in aggregate terms, Myanmar produces a surplus of food, many rural areas
suffer from chronic food insecurity. Disparities exist among and within states and
within communities, where household food insecurity and poverty are closely
linked. Rural poverty is largely a function of lack of resource endowments. Poor
rural people typically consist of landless people and small and marginal farmers,
usually owning less than an acre to up to five acres of land. They lack access to
adequate and nutritious food, as well as to essential non-food items. Many of the
poorest live in isolated hill tracts of ethnic states in the eastern regions. These
states were previously affected by decades of civil conflict that left them isolated
and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. As requested by the Government, the 2013-2015 PBAS allocation for Myanmar is
being applied to two loan-financed projects to develop scalable models in diverse
agroecological zones. The first, Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in Myanmar,
focuses on creating a sustainable agricultural development model for the central
dry zone. The second, the Eastern States Agribusiness Project (ESAP), focuses on



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

2

22

creating a smallholder agriculture and community agroforestry model for the
upland/highland zone, with potential for scaling up across the eastern states.

7. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the
Government's policies to reduce economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with the National Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for
Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development
Action Plan. Specifically, the rationale has four dimensions: (i) to create a model at
the state level for post-conflict economic reintegration that lays the foundation for
sustained peace; (ii) to create a model for environmentally sustainable agricultural
modernization in degraded areas; (iii) to forge pathways for supporting poor
communities in the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture; and
(iv) to better link Myanmar's eastern states with regional markets and technology
flows.

8. The project is consistent with the 2014-2018 country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) for Myanmar, which aims to contribute to reducing rural
poverty, specifically of smallholders, landless people, and ethnic and other
marginalized groups. The COSOP defines three strategic objectives for IFAD’s
engagement: (i) empower rural women and men to access agricultural resources,
technologies, services and markets; (ii) create business and employment
opportunities for rural women and men; and (iii) promote the social and economic
empowerment of marginalized groups, particularly ethnic groups. The project
addresses all three strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. The project will be implemented in selected areas of Kayin and Shan (South) States

in the eastern part of Myanmar. These two states were affected by decades of civil
conflict and insecurity, which adversely affected their socio-economic development.
With recent peace-building efforts, the two states have been selected for
agribusiness development due to their good security, relatively stable political
context and economic potential.

10. In Kayin State, the project encompasses 12 irrigation schemes covering three
townships (Hpa-an, Hlain Bwe, Kaukarate) and the forest communities of
Thandaunggyi township in the northern mountains, for an aggregate area of some
108,000 acres. In Shan State, the project covers the Ho-Pong irrigation scheme
and its upland watershed areas (Ho-pong, Taunggyi, Siseine townships) as well as
the Hekke irrigation scheme (Taunggyi, Kyauk Talon Gyi townships), for an
aggregate area of about 79,000 acres.

11. The target group consists of poor rural women and men in the project areas.
Specifically, it covers: (i) farmers in irrigated lowlands with marginal, small and
medium-sized landholdings ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each;
(ii) farmers in the rainfed uplands with marginal, small and medium landholdings
ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each; (iii) agroforestry households
in mountainous areas of northern Kayin; and (iv) landless households, which will
have access to job opportunities as agricultural labourers or as workers in
agribusiness. The project will ensure that employment opportunities facilitate the
economic reintegration of returning migrants, ex-combatants and displaced people.

12. An inclusive targeting approach will be applied that encompasses geographical, self-
and direct targeting, and social and gender inclusion. The project is expected to
benefit 62,400 households or 315,000 rural men and women.

B. Project development objective
13. The project will develop an inclusive, sustainable and scalable model for smallholder

agriculture and community agroforestry in the eastern states of Kayin and Shan



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

3

33

(South). It will promote commercialized smallholder agriculture linked to
agribusiness, improve living standards in forest communities, and reverse
environmental degradation in sloping areas. It will generate substantial benefits for
households belonging to the Karen, Shan, Paoh, Intha and Mon ethnic groups.

14. The project’s goal is to improve the economic status of poor rural women and men
in selected areas of Kayin and Shan States. Its objective is to increase the incomes
of smallholder and agroforestry households in these areas in an environmentally
sustainable manner.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project has two components. Component 1. Strategic investments. This

component will finance strategic investments in land development and community
agroforestry (approximately US$42.6 million, 65 per cent of total project costs).

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Land development. The project will contribute to the
expansion of irrigated areas served by primary and secondary canals, with
complementary investments in land development identified through a participatory
process. The objectives are to improve drainage networks, irrigation water delivery
and field access, and to create opportunities for crop diversification in response to
market signals. A participatory land-use planning approach will be applied, and
free, prior and informed consent will be introduced. Farmer empowerment and
participatory water management will be strengthened in all irrigation works.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Community agroforestry. Project investment in
agroforestry will improve living conditions, generate economic benefits for forest
and upland villages and reduce encroachment on primary forest. The introduction of
sloping agricultural land technology (SALT) will protect ecosystems, increase soil
water infiltration and reduce soil erosion. In particular, SALT will generate
substantial positive environmental impact by reducing sedimentation in Inle Lake
and the Ho-Pong valley drainage system. Upland and agroforestry activities will be
defined and implemented on the basis of a participatory and culturally sensitive
approach.

18. Component 2. Enabling investments. This component will improve target group
access to knowledge, technology and services, and will maximize the benefits
generated from strategic investments (approximately US$15.7 million, 24 per cent
of total project costs).

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge and technology. The project will improve
farmer access to the technologies, inputs and services required to improve the
productivity of staple, fodder and high-value crops. It will promote a pluralistic
participatory extension platform in support of smallholder households. A network of
knowledge centres (KCs) will be established to broker service delivery to farm and
forest households through linkages with public institutions and the private sector.
These centres will operate on the basis of: a decentralized and bottom-up
approach; pluralism of actors in service delivery; promotion of public/private
partnerships (PPPs); and a clear market orientation comprising cost recovery and
sustainability.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Services. Smallholders and entrepreneurs will be provided
access to markets and to adapted and affordable financial products. Contractual
arrangements among farmers and agribusinesses, such as contract farming or
outgrower schemes, will be promoted for commodities with a comparative
advantage, market demand and growth potential. A competitive grant scheme will
attract processors to the project area, and a credit guarantee mechanism will
improve smallholder access to bank financing. Financial inclusion will be promoted
by fostering savings and credit groups and providing financial literacy training.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

4

44

21. The remaining project financing (US$6.9 million, 11 per cent of total project costs)
is allocated to central project coordination and decentralized project management,
described below.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

22. Based on institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar contexts
and the country strategy, the ESAP implementation approach is to: (i) strengthen
state-level Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) departments and other
agencies involved in agricultural and rural development; (ii) increase the
responsibility of state-level MOAI departments in phased implementation of
activities; (iii) establish a small, state-level project implementation office (PIO) in
each state to manage activities; (iv) organize implementation through contracts
with public and private service providers; and (v) implement project activities in
phases.

23. Project activities will be implemented through contracts with service providers such
as ministries/departments, NGOs and the private sector. Service providers will
enter into performance-based contracts, and their performance will be assessed by
project management and by community representatives where applicable.

B. Organizational framework
24. The project's governance framework will consist of: (i) a national project steering

committee composed of representatives of relevant central-level ministries, to
provide policy and strategic guidance; (ii) state project coordination committees
composed of directors of relevant state-level departments and representatives of
community organizations, to oversee project coordination at the state level; and
(iii) village groups, composed of representatives of community organizations,
partner NGOs and service providers, to monitor and ensure effective participation,
poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming.

25. In alignment with the Government's decentralization policy, project management
and implementation are decentralized to the state level. A PIO will be established in
each state – responsible and accountable for state-level management of the project
and achievement of its results. PIOs will be structured around project components
and investments, and will have a certain level of financial autonomy. Their staff will
be recruited on a competitive basis in compliance with IFAD guidelines. PIOs will be
supported by a central project coordination unit (PCU), established in Nay Pyi Taw
for all IFAD-financed projects. The PCU will support PIOs in planning, financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
26. The state-level annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), supplemented by activity

calendars, will be the key planning instruments for the project. They will identify
annual targets and activities, set implementation priorities, forecast procurement
requirements and facilitate the mobilization of staff and financial resources. These
AWP/Bs will be prepared through a consultative approach involving community
organizations, KCs and stakeholders. The planning process will be coordinated with
national planning procedures, as the project budget is being incorporated into the
national budget.

27. The M&E system is designed to offer comprehensive and reliable information for
results-based management. The system will be participatory and decentralized, and
compliant with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) framework. It
will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring – focusing on physical and
financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring of the use of
outputs and measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and
(iii) impact assessment – evaluating project impact on target groups. All M&E data,



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

5

55

analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and ethnic group.
Considering the well-known problems with data availability and quality in Myanmar,
a data acquisition plan for the project area will be developed at the outset of
implementation.

28. The project will use locally adapted RIMS surveys as the main quantitative survey
tools at baseline, midterm and completion. Ad hoc surveys, qualitative case studies
and thematic reviews will be outsourced to independent institutions to verify results
and draw lessons on themes such as: food security, cropping patterns, climate
resilience; small and micro-business sustainability; participatory water
management; and impact on incomes. An external independent third party (such as
a national university or NGO) will be engaged to assess project impact periodically.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s operational experiences
will create valuable knowledge, which will be captured by the PIO and PCU and
used to generate lessons and best practices. Once documented, the project’s model
of upland/highland agricultural development may be scaled up across the eastern
states. The project will share knowledge and experiences with the wider community
of development practitioners across Asia through the IFADAsia knowledge
management portal.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used for

intended purposes efficiently and cost-effectively; (ii) disbursement of funds
facilitates rapid implementation of activities; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) financial statements are prepared in conformity with internationally
recognized accounting standards; (v) a robust flow of reliable information on
project activities facilitates accountability, transparency and disclosure; and
(vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded.

31. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating
measures: (i) installation of professional accounting software; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) preparation of a financial management manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iv) state-level PIOs with delegated
authority to manage and disburse project resources, and confirmation of PCU
delegated authority; (v) technical assistance and external oversight; (vi) a control
framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits and
social elements; and (vii) a good governance framework to ensure accountability
and transparency.

32. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08 of the General Conditions
for Agricultural Development Financing, a maximum amount of SDR 100,000 for
otherwise eligible project expenditures incurred after the date of project approval
by the Executive Board and before the entry into force of the financing agreement
will be financed. Such financing will be mainly for the implementation of start-up
activities in respect of expenditures for: (i) capacity-building for PCU/PIO staff and
target groups; (ii) consulting services for studies and field surveys; and (iii) other
consultancy services. Such expenditures are pre-financed by the Government, and
will be reimbursed by IFAD only after the financing agreement has entered into
force and conditions precedent to disbursement have been met.

33. The project will use the imprest fund method in operating the two designated
accounts (for the loan and grant respectively). The Government will ensure that
counterpart funds are contained in the national allocations for MOAI at central and
state levels and that they are released to the project promptly.

34. Flow of funds to the two states will be decentralized. This will strengthen
governance structures while maintaining transparency of activities and central
controls. The bank account signatory powers for state-level expenditures will be set
at a sufficiently senior level. Control of expenditures at the state level will be



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

6

66

maintained by retaining centralization of withdrawal application preparation and
approval, access to state-level accounting data, and consolidation of AWP/Bs and
reporting.

35. External audit will be carried out in compliance with International Standards on
Auditing and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits, and independent external auditors
will be appointed on a timely basis. Audit reports will be furnished to IFAD within
six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year.

36. The PCU will oversee project procurement at central and state levels. The
procurement of goods, works and services will be handled by the state-level PIOs,
with support from the PCU for consolidated or international purchases. Procurement
will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD procurement guidelines and
handbook. Procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and time
estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower
and reflected in the procurement plan. The project implementation manual will
detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
37. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation

support mission will be undertaken annually. MOAI departments at central and
state levels will support and participate in these missions.

38. Supervision will be applied as a continuous process requiring ongoing
communication and engagement with the central Government, state governments,
the PCU and PIOs. It will encompass three functions: (i) fiduciary compliance –
covering legal conditions, financial management, procurement and contracting;
(ii) supervision – focusing on performance, progress towards objectives, activities
and outputs, planning and budgeting, monitoring and reporting, governance and
management, targeting and gender equality; and (iii) implementation support.
Implementation support will incorporate a country programme perspective by:
introducing a broad view of development investments; influencing policy based on
operational experiences; developing systems and institutions for poverty reduction;
facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships; and generating lessons and best
practices.

39. Considering the limited implementation experience in Myanmar, two midterm
reviews (MTRs) will be undertaken, at year two and year four, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impact and likely sustainability of
project activities and to make recommendations and necessary adjustments for the
remaining project periods. MTRs will be carried out jointly by the Government, the
PCU, PIOs and IFAD. At the end of the project, a project completion report will be
prepared by the Government, with support from IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
40. Total investment and incremental recurrent project costs, including physical and

price contingencies, are estimated at US$65.2 million over the six-year project
implementation period. The exchange rate has been set at 1,000 Myanmar kyats to
one United States dollar (the average rate prevailing at final design), and a
constant purchasing power parity exchange rate is assumed.

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan on highly concessional terms of about

US$27.6 million (42 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of about US$1.5 million
(2 per cent), cofinancing of US$29.2 million (45 per cent), a government
contribution of about US$4.9 million (8 per cent), and a beneficiary contribution in
kind of US$2.0 million (3 per cent). The Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) has



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

7

77

participated in the project design process and has expressed its intention to
cofinance the project.

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower /
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Strategic investments

1. Land development 3 042.5 4 513.5 - 29 172.5 - 36 728.4 56.3
2. Community agroforestry 134.2 4 457.0 - - 1 243.2 5 834.3 8.9

Subtotal 3 176.6 8 970.5 - 29 172.5 1 243.2 42 562.8 65.3
B. Enabling investments

1. Knowledge and technology 513.7 3 668.5 251.7 - 211.9 4 645.8 7.1
2. Services 113.4 10 292.5 95.0 - 566.4 11 067.3 17.0

Subtotal 627.1 13 961.0 346.7 - 778.3 15 713.1 24.1
C. Project management 1 126.5 4 632.6 1 154.4 - - 6 913.6 10.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 27 564.1 1 501.2 29 172.5 2 021.5 65 189.5 100.0

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will
include a maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.

Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower/
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Works 3 042.5 7.6 8 798.3 21.9 - - 28 407.6 70.6 - - 40 248.3 61.7
2. Vehicles 716.9 71.0 292.8 29.0 - - - - - - 1 009.7 1.5
3. Equipment and materials 7.1 7.6 86.6 92.4 - - - - - - 93.7 0.1
4. Consultancies 28.9 0.8 1 925.0 53.8 847.1 23.7 764.9 21.4 11.0 0.3 3 577.0 5.5
5. Training 197.9 1.6 2 943.5 64.5 654.1 14.3 - - 767.3 6.0 4 562.8 7.0
6. Goods services and inputs 235.3 6.9 1 945.6 56.8 - - - - 1 243.2 36.3 3 424.0 5.3
7. Matching grants and

associated investments - - 5 155.5 100 - - - - - - 5 155.5 7.9
8. Credit guarantee scheme - - 2 978.3 100 2 978.3 4.6
9. Staff salaries and

allowances 528.4 14.1 3 224.7 85.9 - - - - - - 3 753.1 5.8
10. Operating costs 173.3 44.8 213.9 55.2 - - - - - - 387.2 0.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 7.6 27 564.1 42.3 1 501.2 2.3 29 172.5 44.8 2 021.5 3.1 65 189.5 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
42. The project will directly impact an area of some 187,000 acres, of which

58,000 acres are irrigated, 104,000 are upland rainfed, and 25,000 are forest. It
will provide a range of economic and social benefits to 62,400 households
consisting of 315,000 rural women and men. Projections indicate that incremental
agricultural production in the project area from 2015 to 2021 will have an
estimated value of US$38.2 million at farm gate prices. The acreage cultivated is
expected to increase by 21 per cent, and cropping intensity by 22 per cent. Net
income per acre will increase by 64 per cent, while net income per household will
increase by 100 per cent.

43. The project's financial internal rate of return is estimated at 15.1 per cent. Its
economic internal rate of return is estimated at 13.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
44. The sustainability of project investments will be fostered through: (i) access to

knowledge – KCs will be low-cost facilities that will eventually operate on a cost-
recovery basis, evolving into PPP ventures in the medium term; (ii) access to
markets – upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

8

88

will ensure smallholder access to markets sustained through underlying business
relationships; (iii) access to water – irrigation and drainage improvement, combined
with participatory water management, will improve water distribution, and
operation and maintenance; (iv) access to finance – financial inclusion activities will
eventually link smallholders and agroforestry households with the formal financial
sector; and (v) extension services – use of MOAI extension officers trained by the
project will ensure continuity in delivery of services.

45. The project’s exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at central and state
levels; rely on a range of institutional service providers for implementation of
activities; foster profitable business relationships between producers and markets;
and improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The key risks identified relate to: (i) insecure land tenure; (ii) political interference

in project management; (iii) poor governance capacity; and (iv) fiduciary risk.
These risks are mitigated by a set of assurances negotiated with the Government,
decentralization to the state level, participation in planning and implementation,
robust fiduciary compliance procedures, capacity-building of relevant institutions at
the state level, and intensive supervision and implementation support by IFAD.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

47. The ESAP is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, in particular: (i) its targeting
strategy is consistent with the IFAD Targeting Policy approach of focusing on
economically active poor rural women and men; (ii) its investments in rural
economic growth are compliant with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy focus on
promoting inclusive financial systems; (iii) its participatory approach to land
development is consistent with the principles of free, prior and informed consent
and community-driven development stated in the IFAD policies on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security and Engagement with Indigenous Peoples;
(iv) its evolving gender mainstreaming strategy is in compliance with the IFAD
Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (v) its focus on promoting
PPPs for private-sector development and policy dialogue is in line with the IFAD
Partnership Strategy; and (vi) its environmental impact assessment procedures for
infrastructure investment are aligned with the IFAD Climate Change Strategy for
proper adaptation and mitigation measures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the

Government's policy on reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar's National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of partners such as the World Bank and the multi-donor
Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT).

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. The project is the first investment of its kind in the states inhabited primarily by

ethnic groups. It introduces several innovations in its model for sustainable
agricultural development in the upland/highland areas of Myanmar's eastern states.
Key innovations in the Myanmar context include: (i) introduction of a participatory
development approach; (ii) targeted delivery of technologies and services;
(iii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iv) livelihood diversification, with potential for higher value addition; (v) promotion
of smallholder-driven small and micro-businesses; and (vi) support for adapted
rural finance products and services.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

9

99

50. The Government considers the project a model that will eventually be scaled up in
upland/highland areas of Myanmar. The project adopts a modular approach, to the
extent feasible, in which a standard package of investment is designed to expand,
replicate, adapt and sustain successful investments. Through its investment tools
and forward-looking policy support, the project will create the pathways, drivers
and spaces for scaling up.

51. The Italian Development Cooperation has indicated its interest, in principle, in
providing parallel cofinancing to the Government to scale up the ESAP to an
additional eastern state.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement will take place on two levels. First, the project will contribute to

the analysis of policy issues related to implementation experiences. It will also
foster stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. Specifically,
the project is expected to provide evidence-based policy advice on agricultural and
rural development across upland areas – especially with regard to ethnic states.
The project will also support dialogue on technology, knowledge resources and
financial services in support of poor farm and landless households.

53. Second, the project will enhance IFAD’s direct policy engagement with the
Government and partners by channelling operational experiences in poverty
reduction to the appropriate policy and strategy discussions through platforms such
as sector working groups. These experiences provide unique opportunities to
identify policy gaps and formulate policy recommendations on issues affecting poor
rural people, and to generate an evidence base to inform policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
54. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
annex.

55. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

56. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
57. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 20 million
special drawing rights (SDR 20,000,000), approximately US$27.6 million, and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 1.1 million special drawing
rights (SDR 1,100,000), approximately US$1.5 million, and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan for the Economic Transformation
Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Economic Transformation Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Executing agency: Planning and Development Department, Provincial
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan

Total programme cost: US$120.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 48.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$67 million)1

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier(s): To be determined

Amount of cofinancing: US$22.98 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower: US$23.63 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.54 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenditures not exceeding US$0.5 million
incurred between the date of Executive Board approval
and the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement

1 Including US$10 million cancelled, upon request by the Islamic Republic of Pakistan as the borrower, from the
financing for the Southern Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (approved by the Executive Board at its 101st session, EB
2010/101/R.27/Rev.1). The proposed recommitment of the funds cancelled as such is in compliance with the rules and
procedures approved by the Executive Board in “Revision of IFAD approach to use of cancellation of approved loans
and/or grants” at its 111th session (EB 2014/111/R.12/Rev.1).



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Economic Transformation Initiative –
Gilgit-Baltistan, as contained in paragraph 43.

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Pakistan has a total land area of 769,095 square kilometres. The estimated

population in 2013 was 184 million,2 of whom over 60 per cent live in rural areas.
In 2014, nominal GDP was an estimated US$ 246.6 billion and per capita GDP was
US$1,275.3 The services sector contributes the largest share to GDP – 53 per cent
– while agriculture and industry contribute 21 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively.

2. Pakistan is a relatively “young” country with over 55 per cent of the population
below the age of 25 and over 35 per cent between 25 and 54 years. Considerable
gender disparities exist on account of socio-economic, political and health factors,
and Pakistan is ranked 141st among 142 countries evaluated by the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index in 2014. The adult literacy rate is 56
per cent but there are huge variations between the urban and rural population and
across regions. The unemployment rate is 6.7 per cent.4

3. The official poverty line in Pakistan is calorie-based and is defined as per capita
food and non-food expenditures per month to support food consumption equal to
2,350 calories per adult per day.5 A report based on the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) of 2011 calculates the overall incidence of poverty to be
36.55 per cent, with rural poverty standing at 37.08 per cent and urban at 35.49
per cent.6 Poverty in remote and geographically challenging areas like Gilgit-
Baltistan is largely driven by the small size of landholdings, poor access to
markets, lack of access to credit, inputs and support services, limited off-farm
employment opportunities, and policy and institutional constraints.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan (ETI-GB) will directly
support the Government’s second poverty reduction strategy paper (2010), which
includes agriculture as one of the nine core pillars and which places special
emphasis on rural finance and on support for agriculture and small farmers,
microenterprises and small businesses, rural infrastructure, women’s development
and education as important means of poverty reduction.

2 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2013.
3 Economist Intelligence Unit Report, 2014.
4 Pakistan Economic Survey, 2013-14, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan.
5 Ibid.
6 Haroon Jamal, Pakistan Poverty Statistics: Estimates for 2011, Research Report No.84.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

5. The ETI-GB is also aligned with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for 2010-2015 , in which Gilgit-Baltistan was prioritized in view of its
comparative deprivation and higher incidence of poverty and the earlier success of
the IFAD-funded Northern Areas Development Programme in improving the
livelihoods of the hard-to-reach poor in Gilgit-Baltistan.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. Gilgit-Baltistan is a highly mountainous and remote region in northern Pakistan

covering 72,500 square kilometres, with a population of about 1.3 million. A
distinctive feature of the region is that over 90 per cent of the inhabitants own
some agricultural land, as compared to 52 per cent in rest of the country. However,
the per capita holding is very small at 0.6-0.8 acres. Small farm sizes, long harsh
winters, mountainous terrain and other physical challenges result in consumption
levels that are lower than the national average. Dietary diversity is the poorest in
the country, and the incidence of stunting among children is estimated at an
alarming 36 per cent. A survey by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) in 2014 registers only 26 per cent of the population as food-
secure, 41 per cent as moderately food-insecure and 32 per cent as highly food-
insecure. The adult literacy rate is low, at 36 per cent, and the poverty incidence is
29 per cent as compared to 21 per cent for Pakistan overall.

7. Over 90 per cent of the region’s population is engaged in agriculture; therefore the
sector has a very important role for growth and poverty reduction. Traditionally,
apricot has been the most commonly produced food item in the region and this
continues to be the case. To capitalize on seasonal and elevation advantages, there
has been a move towards production of other high-value cash crops like fruits and
vegetables. Potato is the leading crop after apricots in terms of cultivated area and
production.

8. Smallholder farming households engaged in apricot and potato production with an
average landholding of less than one hectare (ha) will be the primary target group.
Other beneficiaries will include small-scale processors, trading and export
cooperatives, people engaged in value adding activities, input suppliers and
transporters. Gender will be mainstreamed in all aspects of the ETI-GB and youth
and women will be specifically targeted in skill development for relevant income
generation opportunities. The entry point for the initiative will be organized village
producers’ groups and marketing associations. In organizing these groups and
associations, the ETI-GB will build on the existing social capital generated by the
community organizations organized under other programmes in the region since
1982. An estimated 100,000 smallholder households, including women and youth,
will benefit directly from value chain and irrigation development activities. In
addition, about 100 local entrepreneurs will be assisted in scaling up their services
for different segments of value chains. About 10,000 persons will draw indirect
benefits from the upgrading of farm-to-market roads, extension, research and
other investments.

B. Development objective
9. The development objective is to increase agricultural incomes and employment for

at least 100,000 rural households in Gilgit-Baltistan region, as part of the overall
goal to improve incomes and reduce poverty and malnutrition in the region.

C. Components/outcomes
10. The seven-year operation will comprise of three mutually reinforcing components:

productive infrastructure; value chain development; and programme management
and policy support. These components will deliver five key outcomes: (i) 100,000
households increase their production, productivity and sales in key agricultural
commodities; (ii) a sustainable and community-driven development approach is



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

introduced, which is pro-poor and youth-, gender- and nutrition-sensitive; (iii) agri-
business actors invest in local production, processing and value addition to improve
marketing of local food products; (iv) government and private agricultural services
are sustainably improved and outreach expanded; and (5) the Government
formulates and enforces pro-poor agriculture policies.

11. The productive infrastructure component consists of two interlinked
subcomponents that will be underpinned by community mobilization and planning
activities in the four poorest districts, with the support of a competitively selected
social mobilization partner. These are, first, an irrigation subcomponent to scale up
the tried and tested community-based irrigation development approach, adding
50,000 acres of new irrigated land and providing an average of one acre of
irrigated land to participating households, including women-headed and landless
households. Participating households will also receive support in developing the
land. Second, a farm-to-market roads subcomponent will link existing production
areas and newly developed irrigated areas to main valley roads and trunk roads.
This will be achieved by upgrading 400 km of existing pony tracks to a standard
that allows use by all-terrain vehicles, and upgrading roads currently fit solely for
all-terrain vehicles to a standard that allows for truck transportation.

12. The value chain development component will be driven by a commercial and
market-centered approach whereby the initiative will identify priority valleys in
each of seven districts based on criteria that will include total population, number
of poor households, total production of priority crop, total cropped area, area
available for irrigation development and farm-to-market road needs. Coverage may
be expanded from the third year depending on progress and results. Within a
valley, interventions will start with villages with existing community organizations
that can be consolidated into larger village producer groups (VPGs). These
producer groups will provide the foundation for gradual expansion to all villages in
the valley and the organization of valley producers’ associations (VPAs).

13. The component will facilitate VPA engagement with private actors and other
partners. Contracts between VPAs and their purchasing partners will drive the
business plans of producers’ associations and the support from programme
implementing agencies. In particular, through its value chain technical assistance
team, the initiative will assist producers’ associations, processors and related
service providers in developing business plans and marketing strategies, increasing
product volume at an agreed quality standard, and accessing capital for
development to realize the full potential of their products. Where justified, capital
investments will be complemented by a value chain development fund using a
matching grants mechanism. The initiative will also build the capacity of
government extension and research agencies to effectively provide services to
VPGs and VPAs. Finally, the component will assist the Government in formulating
pro-poor policies and regulations for land records and titling, irrigation water usage
and management, road operation and maintenance, and developing effective
models for extension and research services.

14. The programme management and policy support component will put in place an
effective management and coordination system led by a steering committee
headed by a chief secretary of Gilgit-Balistan. A programme coordination unit
(PCU) will be established and will operate as an autonomous institution under the
guidance of the steering committee, and will be responsible for programme
planning and budgeting, coordination, monitoring, procurement and annual audits,
as well as management of the value chain development fund. The PCU will also
assist government departments with policy development and implementation. The
PCU will ensure that gender, youth, environment, knowledge management and
communication considerations are integrated into all aspects of programme
management and implementation.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The ETI-GB’s approach is founded on expanding the crop area, improving per-
household land holdings, and modernizing agricultural practices, thereby
transforming the rural economy from deficit/subsistence agriculture to commercial
production with marketable surpluses and more specialized, high-value agriculture
that is responsive to market demands and appropriate for the region’s comparative
advantages. A participatory and community-centered approach to land and water
development will be followed, consistent with the existing traditional practices and
community-based systems in Gilgit-Baltistan. Once a scheme is selected in
accordance with the initiative’s results-based criteria, the social mobilization
partner and implementing agency staff will involve selected communities in
decisions on terms and conditions that relate to them; the implementing agency’s
roles and responsibilities; land ownership; water availability and ownership;
equitable distribution of developed land; identification of beneficiaries including
women-headed and landless households; irrigation scheme implementation
strategy and timelines, etc. Before construction is initiated, a water users’
association, representative of all the beneficiaries, will be established to engage
with the implementing agency, the social mobilization partner and (where one is
required) the contractor. The initiative will also invest in training and equipping 40
youth construction groups for irrigation schemes, to be engaged by communities/
contractors for construction works.

16. Complementing the increase in production, the initiative will support a holistic and
demand-driven approach to value chain development (initially for apricot and
potato; subsequently, other promising products may be pursued). The entry point
for the value chain support will be the organized groups of farmers at village level,
with due regard for women and youth. Organizing smallholder farmers into
producers’ groups and formulating value chain development plans will be the key
elements to address aggregation, quality and marketing challenges. This approach
will involve education, capacity-building and networking of key stakeholders along
the entire value chain, backed by enabling policy support. At the core of this
approach will be a partnership brokerage model, whereby producers and farmers,
public services and private actors will be linked in mutually responsible
partnerships. The strategy is expected to develop capacity and networks for
sustainable expansion of production and marketable surpluses, resulting in
increased incomes and poverty reduction.

17. The initiative will actively engage existing and newly formed women producers’
groups within the target valleys to ascertain women’s priorities in terms of value
chain development, irrigation development and social development. Apart from
actively encouraging and creating opportunities for participation in VPGs, the
initiative will establish 20 women producers’ groups. Suitable opportunities for
women in the local socio-cultural setting will also be identified, such as grading,
packaging, polishing, processing, and women will receive training for such jobs.
Women-centered value chain activities will be another area of focus, including milk
marketing groups and apricot by-product processing. The initiative will introduce
labour-saving devices/equipment for women in order to address the constraints
that result from their disproportionate burden of harvesting, post-harvest shelling,
processing, drying of products, etc. To complement the anticipated effects of
improved infrastructure and higher incomes on nutrition, the ETI-GB shall also
provide training in nutrition to participating households.

B. Organizational framework
18. While the Government of Pakistan’s Economic Affairs Division will be the main

coordinating agency for IFAD financing, the Planning and Development Department
of the provincial government of Gilgit-Baltistan will be the lead executing agency,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

overseeing implementation through an empowered and autonomous PCU.
Implementation will follow a hybrid model where different components/activities
will be implemented by different public agencies, NGOs and private-sector service
providers, coordinated by the PCU.

19. Subregional coordination units will be established in each of the three regions, i.e.
Gilgit, Diamer and Baltistan. These units will be responsible for planning,
coordination and monitoring of activities in the target valleys and villages in
collaboration with the social mobilization partner, the value chain technical
assistance team and line departments. The main implementing partners will be
(i) social mobilization partners/NGOs, competitively selected; (ii) a value chain
technical assistance team; and (iii) a range of private-sector partners including
local entrepreneurs, apricot processors and exporters, corporate and commercial
buyers of seed and table potato, input supply companies; and (iv) around 220
VPGs (20 of which will be women’s associations), 20 VPAs and four to five regional
producers’ associations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The annual workplan and budget (AWPB) represents the key planning document for
the initiative. The plan’s format will follow the logical framework, including clearly
spelled out monitoring indicators that can be easily measured and reported. The
overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities will lie with the
PCU. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME) system will be finalized and
made operational, in consultation with all implementing partners, within the first
six months of start-up. The PME system will be part of an overall information,
knowledge management and communication system that will provide timely and
accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management
decision-making. A baseline survey will be conducted, preferably before start-up,
but at the latest by the end of the third month of implementation to establish
benchmarks based on the logical framework/Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS) related to outcomes and results vis-à-vis beneficiaries. Indicators
will be disaggregated by gender and socio-economic status to the extent possible
to allow for a proper assessment of whether the target beneficiaries are being
reached.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. An assessment of the financial management system was carried out to verify

compliance with IFAD’s requirements in terms of fiduciary risk. This risk,
considered high due to the remote location and weak capacity at the decentralized
level, is deemed mitigated to “medium’’ by a set of measures. These include
recruitment of qualified financial staff under performance-based contracts;
quarterly financial reporting; issuance of payments to implementing partners based
on certified statements of expenditure subject to internal and external audit; and
regular joint monitoring of ETI-GB accounts by the PCU, IFAD, the Government of
Gilgit-Baltistan, each within the context of its remit.

22. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and for coordinating and
consolidating all financial reports from implementing partners. The PCU will
maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and
internationally accepted accounting standards.

23. The annual external audit of expenditures will be carried out by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan, whose role includes the audit of all public resources. These
audit reports will be made available within six months of the close of financial year,
in line with IFAD’s guidelines.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

24. Internal audit services will be provided by a specialized private firm in the first two
years of implementation, with reports made available to the PCU, IFAD and the
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan.

25. Budgeting. AWPBs will be prepared by the PCU in collaboration with the
implementing agencies, for the approval of the programme steering committee and
IFAD.

26. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened in the State Bank of Pakistan
for receipt of loan proceeds, with a sub-account in Pakistani rupees. A PCU-
operated programme account will receive funds from the sub-account in order to
meet the PCU’s procurement and implementation obligations. Each of the PCUs and
partner agencies will open dedicated sub-accounts for the receipt of funds against
agreed AWPBs, periodic expenditure statements and expenditure returns. All fund-
flows will be based on the imprest account modality.

27. Procurement. The PCU will be responsible and accountable for procurement of
goods, works and consultancy services, which will be carried out in accordance with
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook (2010). Procurement
will follow procurement plans approved by IFAD. Specific procurement methods,
prior review arrangements, estimated costs and time frames, and risk mitigation
measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower and reflected in the
procurement plan. The programme implementation manual will detail procurement
procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
28. Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, in collaboration with the

Government and the cofinanciers. The supervision plan will include two supervision
missions annually in the first two years. Additional implementation support
missions will be organized by the IFAD country office as needed. Supervision and
implementation support will encompass: (i) fiduciary compliance with attention to
legal conditions, financial management, disbursement, procurement and
contracting; (ii) implementation performance, progress towards objectives,
investments and outputs, governance and management, targeting and gender
mainstreaming; and (iii) implementation support to provide guidance and
assistance. Implementation support will incorporate a country programme
perspective by introducing a broad view of development investments, influencing
policy and practices based on operational experiences, developing systems and
institutions for poverty reduction, facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships,
and generating lessons and best practices.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Costs
29. The total cost of the initiative, including price contingencies (16 per cent) and

physical contingencies (3 per cent), is estimated at US$120 million. The foreign
exchange component is estimated at US$8 million.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Component cost summary

B. Financing
30. Total costs are estimated at US$120 million. Of this, the Government will

contribute US$24 million (20 per cent) to finance taxes, salaries, operating costs
and certain other expenditures. IFAD will provide highly concessional financing
equivalent to US$67 million and the beneficiaries an estimated US$7 million.
Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing the initiative.
Negotiations are currently ongoing to fund the remaining financing gap of US$23
million.
Table 2
Costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiary
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Investment cost
1. Civil works 35.03 50.7 13.29 19.2 6.54 9.5 14.26 20.6 69.12
2. Equipment and materials 0.38 60.0 0.14 23.0 - - 0.11 17.0 0.63
3. Trainings 3.67 50.9 1.39 19.2 - - 2.16 29.9 7.22
4. Vehicles 0.25 32.5 0.09 12.0 - - 0.42 55.5 0.76
5. Grants and subsidies 16.28 81.0 3.82 19.0 - - - - 20.10
6. Consultancy 0.19 52.0 0.08 23.0 - - 0.09 25.0 0.36
7. Technical assistance 0.95 51.0 0.35 19.0 - - 0.56 30.0 1.87

Total investment cost 56.76 19.17 6.54 17.60 100.06
Recurrent cost
8. Salaries and allowances 6.51 51.0 2.43 19.0 - - 3.83 30.0 12.77
9. Operating costs 3.73 51.0 1.39 19.0 - - 2.19 30.0 7.32

Total recurrent cost 10.25 3.82 - 6.03 20.09
Total 67.00 55.8 22.98 19.1 6.54 5.4 23.63 19.7 120.15

31. Retroactive financing. An exception to the IFAD General Conditions is foreseen
to allow retroactive financing of eligible expenditures for certain activities before
the financing agreement enters into force. Such expenses will be reimbursable by
IFAD when the financing becomes disbursable. The exact activities and amounts to
be considered eligible for retroactive financing include limited operating costs; the

(Pak Rs '000) (US$ Million)
% % Total % % Total

Foreign Base Foreign Base
Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

A. Productive Infrastructure
1. Irrigation & Land Development 4 112 473 434 811 4 547 284 10 44 40.12 4.24 44.36 10 44
2. Farm to Market Roads 1 576 450 174 506 1 750 956 10 17 15.38 1.70 17.08 10 17

Subtotal Productive Infrastructure 5 688 923 609 317 6 298 241 10 61 55.50 5.94 61.45 10 61
B. Value Chain Development

1. Vaue Chain Fund 1 986 966 92 570 2 079 535 4 20 19.39 0.90 20.29 4 20
2. Social Mobilization 398 893 12 337 411 230 3 4 3.89 0.12 4.01 3 4
3. Agri Extension 210 673 7 580 218 253 3 2 2.06 0.07 2.13 3 2
4. Agri Research 262 382 13 415 275 797 5 3 2.56 0.13 2.69 5 3
5. Land Titling & Record system 214 861 3 208 218 069 1 2 2.10 0.03 2.13 1 2

Subtotal Value Chain Development 3 073 774 129 110 3 202 884 4 31 29.99 1.26 31.25 4 31
C. Programme Coordination Unit 830 692 22 733 853 425 3 8 8.10 0.22 8.33 3 8
Total BASELINE COSTS 9 593 389 761 161 10 354 550 7 100 93.59 7.43 101.02 7 100

Physical Contingencies 297 229 30 028 327 256 9 3 2.90 0.29 3.19 9 3
Price Contingencies 2 118 263 56 082 2 174 346 3 21 15.74 0.20 15.94 1 16

Total PROJECT COSTS 12 008 881 847 271 12 856 152 7 124 112.23 7.92 120.15 7 119



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost of the recruitment process and key equipment; the cost of installing
accounting software and preparing a finance manual; and the costs of carrying out
baseline surveys and recruiting a service provider for social mobilization. The
amount of retroactive financing will be determined during negotiations and will not
exceed US$500,000. The Government of Pakistan agrees to make provision for this
financing initially and will be reimbursed for all eligible expenditures from IFAD
financing. The effective date for the retroactive financing will be the date of the
Executive Board’s approval of the financing.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. About 100,000 smallholder households, landless households with unemployed

youth, and women-headed households will benefit directly from the ETI-GB
interventions. Another 10,000 smallholders, daily wage workers, artisans, masons,
etc. will also derive direct and indirect benefits from the interventions. Around 100
people involved in processing, adding value and providing other services along the
value chain will also benefit. The main benefits will be derived from:

(a) An additional 50,000 acres of newly irrigated land, increasing the local
irrigated area by around 30 per cent;

(b) The upgrading of 400 km of roads, which will reduce transportation costs and
enable farmers to transport bigger quantities of better quality;

(c) The injection of about US$25 million into the rural economy through labour
payments for irrigation development, of which about US$23 million will be
recovered and reinvested in the same villages for socio-economic
development, in addition to employment generated in upgrading roads and
food processing;

(d) The provision of a range of capacity-building, local processing, storage and
value addition facilities in support of 220 village producers’ associations;

(e) Sustainable, market-oriented improvements in potato seeds and fruit plant
production, processing and marketing systems;

(f) Strengthening of agriculture extension and agriculture research, and
capacity-building of the Water Management Directorate, Public Works
Department for better service delivery, commensurate with the status of a
provincial agency; and

(g) Policy formulation and reform in critical areas of water management, road
O&M, and land records and titling to ensure improved service delivery, better
governance and sustainability.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability will be promoted by engaging community-based groups and

organizations in all activities; upgrading existing systems, practices and structures
already present in the region; achieving scale efficiencies; and investing in
improving access and reducing the high transaction costs prevailing in this remote
region; and generating a commercial basis for future revenue generation by local
governments. Complementary features aimed at strengthening prospects for
sustainability include: (i) emphasizing creation of independent commercial win-win
relationships between the producers and private-sector buyers; (ii) developing
private local processing and value addition industry to create alternative avenues
for marketing of products; and (iii) strengthening the enabling environment
through support to development of local policy and regulatory systems.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Security is a key area of concern for IFAD’s country programme in Pakistan. By

providing an inclusive and expansive development initiative that benefits rural
communities across the region, the ETI-GB is expected to mitigate possible ethnic,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

religious or tribal tensions. Moreover, as the target area is of strategic importance
for the Pakistan-China economic corridor and for the national water and power
supply, both the federal Government and the provincial government of Gilgit-
Baltistan are placing significant emphasis on ensuring adequate security personnel
to maintain law and order in the area.

35. As this will be the largest development initiative to date in Gilgit-Baltistan, the
capacity of a relatively young provincial government to implement such a large-
scale intervention is another area of risk. The region has only recently been
granted provincial status, and its institutional capacities may still not be up to the
level needed to effectively implement a large development operation. The design
has therefore made provisions for capacity-building of Government services,
competitive packages for key programme staff to be recruited from the private
sector and engagement of experienced NGOs as service providers for field
implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The initiative is in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. The
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in
compliance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting, and in line with the approaches
outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme Management
Department (PMD) Operations. The initiative is consistent with the IFAD Private-
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy. Management and operation of the
proposed value chain development fund are aligned with the IFAD Rural Finance
Policy and the IFAD decision tools for rural finance. A detailed environmental
assessment has been undertaken, which determined that the intervention is
aligned with both the IFAD Climate Change Strategy and the Environment and
Natural Resource Management Policy. The assessment confirmed that the water
sources that would be tapped for irrigation are not at threat; and that the
incremental effect of additional water use is negligible. Although some scientific
projections expect overall faster glacial melt in the Himalayas, studies specific to
the Karakoram region (where this programme is located) find that glaciers are
expanding due to different climatic phenomena as compared to the western
Himalayas. The ETI-GB’s environmental classification is Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. IFAD will coordinate activities closely with other donor agencies active at present or

in the recent past in the area and will also pursue possibilities of cofinancing from
such sources as Italy, the United States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The design has already benefited from lessons learned in the past and ongoing
programmes of these agencies. IFAD is also working in partnership with WFP to
carry out hazard mapping of the target area and related communication
infrastructure. The possibilities of extending WFP’s school feeding programme and
food-for-work programme to the ETI-GB target area are being discussed with the
WFP country office.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. Attempts will be made to introduce several innovative aspects to the target area:

(a) Mutually responsible commercial relationships between the private/corporate
sector and groups of smallholder farmers that address the quality and volume
concerns of the buyers and price, market predictability and trust concerns of
the sellers;

(b) Instead of following the traditional 20 per cent community contribution
approach, the ETI-GB will sponsor construction of water schemes and land



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

development at full cost, thereby injecting about US$30 million into the local
rural economy in the shape of wages. Benefiting households will be required
to pay back 50 per cent of these costs, but over three crop seasons and into
a community account that would be used for additional infrastructure, value
chain facilities, and social development needs as per agreed village
development plans;

(c) A value chain development fund, operating on a matching grant basis,
covering the full range of products and entire region;

(d) Piloting of cost-effective water-lifting systems along main rivers with the
potential to add thousands of additional acres to agriculture production
system.

Policy engagementD.
39. Policy formulation support will be provided to the Government in relation to value

chain development and priority areas for investments. These include land
settlement and titling, irrigation water policy, road O&M policy, seed and product
certification and quality certification. The IFAD Country Office in Islamabad will
facilitate cross-fertilization between the proposed initiative and other IFAD-funded
projects in the country in these policy areas. In particular, the IFAD-funded
Livestock and Access to Markets Project in Punjab incorporates a value chain
approach that also seeks to engage with government policies, allowing IFAD to
feed bottom-up, pro-poor perspectives into national policy dialogue processes in
areas of key concern for rural poverty reduction in the country.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

41. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in an amount equivalent to forty-eight
million five hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 48,550,000),
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Convergence on Value
Chain Enhancement for Rural Growth and
Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Republic of the Philippines

Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Department of Agrarian Reform

Total project cost: US$52.53 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.8 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest
rate

Contribution of borrower: US$9.59 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$17.93 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Convergence on Value Chain
Enhancement for Rural Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE), as
contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In 2009 the population was 92.2 million and growing at 2.04 per cent annually. In

2010, gross national income per capita was US$4,002 (in 2008 dollars). Since 1981
GDP growth has averaged 3.1 per cent per annum, but only 2.3 per cent per
annum from 2001 to 2010. Over the period 2004-2010, the headline inflation rate
averaged 5.6 per cent. The Human Development Index of 0.638 in 2010 ranked
the country 97th among 169 countries, whereas in 1998 it was 0.744, which shows
that, over those 12 years, development efforts were unable to improve the human
development status. The gender development index decreased from 0.768 in 2005
to 0.742 in 2008 and the gender empowerment measure fell from 0.590 in 2005 to
0.560 in 2008. The national poverty incidence decreased slightly, from
21.1 per cent of families in 2006 to 20.9 in 2009. But with population growth, the
number of poor families rose from 3.67 million to 3.86 million in the same period,
higher than in 2003. Farmers and fishers were the poorest groups in the country,
with a poverty incidence of 44 and 50 per cent, respectively, in 2006. Nationally,
income inequality remains high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.448.

2. The failure to reduce poverty in recent years reflects underinvestment and the slow
growth of per capita incomes, high population growth and dependency rates,
natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from rising fuel and food
prices. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty, the
Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the country can still
achieve Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction targets by 2015.
Favourable factors exist that may help the country break out of its perennial
condition of widespread rural poverty, inequity and lagging human development,
including a healthy external payments situation, years of trade reform (leaving an
industrial sector fairly undistorted by subsidies and heavy protection), a stable
currency, low inflation and positive political developments.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The proposed project is consistent with the PDP 2011-2016, the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 and the IFAD country strategy for the Philippines for 2010-
2014. The rationale for IFAD’s help in financing the project is to: (i) exploit
opportunities to support the agrarian reform process and help meet the needs of
under- and unserved agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) – through a value chain
approach to enhance agricultural growth and agribusiness development – in order
to maximize benefits from the land distribution programme; (ii) support
harmonization of rural development efforts by the Departments of Agrarian Reform
(DAR), Agriculture (DA) and Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and
other agencies engaged in agribusiness development, in order to maximize impact
in rural poverty reduction; and (iii) support the DAR approach of clustering
agrarian reform communities to realize economies of scale for production, access to



EB 2015/115/R.13

2

markets and service provision in order to benefit from value chain development.
The project will contribute to the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable
agriculture and fisheries sector through improved food security and increased rural
incomes, and it supports the national Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme.

4. The project is part of the National Convergence Initiative (NCI), which seeks to
synchronize the initiatives of the three departments engaged in rural development
– DAR, DA and DENR – and optimize use of the resources available to support
sustainable rural development. Linkages will be built with the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) under the Rural Microenterprise Promotion Programme, with
the DA under the Second Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management
Project and with the DENR under the Integrated Natural Resources and
Environmental Management Project approved by the Executive Board in December
2012. Lessons learned in ongoing and previous projects have been incorporated
into the design.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target Regions IX, X and Caraga, located in the west, north and

north-east of Mindanao, which are the three poorest regions of the country,
accounting for 18 per cent of those living below the national poverty line. Within
the three regions, the project will target 11 agrarian reform community (ARC)
clusters, including 93 ARCs in 48 municipalities in 10 provinces. The target group
includes ARBs, other smallholders, under- or unemployed rural youth, indigenous
peoples (IPs), women, and business development partners, including eligible
people’s organizations (POs). The total size of the target group is estimated at
144,732 agricultural households (about 773,106 people), including non-ARC
barangays (villages) and IP households. Of this total, ARBs account for 59,217
households, of which 30 per cent are headed by women. The major crops
cultivated include coconut, rice, maize, rubber, banana, high-value vegetables, oil
palm, coffee and cassava. Some 29 per cent of ARC average incomes are below the
poverty line.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the reduction of poverty incidence

in the 10 target provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga. The project’s development
objective is to enable ARBs and other smallholder farmers in the 10 target
provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga to become highly productive and
competitive entrepreneurs and contribute to the achievement of broad-based rural
economic growth. The expected impact and outcome indicators for the
approximately 35,000 households and 100 POs (e.g. farmers’ cooperatives and
associations) in the 11 ARC clusters include: (i) average annual income increased;
(ii) increased farm income derived from new farming activities; (iii) increased
ownership of household assets; and (iv) reduced prevalence of child malnutrition.

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has the following components: (1) participatory value chain analysis

and planning; (2) integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development; (3) subdivision of collective certificates of land ownership award and
facilitation of land transfer programme; and (4) project management, monitoring
and evaluation and knowledge management.

8. Component 1: Participatory value chain analysis and planning. The expected
outcome of this component will be that value-chain business development plans for
selected crops are validated and implemented, resulting in improved farm income.
In each of the 11 ARC clusters, the component will support: (i) validation of the
proposals for value chain development as identified by the feasibility studies;
(ii) identification of the gaps and inefficiencies in the value chains and of the
solutions and investments required; (iii) identification of POs and private-sector



EB 2015/115/R.13

3

organizations wishing to and capable of participating in value chain development;
and (iv) updated ARC value chain investment plans (ARC-VIPs).

9. Component 2: Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development. The expected outcome of this component is improved production,
value addition and marketing of selected agricultural commodities. The component
has two subcomponents: (i) farm and value chain enterprise development; and
(ii) investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure.

10. Under farm and value chain enterprise development, the project will support
improvement of the quantity and quality of production at the farm level and the
phasing of production to meet market demand. It will achieve this through farmer
training, capacity-building and the provision of technical and farm management
advice in product testing, soil analysis, production technologies and management,
adaptation to threats from climate change, environmental awareness-raising and
good agricultural practices. This will involve the private sector (e.g. extension
personnel employed by buyers or consolidators) and/or public-sector agencies (e.g.
DAR development facilitators, technical staff of local government units (LGUs) and
the Agricultural Training Institute). In the area of value addition and diversification,
the project will facilitate the creation of appropriate business models and of the
institutional structures required to enable smallholders and their organizations to
engage in value addition and enterprise development, with private-sector
management of these value chains. The project aims to increase farmer share in
value chains through product differentiation and the already-mentioned value
addition and diversification. Project interventions will be implemented through the
provision of matching grants when there is a clear opportunity to improve
profitability for the target group. Other investments to enhance value addition
include the provision of assistance for product development, branding, packaging,
logistics, certification/accreditation, technology and equipment upgrading, and
organizational development through training with a focus on meeting market
requirements. The project will provide investments, on a cost-sharing basis, to
match the contributions of private-sector participants for eligible proposals and for
financing the equipment associated with post-harvest facilities.

11. In the area of market and investment facilitation, the project will develop linkages
within the value chain among input providers, producers and buyers to enhance
the profitability of farm enterprises. Assistance in consolidating supplies to meet
the volume and frequency requirements of buyers and investors is part of this
process. The assistance provided will include support for improving and/or
extending existing market information systems, trade fairs, business and investors’
forums, and assistance in negotiations with buyers and investors for leasehold,
contract growing, joint venture or marketing arrangements. The project will make
use of the expertise of agencies such as DA, DENR, DTI and the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, improve their market access and
competiveness, generate greater profits and provide a more integrated package of
services in the priority chains to be developed. The project will also assist project
beneficiaries in accessing funding from the banking and microfinance sectors using
a combination of approaches: private-sector enterprises involved in the value
chain; project matching grant funds to farmers, POs and private-sector
organizations meeting strict eligibility criteria for investments; development of the
capacity of viable farmers’ organizations to access finance from the formal banking
sector, government finance institutions and microfinance institutions; and linkages
with financial institutions to develop appropriate financing packages and products
for the value chain initiatives.



EB 2015/115/R.13

4

12. Under investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure, after participatory
planning with target ARCs and target group members, the project will invest in
rural infrastructure subprojects meeting eligibility and priorities criteria to support
value chain development. Eligible infrastructure includes farm-to-market roads,
rehabilitation/restoration of communal irrigation schemes (CISs), water-harvesting
and management, post-harvest facilities (storage, auction centres, etc.) and water
supply required to process local produce for value chain development. Irrigators’
associations and farmers’ groups/associations will operate and maintain CISs and
post-harvest facilities, while LGUs will maintain the farm-to-market roads.
Investments in additional road construction will take place only after firm funding
has been secured from participating LGUs. In addition, the capacity of LGUs to fund
and undertake maintenance of the roads will be closely monitored.

13. Component 3: Subdivision of collective certificates of landownership
award (CLOA) and facilitation of land transfer program. This component will
cover the subdivision of CLOAs and facilitation of land transfer action to stabilize
ownership and property rights in the project areas. This will provide incentive to
farmers to make their lands more productive and enable them to access credit and
engage in agribusiness projects with private investors. Target outputs and
outcomes for this component will be under the regular programme of DAR and will
be funded under the regular budget of DAR.

14. Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation and
knowledge management. The expected outcome of this component is that the
project is completed on time, within the agreed budget, and to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The output will be timely, cost-effective and transparent
management that is gender and culturally sensitive. The component will finance
the costs of project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and reporting activities at national, regional and provincial levels. It will also
finance the costs of contracted project staff based in the central project
management office (CPMO) in Mindanao, the three regional project management
offices (RPMOs) and in the 11 provincial project management offices (PPMOs),
honorariums of DAR regular staff assigned to the project, equipment, vehicles,
short-term consultants, training, preparation of project manuals, case studies and
operating costs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The key elements of the overall project approach are: (i) use of a participatory
value chain development approach to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, sustainably improve the profitability of
household farm enterprises, improve their market access and competiveness and
generate greater profits; (ii) application of convergence in implementing project
activities under the leadership of DAR to enhance the investment and opportunity
climate for agribusiness; (iii) use of the ARC clustering approach for the provision
of support to ARCs for value chain development; (iv) implementation through DAR,
at all levels, with the participation of the other agencies (e.g. DTI, DOST, LGUs and
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples [NCIP]); and (v) emphasis on
knowledge management (KM) and learning to ensure that experience and lessons
learned are available to improve project performance and for scaling up and wider
dissemination.

16. The project implementation period is six years. The implementation strategy will
include: (i) geographic targeting to identify the project areas and provide a
preliminary list of target commodities based on the 11 feasibility studies and
investment plans already prepared; (ii) selection of private sector organizations to
provide marketing and/or other services that meet the proposed eligibility criteria
during the initial participatory value chain analysis and planning phase; (iii) self-
targeting by members of the target group based on their interest in participating in



EB 2015/115/R.13

5

project activities; (iv) non-poor households will be targeted through their inclusion
in the POs or other types of organizations formed; and (v) provision of public
goods, such as improved farm to market roads, rehabilitated CISs, post-harvest
facilities, etc. Consultations were held with the NCIP, the organization charged with
supporting the integration of IPs in the mainstream. The approach to working with
IPs as a sub-group of the target group will work within the framework of the NCIP’s
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan. This approach
involves putting into practice the principle of free and prior informed
consultation/consent on all project activities by providing adequate information.

B. Organizational framework
17. DAR will be the lead agency for project implementation, in cooperation with DA,

DENR, DTI and DOST. DAR has the necessary institutional capacity and structure to
undertake this role and the experience gained from implementing over 60
externally funded projects – including two recently completed IFAD projects that
were implemented satisfactorily in Mindanao. DAR has staff at all levels of
government, down to the municipal level (municipal agrarian reform officers), and
a development facilitator assigned to each of the 11 ARCs to work with
beneficiaries. The project management structure involves a CPMO based in
Cagayan de Oro (Region X); RPMOs in each of the three regions; and PPMOs in
each of the 10 provinces (two operational divisions in Bukidnon). The oversight
structure includes a project steering committee at the national level as the
project’s policymaking body; a regional multi-stakeholders committee (RMSC) in
each of the three regions to advise regional project implementers on major policy
considerations and technical and operational issues and to ensure participation of
the region-based agencies in project implementation; and a cluster project
operations team (CPOT) in each of the 11 ARC clusters to serve as coordinating
mechanisms for delivery of government services to the clusters.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. At start-up, project staff and stakeholders at national and regional levels will
prepare a multi-year global workplan and budget for achieving project objectives
and targets, for approval by the project steering committee. Participatory planning
of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will start at the barangay and ARC
cluster levels, involving representatives of the ARCs, CPOTs and PPMOs. The
project will have a results-based M&E system to report the status of project
implementation and progress on outputs, outcomes and impact. The overall M&E
system will consist of regular reports and process monitoring by the CPMO, based
on data provided by RPMOs, PPMOs and implementing agencies, and
communicating the project’s physical progress data and financial accounts,
maintained by the CPMO and regional/provincial offices. During the first project
year (PY1), DAR will undertake a baseline survey to cover all indicators of the
logical framework, including RIMS indicators, and, subsequently, midterm impact
and completion impact surveys. M&E and KM units will be established in all
implementation levels. M&E documentation results will contribute to policy studies
to improve the business environment for smallholder farmers in the Philippines,
with a view to scaling up within the country.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management of the project will follow government systems, rules and

regulations for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the loan – to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s standard disbursement procedures. The
Bureau of the Treasury, through DAR, will maintain one designated account
exclusively for the loan. DAR, through the CPMO, will be responsible for overall
management of project funds, which includes: oversight of project operations,
procurement, internal control, accounting, review and consolidation of project
AWP/Bs, physical and financial reporting, audits; and consolidation of accounts and



EB 2015/115/R.13

6

withdrawal applications. RPMOs and PPMOs will be accountable for project funds
received for implementation of the project. DAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each of the partner implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to specify the services and support to be provided
by each agency and by the project.

20. IFAD’s review of the project implementation manual (PIM) will be a precondition of
disbursement. Guidelines in the PIM will be consistent with the Government’s and
IFAD policies, systems and procedures. Annual financial statements on project
funds will be prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting standards, such as
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), or national standards where these are
converging towards internationally recognized best practice and/or are deemed to
provide minimum disclosures.

21. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually in
accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. All project accounts will be
audited, including all sources of funding. Annual audit reports will be submitted to
IFAD within six months after the end of each fiscal year.

22. The project will follow government procurement regulations (RA 9184) using the
latest implementing rules and regulations – to the extent that they are consistent
with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance policy
to fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions.

E. Supervision
23. Annually, IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly

conduct a full supervision and implementation support mission, and a post-
supervision mission 6 to 9 months later, depending on progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
24. Project costs are estimated at about US$52.53 million over a six-year

implementation period, including taxes and duties estimated at US$5.96 million or
11 per cent of total costs. Price contingencies of 3 per cent, and physical
contingencies have been computed at 3.5 per cent of base costs on all items, both
decided by the National Economic and Development Authority.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Participatory value chain analysis and planning 0.58 63.5 0.34 36.5 - - - - 0.92 1.8
2. Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural

enterprise development

i. Farm and value chain enterprise development 11.78 35.6 1.72 5.2 2.01 6.1 17.56 53.1 33.07 63.0

ii. Value chain related rural Infrastructure 10.86 79.0 1.05 7.6 1.47 10.7 0.37 2.7 13.74 26.2

Subtotal 22.63 48.3 2.77 5.9 3.48 7.4 17.93 38.3 46.81 89.1

3. Project management, M&E and KM

1. M&E and KM 0.93 50.9 0.90 49.1 - - - - 1.83 3.5

2. Project management 0.86 29.0 2.10 71.0 - - - - 2.96 5.6

Subtotal 1.80 37.4 3.00 62.6 - - - - 4.80 9.1
Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0



EB 2015/115/R.13

7

B. Project financing
25. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$25.01 million (47.6 per cent);

(ii) contribution of the borrower for US$9.59 made of national government
counterpart funding of US$6.08 million (11.6 per cent) and LGU financing of
US$3.51 million (6.6 per cent); and (iii) contributions from proponents and
beneficiaries of about US$17.93 million (34.1 per cent). The financing plan by
expenditure category and financier is presented in table 2 below. The categories of
expenditures may be merged into broader categories in the financing agreement.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
Proponent Total

Expenditure categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.   Works 9.79 80.0 0.61 5.0 1.47 12.0 0.37 3.0 12.24 23.3

2.   Equipment and materials (for farms and
enterprise development)

8.17 30.0 0.68 2.5 1.50 5.5 16.88 62.0 27.23 51.8

3.   Equipment and materials (for value
chains)

1.87 55.0 0.34 10.0 0.51 15.0 0.68 20.0 3.40 6.5

4.   Consultancies 3.69 73.0 1.36 27.0 - - - - 5.05 9.6

5.   Training and workshops 1.32 71.7 0.52 28.3 1.85 3.5

6.   Equipment 0.17 35.0 0.32 65.0 - - - - 0.49 0.9

7.   Government support staff - - 0.80 100.0 - - - - 0.80 1.5

8.   Operation and maintenance - - 1.48 100.0 - - - - 1.48 2.8

Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. It is estimated that about 35,000 rural households will benefit directly from the

project, including 3,000 jobs to be generated by the project in the value added
subsector. Some 15,000 households, not counted elsewhere, will benefit from
improved rural roads, bringing the total to 50,000 beneficiary households. The
main incremental outputs following project investment in the target ARC clusters
will derive from the priority products selected by the feasibility studies. Likely
benefits at the farm level will stem from increased production and improved
productivity, enhanced value added at the farm level and higher prices as a result
of both quality improvements and more efficient marketing. Additional benefits will
be generated by the project’s capacity-building programme, e.g. strengthened
capacity to participate in value chain and rural enterprise development, and for
implementing agencies, capacity to target and manage poverty reduction and rural
development programmes in a gender-sensitive and participatory manner.

27. The financial and economic impact of the project has been assessed by:
(i) preparing detailed feasibility studies for the value chain investments that are
likely to be undertaken under the project; and (ii) analysing each model to
ascertain probable impact at the individual farmer level, in comparison with typical
without-project incomes. The project shows an economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 44.6 per cent and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.57 discounting benefits and
costs at 15 per cent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the results are
robust. For example, the project would still be viable if all costs increased by
20 per cent and benefits 20 per cent lower. The economic and farm budget
analyses will be updated based on market demand and value chain analysis
undertaken in the first year.

D. Sustainability
28. The following elements are built into project design to help ensure that the

proposed investments and benefits are sustainable: (i) dedication of the first year
of implementation to the analysis, identification and planning of the project’s
investments in priority value chains involving famers, their organizations and the



EB 2015/115/R.13

8

private sector; (ii) the experience and lessons learned in the implementation of the
11 feasibility studies contribute to ensuring that subsequent investments are
sustainable; (iii) the project has a strong focus on involvement of the private sector
on a long-term basis to enhance the sustainability of investments and benefits;
(iv) it will support contractual and other types of arrangements linking smallholders
with the private sector to enable them to move up the supply chain and incorporate
greater value addition; (v) beneficiaries and LGUs will be involved in providing
counterpart funds for infrastructure facilities and will be responsible for their
operation and maintenance; (vi) project design takes into account the knowledge,
systems and practices of IPs, which will also help ensure the sustainability of
project interventions in areas where IPs are present; and (vii) 18 months before
the completion date, the CPMO will work closely with all stakeholders at national,
regional, provincial and municipal levels, and with ARCs and barangays, to finalize
an exit strategy and sustainability plan based on specific mechanisms to ensure
sustainability after the end of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The first risk is that effective coordination among the three NCI agencies in the

field will be more difficult than at the national level. Project design counters this
risk as follows: (i) all agencies having a role in project implementation will be
members of the project steering committee to be able to resolve inter-agency
coordination issues; (ii) all implementing agencies will have an NCI focal point
through whom the project will interact with the NCI at the national level; (iii) the
three RMSCs will include representation of all relevant agencies to ensure effective
coordination of implementation in the regions and ARC clusters; and (iv) within
ARC clusters, CPOTs will include staff involved in day-to-day project
implementation. The second risk is the degree of willingness of the private sector
to be involved in implementation of component 2, which is essential for the success
of the project. This risk is addressed through: (i) component 1 and the
participatory analysis and planning process, which will involve all potential
participants, including representatives of private-sector agencies involved in the
particular value chains under analysis; and (ii) during the value chain analysis and
planning process, publication of the availability of grants for value chain
development to match investments from the private sector, the size of the grants
available, and the terms and conditions of the grants for diverse interventions. The
third risk is the weak capacity of poorer LGUs to provide the required counterpart
funds for rural infrastructure investment. The project counters this risk by reaching
an agreement with the Government on a financing plan for these investments
based on a financing ratio of 80 per cent for the IFAD loan, 5 per cent for national
government counterpart funds, 12 per cent on average for LGUs and 3 per cent for
beneficiary contributions.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

30. IFAD policies relevant to the project include: the IFAD Targeting Policy: Reaching
the Rural Poor; Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; Engagement with
Indigenous Peoples; IFAD Rural Enterprise Policy; IFAD’s Private-Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy; IFAD Climate Change Strategy; IFAD Rural
Finance Policy; and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities
and Operations. Project design has reflected these policies and lessons learned in
the IFAD country programme. The project is classified as Category B and employs
the following mitigation measures: value chain development is resilient to climate
change, environmentally friendly and sustainable; training includes management
and adaptation to the threats of climate change and environmental awareness;
environmentally friendly and sustainable production systems will be promoted (e.g.
use of the farming systems approach, good agricultural practices and varieties that
can tolerate climate variability); and DENR and its local offices will be involved to
ensure that value chain development is in line with good practices for



EB 2015/115/R.13

9

environmental and natural resource management.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
31. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and

sustainable agriculture and fisheries sector. The project will complement other
donors working in the same sector – such as the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency and World Bank – to increase project impact in
poverty reduction and on policy dialogue with the government and other
stakeholders. IFAD will also work with government programmes for an improved
policy environment and governance. The project will explore diverse types of
partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries and the private sector,
ensuring that such arrangements are fair to farmers and ARC communities.
Private-sector organizations and business development partners can take a leading
role as innovators in improving the returns from existing and emerging value
chains in an enterprise-oriented development approach.

Innovations and scaling upC.
32. The project will be the first foreign-assisted project under DAR to support the NCI.

Its investment is quite small when compared with the growth needed to make a
serious dent in rural poverty in Mindanao. However, the project could catalyse
improved household incomes and attract further investment for scaling up – in
order to fully realize the potential benefits of Mindanao’s comparative advantage in
key agricultural commodities.

Policy engagementD.
33. The project will finance policy/case studies – for policy dialogue and consultation

with relevant national and local institutions and with other stakeholders – on
planning and implementation of the value chain approach to agro-enterprise
development, mechanisms for convergence and other relevant studies. The studies
envisaged could include: (i) consolidation of smallholder production to achieve
economies of scale in production and marketing, appropriate business models, and
contractual and legal arrangements; and (ii) innovative engagement of the private
sector in providing rural infrastructure to support value chain development.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

35. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million
eight hundred thousand euros (EUR 22,800,000), equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's Report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal
Resources and Livelihood Project (FishCORAL)


Republic of the Philippines

Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources,
Department of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$43.05 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 27.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$29.96 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.33 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.12

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal Resources and
Livelihood Project (FishCORAL), as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Philippines is a middle-income country, and in 2013 the GDP reached an annual

growth rate of 7.2 per cent. However, the recent increase in GDP has not translated
into a reduction of the incidence of poverty, indeed there has been little change
from 2009 to 2012; 22.9 per cent (2009) and 22.3 per cent (2012) of families in
those two years were living below the poverty line. The failure to reduce poverty
during the previous decade reflects underinvestment, slow growth of per capita
incomes, a high population growth rate, high dependency rates, inequitable
distribution of income, natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from
rising fuel and food prices. Nationally, income inequality remains high, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.44. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of
poverty, the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the
country could still achieve the Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction
targets by 2015. In 2011, the Human Development Index for the Philippines was
0.644, ranking 112th among 187 countries. The country’s Gender Inequality Index
improved to 0.427 in 2011, ranking 75th in the world.

2. Fishers were among the poorest groups in the country, with a poverty incidence of
41.4 per cent in 2009, higher than the 35 per cent in 2003. Municipal fishers1 and
their families remained poor due to: (i) low coastal productivity owing to habitat
and watershed degradation; (ii) fish stock depletion due to illegal fishing practices,
pollution and overfishing; (iii) lack of access to basic services and institutional
support; (iv) high population density in coastal areas; (v) poor post-harvest
handling and distribution systems; (vi) lack of alternative income-generating
activities; and (vii) weak political will on the part of local leaders to enact and/or
enforce fishery laws.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The rationale for investing in the fisheries sector is that: (i) fishers, especially
municipal fishers, are among the poorest groups in the country; and (ii) the
fisheries sector is very important to the fishing communities as it is the source of
their livelihoods and a major source of dietary protein for the population as a
whole, and the main source of foreign exchange earnings for the national economy.
The project includes investments and activities to address the key issues that have
impoverished many fishing communities, such as coastal habitat degradation, use
of illegal fishing practices, overfishing, lack of enforcement of fishery ordinances,
pollution and a lack of viable livelihood activities alternative to fish capture. It will
adopt the ecosystem approach to fisheries and coastal resource management, and
a bay-wide approach to enabling the municipalities and fishing communities to

1 Those who fish within 15 km of the shoreline, 12 km in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



EB 2015/115/R.12

2

improve the productivity and sustainable management of their fishery and coastal
resources. The project will link the livelihood enterprises it supports to the market
economy to help ensure their sustainability. It will assist the Bureau of Fisheries
and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in improving its institutional capacity to support the
fisheries and coastal resources sector. The project is in line with the priorities
defined in the PDP 2011-2016 for the fisheries sector in the areas of inclusive
growth, poverty reduction, improving the economic status of poor coastal
communities, building the capacity of communities and local administrations to
better manage their coastal resources, improving the productivity of inshore
waters, exploring the export potential of fisheries, improving food security and
nutrition, and overall GDP growth. It also contributes to attainment of the goals and
targets of existing sectoral plans, such as the Agrikulturang Pilipino (AgriPinoy), the
Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Programme (AFMP) and the Fisheries Road
Map. Investment in livelihood development supports the Agribusiness Road Maps
for the fisheries sector and the regional development plans.

4. The project is complementary to and supportive of the Government’s
Reconstruction Assistance to Haiyan and the Department of Agriculture’s
rehabilitation plan for the agriculture sector. These initiatives will help rebuild
fishing communities and rehabilitate coastal resources affected by Typhoon Haiyan
in the Eastern Visayas Region, through rehabilitation of the coastal and fishery
resources and recovery of the livelihoods of fishing communities – contributing to
increasing community resilience to natural disaster and climate change risks. The
project is consistent with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2010-2016 in: (i) improving fisheries and
coastal resource management and the livelihoods of poor coastal communities; and
(ii) managing natural resources within the context of climate change, gender
mainstreaming, policy dialogue and support for decentralization.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target 11 bays/gulfs from Regions 5, 8 and 13 in Luzon and

Visayas, and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The targeted
bays are located in 14 provinces, with 103 municipalities or cities bordering the
bays/gulfs and 1,098 coastal villages/barangays. Approximately 724,000 poor
people or 188,000 households live in these coastal villages, of which 90,596 are
fishing households with an estimated 38,050 of them living below the poverty line,
including households headed by women and/or out-of-school youth. The main
criteria for selection of project beneficiaries will be based on the socio-economic
conditions of fishing households, using up-to-date lists of poor households from the
Department of Social Welfare and Development. The project will identify potential
beneficiaries by targeting existing, eligible registered people’s organizations (POs)
and their fishing community members. Members of the target group will include
memberships of the POs, either self-selected or based on their interest in the
proposed livelihood enterprise(s) or through participatory wealth ranking. The
project will also establish new POs in response to demand from the target group.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reduction of poverty in the target

coastal communities of the targeted bays/ecosystems by 5 per cent from the mean
poverty incidence of 42 per cent. The development objective is to realize (a) annual
income of participating fishing community households increase by 10 per cent from
baseline; and (b) employment of women engaged in income generating activities
increased to 40 per cent from the baseline of 20 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.12

3

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has three components: (i) coastal resource management; (ii) livelihood

development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The expected
outcomes for components 1 and 2 are: component 1: fishing communities adopt
sustainable management of fishery and coastal resources that increase overall
stocks; and component 2: fishing households in the target coastal communities
constantly engaged in diversified sources of income.

8. Component 1 will:

(a) Assess governance and legislation by the bay management councils (BMCs),
and facilitation of the formation, reactivation and management of the
operations of the BMCs, including the adoption of bay-wide fisheries
ordinances. The project will encourage the creation of integrated fisheries and
aquatic resource management councils (IFARMCs) where no such organization
exists, and will support their operation and that of the existing IFARMCs,
including capacity-building. It will also facilitate the participation of local
fishing communities in the management of municipal fisheries and coastal
resources, together with local government units (LGUs), by incorporating pre-
existing fisheries management systems. It will assist LGUs in introducing
and/or completing registration of municipal fishers, their motorized and non-
motorized fishing vessels and gear and the introduction of a municipal
licensing system for fishers, fishing vessels and gear, as well as collection of
associated licensing revenues and their use to support enforcement of
fisheries ordinances.

(b) Help control overfishing caused by illegal fishing and high population density
along the coastline and will support law enforcement and regulatory activities
of LGUs to manage fishing efforts and provide alternative marine and land-
based livelihood opportunities to contribute to a reduction in overfishing. It
will address the lack of landing, catch and effort statistics by having fishing
households record data to enable BFAR to propose policy measures to
appropriately address overfishing based on reliable and timely information.
The project will support a review of existing relevant legislation, including
municipal fishery ordinances, in consideration of the proposed changes in the
Fisheries Code.

(c) Reinforce fishery law enforcement teams (FLET) at village or community and
LGU levels. BFAR will organize and strengthen law enforcement teams
composed of coast guard and police personnel to apprehend violators. The
project will assess the types and social and economic characteristics of illegal
fishing, propose ways to address this complex issue, and provide equipment
and training as required. The project will assist LGUs in improving
coordination functions with BFAR and other relevant agencies; the fisheries
database and reporting system; and revenue generation from registration
fees, fines, and fees for resource use, etc. These steps will help institutionalize
the arrangements for funding law enforcement activities and fisheries coastal
resources management.

(d) Update coastal resource management plans through a participatory process
involving local communities, people’s and private-sector organizations and
local governments. They will become coastal resource management and
investment plans and will be part of a comprehensive land and water use plan
and of the municipal development plans of LGUs. All subprojects proposed for
financing and included in the municipal development plans will reflect the
need to address the expected impacts of climate change and to reduce the
risks of natural disasters. Assistance will be provided to help LGUs settle
disputes on municipal boundaries to establish clear municipal waters
delineation.



EB 2015/115/R.12

4

(e) Manage mangroves, sea grasses, coral reefs and beaches using an ecosystem
approach. New and existing fish sanctuaries and other types of protected
areas will be established and managed. The project will help protect, enhance
and rehabilitate resources, e.g. stock enhancement in protected areas using
juvenile and adult fish from hatcheries.

(f) Support coastal resource management – the project will finance the
infrastructure and equipment required, including delineation markers for
identified fish sanctuaries within targeted bays. LGUs will be fully responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment
provided by the project – during and after the implementation period – with
the support of IFARMCs.

9. Component 2 will:

(a) Support/reactivate suitable existing POs and form new groups/POs as needed,
giving particular attention to the participation of women. Key elements of the
training modules will be group organization and management, basic
entrepreneurship, business management, value chain concepts and
approaches, coastal resource management and gender mainstreaming.

(b) Promote environmentally friendly livelihood enterprises identified in the
approved coastal resource management plans, for example fisheries-related
enterprises, sustainable tourism and other appropriate enterprises. There will
be no project support for increasing fishing activities or for provision of fishing
gear. Mitigation measures for identified feasible livelihood enterprises will be
put in place to prevent further environmental degradation, waste generation
and overexploitation of resources. Project-financed inputs for livelihood
enterprises will be provided as a package, combined with the provision of
training for the members of POs, including both technical skills and the
business development aspects of operating livelihood enterprises. Subsequent
cycles will be financed from the income earned, while successful enterprises
can access microfinance institutions or NGO sources to finance future
expansion.

(c) Finance the following: infrastructure facilities to support seaweed production;
access improvements, connecting coastal communities to the nearest all-
weather road for transport of marine products; improvements of selected
BFAR hatcheries; and, where needed and justified, construction of fish-landing
facilities; provision of mini ice plants with cold-storage facilities, smoke
houses, store houses and dryers. It will also assist in the identification of
potential private investors and the preparation of feasibility studies. POs will
be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
and equipment provided by the project – during and after the implementation
period.

10. Component 3 will assist BFAR in implementing its reorganization plan in the four
regions and will finance the project management and coordination structures and
associated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms at national, regional, bay-
wide and city/municipality levels.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The key elements of the project’s implementation approach include: (i) use of the

ecosystem approach for fisheries management; (ii) financing of activities identified
by coastal communities and municipal/city authorities and included in the LGU
development/investment plans; (iii) implementation arrangements that will follow
the Government’s procedures and mandate at all levels and will operate within the
government framework for decentralization and as part of the National



EB 2015/115/R.12

5

Convergence Initiative; and (iv) consultation with the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples, if indigenous peoples (IPs) are found to live in any of the
target coastal communities – following the approach and procedures for engaging
IPs in development. The phasing of project implementation will be based on the
readiness of POs, LGUs, BMCs and regional agencies. The livelihood development
subprojects will be aligned with the priority commodities identified by the BFAR
Regional Roadmaps to ensure their suitability for the target locations and thus
contribute to their sustainability.

B. Organizational framework
12. BFAR will be the project’s lead implementing agency, with full responsibility for

project administration and management, and will use its existing structures at
national, regional, and provincial levels to implement project activities. The
municipalities and cities are responsible for managing municipal waters and coastal
zones. A high-level inter-agency project steering committee (PSC) at the national
level will provide policy guidance; approve project implementation guidelines,
annual workplan and budgets (AWP/Bs) and procurement plans; and resolve
implementation issues that cannot be decided at the regional level. A regional
coordination and steering committee (RCSC) will serve as the policy and
institutional advisory committee for project implementation at that level, and will
facilitate effective and efficient delivery of various agencies’ services in support of
the project. A bay coordination and support committee will coordinate project
activities within each bay. A project support and coordination office (PSCO) at BFAR
central office will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and monitoring project
implementation, coordinating within BFAR and with government oversight agencies,
LGUs, project management teams at regional, municipal and bay/gulf levels, and
IFAD. Regional project management offices (RPMOs) will be established in each
target region. Municipal/city project management offices (M/CPMOs) will be based
at the municipal or city LGU in Regions 5, 8 and 13, while in ARMM a municipal
project implementing unit (MPIU) will be based at the BFAR Provincial Fisheries
Office under the leadership of the provincial fisheries officer. The project will
operate as part of the National Convergence Initiative, with assistance from other
government agencies as needed.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. AWP/Bs will be prepared through a participatory process, starting at the
community level and involving representatives of POs, the CPMO/MPMO/MPIU and
the bay/gulf alliance. RPMOs will consolidate the provincial AWP/Bs into a regional
document. PSCO will consolidate the regional AWP/Bs into a national AWP/B for
IFAD review and subsequent PSC approval.

14. Monitoring and evaluation. Project M&E will be in accordance with the
Government’s harmonized, national Results-based Performance Management
System and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). It will report
on project implementation status and progress in terms of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The RCSC and RPMO will provide regular reporting on accomplishments
regarding policy and major operational issues to regional development councils,
LGUs and other stakeholders. The project will conduct baseline and completion
impact studies. A rapid participatory resource and socio-economic assessment will
be conducted in each bay at project start-up and completion.

15. Learning and knowledge management. The project will generate and manage
knowledge in order to: improve implementation; contribute to BFAR’s body of
knowledge; aid in raising awareness of stakeholders; and enhance future policy
development and project/programme implementation. It will support innovative
approaches, document lessons learned and organize knowledge-sharing among
project staff, BFAR and other implementing agencies. It will also share knowledge



EB 2015/115/R.12

6

with other IFAD-assisted projects across the country and the region.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. BFAR, through the PSCO, will be responsible for overall

financial management of the project, including AWP/Bs, procurement, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and audit. The
project will follow the government’s financial systems, rules and regulations under
the New Government Accounting System, consistent with IFAD’s standard
disbursement procedures, for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the
IFAD loan and government counterpart funds. RPMOs will be responsible for
management of funds at the regional level. BFAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each LGU and other implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to detail responsibilities, required services and their
financing. In order to reduce fiduciary risks arising from insufficient experience and
capacity, the financial management capability of the central and regional offices of
BFAR and of LGUs will need to be strengthened through staff training and close
supervision.

17. Flow of funds. The Department of Finance, through the Bureau of the Treasury,
will open a designated account in United States dollars, in the central bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD, exclusively for the loan. Project accounts in the
Philippine peso will be opened at central and regional levels.

18. Procurement. BFAR will undertake major procurement packages in line with the
annual procurement plans through the PSCO and RPMOs supported by their
respective BAC and Finance and Administrative Services Division. Procurement will
follow the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Government Procurement
Reform Act (RA 9184) to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines. Smaller items, as defined in the procurement plans, will be
procured by regional offices.

19. Audit. Project consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the
Commission on Audit in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The
annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each
fiscal year.

20. Governance. IFAD will apply a policy of zero-tolerance in respect of fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive action.

E. Supervision
21. IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly conduct annual

supervision and implementation support missions, and IFAD will conduct a post-
supervision mission 6-9 months later, depending on the project’s progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
22. Total project costs are estimated at US$43.05 million over a five-year

implementation period, as shown in table 1. This includes taxes and duties
estimated at US$3.72 million or 8.8 per cent of total costs, which will be covered by
the Government’s contribution. Base costs were estimated at 2013 prices, with
price contingencies of 3 per cent per annum for pesos and dollars, and physical
contingencies of 3.5 per cent of base cost for all expenditures except staff costs.
Physical contingencies amount to US$1.14 million and price contingencies to
US$1.43 million, yielding total contingencies of US$2.57 million (6 per cent of total
baseline costs). The estimated average cost per target beneficiary household is
US$274 per household.



EB 2015/115/R.12

7

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Coastal resources

management 18 751.2 77.7 2 537.4 10.5 2 725.8 11.3 128.3 0.5 24 142.6 56.1
2. Livelihood

development 10 988.2 72.7 1 721.1 11.4 1 199.8 7.9 1 199.8 7.9 15 109.0 35.1
3. Project management

and coordination 216.4 5.7 1 866.1 49.2 1 710.5 45.1 - - 3 793.0 8.8
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

B. Project financing
23. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$29.96 million (69.6 per cent);

and (ii) a Government contribution of US$11.76 million (27.3 per cent), consisting
of the national government counterpart contribution of US$6.12 million
(14.2 per cent) and LGU financing of US$5.64 million (13.1 per cent); and
(iii) contributions in cash or in kind from proponents and beneficiaries of about
US$1.33 million (3.1 per cent).

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/

proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 726.8 80.3 230.4 10.7 193.4 9.0 - - 2 150.6 5.0
2. Equipment,

materials, and
supplies 17 734.0 76.4 2 486.1 10.7 1 735.9 7.5 1 247.4 5.4 23 203.4 53.9

3. Consultancies 10 494.9 89.5 1 071.2 9.1 80.8 0.7 80.8 0.7 11 727.7 27.2

4. Government staff - - 367.1 16.1 1 915.5 83.9 - - 2 282.6 5.3
5. Operation and

maintenance - - 1 969.8 53.5 1 710.5 46.5 - - 3 680.3 8.5
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. About 724,000 poor people or 188,000 households living in the 1,098 coastal

villages in the 11 targeted bays/gulfs will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 90,596 are fishing households, with an estimated 38,050 (146,495 people)
living below the poverty line. Project interventions are expected to improve the
productivity of municipal waters and coastal zones and generate livelihood benefits
for the members of coastal communities. Project benefits are expected to be
generated through: (i) effective law enforcement and regulatory activities with
respect to municipal fisheries; (ii) improved protection and management of coral
reef, mangrove, sea-grass ecosystems and other coastal resources; and
(iii) implementation of sustainable community-based livelihood enterprises.

D. Sustainability
25. To help ensure sustainability, the following are included in project design:

(i) assisting LGUs in developing sustainable sources of local revenues to finance
FLETs and provide funds for investment in the management of municipal fisheries
and coastal resources; (ii) ensuring the participation of POs and their members in
identifying and planning proposed livelihood activities; (iii) involving the private
sector on a long-term basis to enhance sustainability of the investments in



EB 2015/115/R.12

8

alternative sources of livelihoods for members of coastal communities and their
organizations; (iv) requiring beneficiaries, municipalities and cities to share in the
costs of the project’s investments; and (v) after the midterm review, preparing an
exit strategy and sustainability plan.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The current lack of technical and management capacity within BFAR is a risk. It is

addressed by the inclusion of sufficient contract staff to manage the project
together with the assigned staff of BFAR. The project will support BFAR’s
reorganization plan through provision of the capacity development needed to
improve the technical capacities of BFAR’s offices in the target regions. A second
risk is unsustainability of project activities after the project ends, thereby repeating
the experience of many previous project interventions in various bays/gulfs. The
project design tackles this issue by focusing on the generation of sustainable
sources of local revenues to finance the necessary law enforcement activities and
investment in resource management. Another risk is that agencies concerned may
be unable to provide the coordinated approach needed at the local level. The design
counters this risk through the use of memorandums of agreement between BFAR
and all agencies engaged in project implementation to specify roles and
responsibilities, costs and sources of finance. It also includes all agencies with a
role in project implementation as members of the regional coordination and
steering committees; and indicates that all implementing agencies will have a
FishCORAL focal point at the national level. An associated risk concerns the
willingness of the private sector to be involved in supporting the development of
alternative livelihood enterprises for the members of fishing communities. This is
addressed by involving the private sector from the initial planning stages through to
the processing and/or marketing of the products, and by the availability of some
initial project finance for livelihood development production activities to match
investments from the private sector for processing, drying and marketing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project design is consistent with the third strategic objective of the COSOP2 and

aligns well with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, which focuses on:
secure access to natural resources; climate change adaptation and mitigation;
improved agricultural technologies and effective production services; more
comprehensive financial services; integration into value chains through competitive
agricultural input and produce markets; rural enterprise development and off-farm
employment opportunities; technical and vocational education and training; and
empowerment of rural poor people through effective and sustainable rural
producers’ organizations. In this context, agriculture includes fisheries. Under the
Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, the project is classified both as
Category C and Category D, as it is intended to directly enhance the quality of the
environment or address existing environmental problems in coastal areas; and the
rural infrastructure components are small-scale and do not fall under other
categories.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable

agriculture and fisheries sector. It will complement and coordinate with existing and
planned projects of the Department of Agriculture and others (e.g. the Philippines
Rural Development Project (World Bank), Integrated Environment and Natural
Resource Management Project (AsDB/IFAD) and Ecosystems Improved for

2 “Selected marginalized and poor communities dependent on coastal resources in Bicol, eastern Visayas, northern
Mindanao and ARMM have sustainable access to fisheries and other productive coastal resources, use sustainable
management practices and diversify livelihood opportunities to meet their basic needs (in particular, food).”



EB 2015/115/R.12

9

Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH – USAID). IFAD will also work with government
programmes for an improved policy environment and governance. The project will
explore diverse types of partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries
and the private sector. Private-sector organizations and business development
partners will take a leading role as service providers in improving the returns from
livelihood enterprises.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. Despite the relatively small investment in relation to the scale of the issues

involved, the project could be a catalyst for improving household incomes and
attracting further investment in scaling up. This in turn could realize the potential
benefits from good, sustainable management of city/municipal fisheries and other
coastal resources. A key innovation for scaling up will be the sustainable financing
systems to be developed and introduced at the municipal level to: (i) effectively
enforce the fisheries ordinances for municipal fisheries and coastal resources; and
(ii) improve conservation and management of fisheries and coastal resources by
local governments and fishing communities.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will support policy/case studies for policy dialogue and consultation with

the relevant national and local institutions. Such communication will concern the
management by LGUs of municipal/city fisheries and coastal resources and
development of alternative livelihood enterprises for coastal communities. The
project will provide support in reviewing existing relevant legislation, covering the
parts of the Local Government Code related to: municipal fisheries; the Coastal
Zone and Fisheries Code of the Philippines; possible duplication between the roles
and responsibilities of the BMCs and IFARMCs; and the future management role of
pre-existing fisheries management systems. The project will also provide support to
review other relevant legislation such as the Agriculture and Fisheries Management
Act. After the midterm review, it would pilot proposed changes to the codes with
respect to municipal fisheries in selected locations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

32. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-seven million
three hundred and ten thousand euros (EUR 27,310,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$29.96 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the
Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Executing agency: Ministry of Plantation Industries

Total project cost: US$65.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 18.45 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.764 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms: Maturity period of 25 years, including agrace period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier(s): Bank of Ceylon and People’s Bank

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$32.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.61 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and
Rubber Revitalization Project, as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Sri Lankan economy has grown at an impressive pace in recent years,

recording an annual average growth rate of about 7.4 per cent in 2014. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals and
compares favourably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender
equality. The Government’s development policy framework is articulated in the
Public Investment Strategy 2014-2016, which sets the principal targets as raising
the per capita income to US$4,000 in 2016 and elevating Sri Lanka to the level of a
strong middle-income country. The new Government, initially appointed in January
2015 and then reappointed in September 2015, has maintained these targets.

2. Eighty per cent of Sri Lanka’s population resides in rural areas, and agriculture
remains the backbone of the economy despite its declining share of GDP.
Smallholder farmers are major contributors to food security. The government’s
strategic direction for agriculture is to achieve a sustained improvement in
production through increased productivity and market competitiveness. Poverty is
primarily a rural phenomenon, and the main population groups living in poverty
are: (i) smallholders in crop and plantation production; (ii) plantation workers in
estate areas; (iii) artisanal and small-scale fishers; (iv) women-headed households;
and (v) unemployed and underemployed labourers.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. Rationale. The tea and rubber subsectors have been important contributors to the
national economy. Tea smallholders contribute 70 per cent of Sri Lanka's total tea
production while smallholder rubber growers make up 62 per cent of the land under
rubber cultivation. About 50 per cent of the smallholder tea lands are more than 20
years old with less than optimal production capacity. There is a dire need for
replanting, without which many of the smallholders will be pushed below the
poverty line. The Government has a subsidy scheme in place aiming to address
smallholders' difficulty in accessing appropriate financial products for tea replanting.
However, both the timeliness and level of financial support this government scheme
provides remain problematic, and additional financing is needed in order to
strengthen smallholders' participation in the replanting programme. The project will
complement the existing government scheme, and will make it more effective by
providing capital investment support to smallholders at the commencement of tea
replanting.

4. As part of the National Rubber Master Plan, the Government has been promoting
rubber in non-traditional rubber cultivation areas to provide a source of livelihood
for smallholders. This expansion is also a direct response to the demands of the



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

private sector, which has been calling for greater government support for rubber
production. The Government has introduced proactive policy that supports the
granting of land permits, land clearance and initial rubber cultivation. The project
serves to reinforce the Government's priority of rubber development in non-
traditional areas, focusing support on smallholder production.

5. Alignment with government priorities and the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP). The project is directly
aligned with the government’s development priorities as defined in the Public
Investment Strategy 2014-2016, particularly the policy directions for the tea and
rubber subsectors. It is consistent with the RB-COSOP for Sri Lanka (2015-2020)
and contributes directly to its two strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project area will cover eight neighbouring districts in central and southern Sri

Lanka, including Galle (tea), Matara (tea), Ratnapura (tea and rubber processing),
Badulla (tea), Kandy (tea), Moneragala (rubber) and Ampara (rubber) and Nuwara
Eliya (tea). A total of 144,000 people, or 32,000 households, are expected to
benefit from the project.

7. The target group of tea interventions will be existing poor smallholder tea growers
having less than one hectare of unproductive tea lands. The target group of rubber
interventions will be smallholders having a holding of one hectare of rubber, to be
selected by poverty level. Gender equality will be one of the criteria used in the
selection of beneficiaries, to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the tea and rubber
growers are women.

B. Project development objective
8. The project goal is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security,

increase their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The development objective
is to ensure that smallholders' economic activities in tea and rubber become more
productive, profitable and resilient.

C. Components/outcomes
9. The project will have three components: (i) tea smallholder development;

(ii) rubber smallholder development; and (iii) inclusive rural financing, to be
supported by project management.

(i) Component 1: Tea smallholder development (approximately US$44.44
million; 69 per cent of total base cost), will promote better organization
among tea smallholders to enable them to effectively and sustainably produce
and market their products. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening tea
societies in production and marketing; (b) market-driven production support;
and (c) income and market diversification for tea smallholders.

(ii) Component 2: Rubber smallholder development (approximately
US$14.78 million; 22 per cent of total base cost), will enhance rubber
production and processing of quality rubber products with better market
linkages. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening rubber societies,
including processing and market sensitivity, (b) market-driven production
support, and (c) income and market diversification for rubber smallholders.

(iii) Component 3: Inclusive rural financing (approximately US$3.5 million;
6 per cent of the total base cost), will facilitate access by the targeted
smallholders to available bank financing for production, harvesting and
marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products. It has two
subcomponents: (a) facilitating access to lending from the banking system;
and (b) supporting implementation arrangements.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

10. The main project outcomes include: (i) 200 revitalized tea societies and 100
strengthened rubber societies able to effectively provide a range of services to their
members; (ii) high-yield tea crops replanted on 5,500 hectares and rubber planted
on 3,000 hectares by smallholders to provide a sustainable source of income and
diversified livelihoods; and (iii) strengthened smallholders undertaking sustainable
commercial business with the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project will adhere to the principles of demand-driven participatory

development to ensure that smallholders are the key decision-makers when they
participate in project activities. A value chain approach will be adopted in
identifying the relevant activities from production to processing and marketing.
Overall project implementation will take into account the following key factors: (i) a
large number of smallholders are the predominant producers of tea and rubber;
(ii) the private sector is keen to enhance tea and rubber production in order to
meet the growing market demand for these commodities, as well as to promote
sustainable and responsible farming; (iii) the formal banking sector is unable to
effectively provide the needed lending products due to their loan processing
procedures and risk aversion to rural lending; (iv) there is a need to strengthen the
capacity of government extension staff; there is also a need to put in place an
implementation strategy that is sustainable and does not lead to friction with
existing line agency staff; and (v) the cadre of village-level government staff can be
effectively employed for project implementation.

B. Organizational framework
12. The lead agency for the project will be the Ministry of Plantation Industries (MPI).

MPI will (i) appoint a senior staff member to supervise the overall implementation
of the project; (ii) set up a national steering committee to guide and steer project
implementation; and (iii) establish a project management unit (PMU) responsible
for daily project operations. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. District
level implementation will be the responsibility of the Tea Small Holdings
Development Authority (TSHDA) and the Rubber Development Department (RDD),
two of MPI's main constituent institutions. The district office of TSHDA, headed by
the TSHDA regional manager, and that of RDD headed by the RDD deputy director,
will act as the district project management cell (DPMC).

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. The project logframe will be the basis for preparing the annual work plan
and budget (AWP/B). The logframe will be refined periodically to reflect any
changes and adjustments that may be necessary during the life of the project. The
overall responsibility for AWP/B preparation will rest with the project manager, with
support from the TSHDA regional manager for tea and the RDD deputy director for
rubber at the district level. The district project AWP/Bs will be prepared by the
TSHDA regional manager or the RDD deputy director. The project manager will be
responsible for consolidating the district AWP/Bs into the overall project AWP/B, for
approval by the national steering committee and then no-objection by IFAD.

14. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will establish an effective and
efficient M&E system to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data and
information for sound result-based management and decision-making. The overall
responsibility for the project M&E activities will lie with the PMU, specifically its M&E
coordinator, who will be responsible for ensuring the consistency, accuracy and
timeliness of all project reporting. All M&E activities will be based on the IFAD
guidelines for project M&E and the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
first- and second-level indicators handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated by



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

gender and socio-economic status to allow for a proper assessment of poverty and
gender targeting.

15. Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlying theme. The
project is expected to offer valuable opportunities for learning at the policy,
operational and technical levels because it has certain novel features that can make
the existing government scheme for tea replanting and rubber expansion more
effective. In addition, the project can contribute to restructuring the manner in
which the group rubber processing centres are financed and operated as business
enterprises; demonstrating the use of eco-restoration to enhance tea yields;
promoting partnership with the private sector for better market linkages; and
enhancing the access to existing bank lending products for tea and rubber
production and other income-generating activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. MPI as the lead project agency will be responsible for

overall financial management. The financial management arrangements will, to the
extent feasible, be mainstreamed into government systems. Operational day-to-day
fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of the PMU embedded within MPI, in
liaison with the DPMCs attached to district-level TSHDA and RDD offices. The PMU’s
financial management role will include consolidating AWP/Bs, managing the flow of
funds, maintaining project bank accounts, processing disbursement requests,
consolidating interim financial reports, and preparing annual financial statements
for audit. The PMU will put in place an imprest mechanism for the release of
adequate funds to DPMCs. It will also be responsible for ensuring that district-level
finance staff are provided with appropriate training and guidance with regard to
reporting expenditure and procurement. The financial management risk for the
project is rated medium. Measures to be put in place to mitigate this risk include
qualified and experienced financial staff, a detailed financial and accounting
manual, automated accounting processes (accounting software), quarterly financial
reporting, and internal and external audit.

17. Flow of funds. MPI will be responsible for managing the flow of funds from the
IFAD loan proceeds and the government counterpart funds, opening and
maintaining the designated account in United States dollars at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka to receive initial deposit and replenishments, obtaining the agreed
counterpart funds from the General Treasury, forwarding imprest applications
prepared by the PMU to obtain advances from the designated account to meet
project requirements, and scrutinizing and forwarding withdrawal applications to
IFAD. MPI will make adequate annual budgetary provisions for both IFAD and
counterpart funds in the national budget, based on the project AWP/B.

18. Audit. The Auditor General, who is constitutionally mandated to audit all
government accounts and reports to Parliament annually, will perform the external
audit of the project. The Auditor General will submit audited financial statements
and a detailed audit report along with a management letter no later than six
months after the end of the financial year.

19. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project
will be carried out in accordance with the national procurement guidelines to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. The
procurement methods to be applied in each case will depend on the expenditure
and the estimated value of the contract. The thresholds for the different
procurement methods will be detailed in the letter to the borrower.

20. Governance. In line with its anti-corruption policy, IFAD will apply zero tolerance in
respect of fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive action.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
21. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD which, with government

collaboration, will conduct annual supervision missions, regular implementation
support missions, a midterm review and a completion review.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
22. The total project cost is estimated at US$65.4 million including contingencies

(US$3.8 million) over a period of six years. Project costs are organized into: (i) tea
smallholders development (69 per cent of total base costs); (ii) rubber smallholders
development (22 per cent of total baseline costs); (iii) inclusive rural financing
(6 per cent of the base cost); and (iv) project management (4 per cent of total
baseline costs).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Tea smallholder
development 16 380 36.9 - - 1 955 4.4 26 107 58.7 44 442 68.0

2. Rubber smallholder
development 7 635 51.6 15 0.1 1 654 11.2 5 480 37.1 14 783 22.6

3. Inclusive rural financing 50 1.4 3 251 92.8 - - 201 5.7 3 502 5.4

4. Project management 1 699 63.6 - - - - 974 36.4 2 674 4.1

Total 25 764 39.4 3 266 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 65 401

B. Project financing
23. IFAD will provide a loan equivalent to US$25.764 million on blend terms; the

Government will provide counterpart funds equivalent to US$32.76 million; the two
participating banks will provide an amount equivalent to US$3.25 million as a line
of credit from their own funds; and the beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at
US$3.61 million.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries Borrower/Counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 4 491 60.5 - - 1 772 23.9 1 162 15.6 7 425
2. Vehicles 686 41.0 - - - - 987 59.0 1 674
3. Equipment and materials 3 985 72.0 - - 1 332 24.1 219 4.0 5 536
4. Consultancies 587 89.5 - - - - 69 10.5 656
5. Credit - - 3 000 100 - - - - 3 000
6. Goods, services and

inputs 2 028 75.1 - - 505 18.7 169 6.2 2 702
7. Capital grants and

government subsidy 9 624 27.0 - - - - 26 000 73.0 35 624
8. Training 1 294 67.3 251 13 - - 364 18.9 1 923
9. Salaries and allowances 1 645 41.0 - - - - 2 369 59 4 014
10. Operating costs 1 424 50.0 - - - - 1 424 50 2 847
Total 25 764 39.4 3 251 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 62 504

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. The project is expected to benefit a total of about 32,000 households and 144,000

people. Women-headed and poor households will be targeted in particular. The
project's support for tea replanting and intercropping will lead to increased yields



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

from tea as well as from appropriate inter-crops such as pepper. On average, a
household’s production benefits will increase from 3,000 kg/ha to over 14,000
kg/ha of fresh tea leaves in a year over a 20-year period, at a minimum.
Smallholders planting rubber will be able to benefit from a steady income from
latex, the average production of which is expected to be 2,160 kg per year for the
next 30 years. The project will contribute to institutional sustainability at the village
level by strengthening tea and rubber societies and linking them with private-sector
partners. The project's economic internal rate of return is estimated at 26 per cent.

D. Sustainability
25. There are strong elements in the project design that will enhance the sustainability

of benefits for smallholders. The most significant investment will be in the
replanting of tea and planting of rubber trees on new lands. The tea plantations are
expected to provide yields for another 20 to 25 years while the planting of rubber
trees is expected to provide benefits for 30 to 35 years. The quality of produce will
be ensured through the provision of high quality plants from nurseries certified by
the Tea Research Institute and the Rubber Research Institute. The marketing of tea
and rubber is not an issue in the country as there is high demand for both. Due to
the acute shortage of rubber, any additional rubber product can easily be
marketed. The ability of smallholders to convert latex into ribbed sheets will
enhance shelf life, and this in turn will make marketing easier. The increased
capacity of the smallholders to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises
through project support will enhance the sustainability of their livelihoods.
Smallholders' livelihoods will be further enhanced by increased incomes generated
from linkages with the private sector and implementation of the business models.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The first risk is smallholder's lack of capital to invest in the replanting of old tea

crops and new rubber lands and also in processing equipment. This will be
addressed by providing capital support upfront to supplement government
financing. The second risk is the unavailability of plant materials, which can be
addressed by supporting private nurseries for tea and the large RDD nursery in the
Ampara district for rubber to provide the required plant materials. The third risk is
related to the timely regularization of land for the new rubber plantations. This is
currently being proactively addressed by MPI in collaboration with the Forest
Department and the Mahaweli Development Authority, both of which have agreed
to make the lands available immediately upon project start-up. The fourth risk is
farmer groups' low management and negotiating capacity, poor access to roads,
lack of transport and market information. These will be addressed through capacity-
building for tea and rubber societies and by supporting farm roads for enhanced
accessibility. Finally, the risk of climatic factors such as drought leading to lower
yields will be mitigated through the adoption of good agricultural practices,
including soil renovation and soil moisture management.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project is in line with IFAD policies, specifically: (i) the project target group has

been clearly defined and the selection of the project area is in keeping with IFAD's
targeting policy; (ii) in compliance with IFAD's gender policy, the project will make
special provision for the targeting of women, and gender disaggregated indicators
will be used to monitor women's participation; (iii) in line with IFAD's private sector
strategy, the project will place a strong emphasis on further developing and
strengthening the smallholders' linkages with licensed tea and rubber collectors and
processors; (iv) in keeping with the IFAD rural finance policy, the project will
facilitate access of smallholders to available financing for production, harvesting
and marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products; and (v) the design has
capitalized on the IFAD strategies and guidance tools for natural resource



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

management, climate change and environment, and has structured the project
activities in a way that will bring positive environmental impact and socio-economic
benefits to the communities.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project is aligned with the Government’s development priorities for the tea and

rubber subsectors, and supports the implementation of the newly developed
National Rubber Master Plan. It will complement the ongoing government
programmes for smallholder tea replanting and rubber production. The project will
explore and support diverse types of partnerships between the project beneficiaries
and the private sector for enhanced access to market and financial services.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. The project will vertically scale up to new geographic areas the successful

interventions in support of smallholder tea and rubber production initiated through
the IFAD-financed Smallholder Entrepreneurship Development Programme. It will
provide funding support for business models that link smallholders with the private
sector to ensure effective market access. The project will also partner with two
state banks to enhance smallholders' access to existing financial products specific
to tea and rubber.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will facilitate the conduct of studies to assess the role and contribution

of the up-front capital grant in encouraging tea smallholders' participation in the tea
replanting scheme. The results of such studies will be used to initiate policy
dialogue with the Government on reviewing and possibly revising its subsidy
scheme to make it more effective for smallholders.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached
as appendix I.

32. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is empowered under its laws to
receive financing from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in an amount equivalent to
eighteen million four hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 18,450,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































































(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 

between

MONGOLIA 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED fC'

MON 39229



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement dated 24 October 2008 between the Borrower 
and ADB (“Grant Agreement”), ADB agreed to provide a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in an amount of fourteen million seven hundred twenty thousand 
Dollars ($14,720,000) for the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the Grant 
Agreement (“Original Project”);

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith entered into between the 
Borrower and ADB (“Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide the 
Borrower a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources in various currencies equivalent to ten 
million seven hundred nineteen thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR10,719,000) for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement;

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB’s Ordinary Capital 
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan 
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, 
however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium.
(a) The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge

on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the 
terms specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall



2 
 
 

 

remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB shall apply the 
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.   
 

(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity 
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB 
shall add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the 
Borrower. 

 
(b) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an 
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is 
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread 
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that 
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per 
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on 
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the 
Borrower.  The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall apply the 
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

 
(c) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a 
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge. 
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will 
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to 
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum), 
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which 
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 



3 
 
 

 

commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a 
Surcharge.  The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined 
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall add the 
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

    
  Section 1.02.  Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations, the Grant Agreement and the Special Operations 
Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or 
the context otherwise requires.   
 
 
 

ARTICLE II 
 

The Loan 
 
 
  Section 2.01.   (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.  
 

(b) The Borrower shall onlend a portion of the proceeds of the Loan to the 
Participating Banks for the purposes of Output 1(c) of the Project, under the Onlending 
Agreements, upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB. 
 

(c) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (d) hereinafter.  
 

(d) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (c) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.02.    The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of: 
 
 



4 
 
 

 

(a) LIBOR; 
 

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a 
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations 
and; 

 
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10 as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 

Regulations. 
 

  Section 2.03.   The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum.  Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement. 

    
  Section 2.04.   Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year. 
 
  Section 2.05.   The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.06.  (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of 
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management: 
 

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency; 

 
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and 

 
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate. 

 
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 

is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.  

 
 



5 
 
 

 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 

 
  Section 3.01.  The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 3.02.   The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  Section 3.03.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 of the Special 
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has 
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between 
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are satisfactory to 
ADB. 
 
  Section 3.04.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 
   

Section 3.05.   The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2021 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
 

Particular Covenants 
 

 
  Section 4.01.   (a)   The Borrower shall cause the Project to be 
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, and development practices. 
 
  (b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities, 
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5 
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 4.02.   The Borrower shall make available, promptly as needed 
and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the funds, facilities, services, land and other 
resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. 
 
 



6 
 
 

 

  Section 4.03.  (a)  Whenever applicable, in the carrying out of the 
Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, 
acceptable to ADB to be employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory 
to the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  (b)  The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance 
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods 
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable.  The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to 
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made 
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request. 
 
  Section 4.04.    The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its 
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative 
policies and procedures. 
 

Section 4.05.  (a)  The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate 
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) cause each Participating Bank to maintain the 
Special Account and other separate accounts and records for the Subloan(s); (iii) prepare 
annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (iv) cause each Participating Bank to prepare and submit to the Borrower 
a statement of utilization of funds for the Subloan(s) in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (v) have such financial statements, including the statement of utilization 
of funds for the Subloan(s) prepared by each Participating Bank, audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB; (vi) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report (which 
includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements, statements of utilization of funds, 
use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this Loan 
Agreement and the Onlending Agreements as well as on the use of the procedures for the 
imprest funds and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the 
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, 
if any); and (vii) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in 
the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
 

(b)   The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to (i) 
prepare its own entity-level annual financial statements in accordance with national accrual-
based financing reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements 
audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of 
reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iii) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements) and a 
management letter; and (iv) furnish to ADB through the Borrower, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request; 

 



7 
 
 

 

 
  (c)  ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements referred to in Section 
4.05(a) hereinabove within 30 days of the date of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s 
website. 
 

(d) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(v) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree. 
 
  (e)  The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to enable ADB, 
upon ADB's request, to discuss the entity-level annual financial statements and the 
Participating Bank’s financial affairs where they relate to the Subproject(s) with the auditors 
appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(ii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any 
representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. 
This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Participating Bank, unless the Participating Bank shall otherwise 
agree. 
 
  Section 4.06.  The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. 
 
  Section 4.07.  The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to 
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices. 
 
 
 

ARTICLE V 
 

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity 
 
 
  Section 5.01.   The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: 
 

(a) a party to an Onlending Agreement shall have failed to perform one or 
more of its obligations under an Onlending Agreement;  

 
(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Grant Agreement; and 
 
(c) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.  
 



8 
 
 

 

Section 5.02.   The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: any 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.  
 
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
 

Effectiveness 
 

 
  Section 6.01.   A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations. 
 
 



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By
BOLOR BAYARBAATAR

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



 
 
 
 

 

11 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 
 

 
1.  The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the 
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share).  If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the 
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on 
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total 
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment 
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount 
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies. 
   
 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first  
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows: 
 

(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and 
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule. 
 

(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts 
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the 
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the 
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for 
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies. 

 
3.  Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal. 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.  



 
Schedule 1 

 
 

 

13 

 
5.  If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to 
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount. 



14 
 

 

 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1.  The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).  (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest and Commitment Charges 
 
3.  The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing interest and commitment 
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  ADB shall be entitled 
to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges. 
 
Reallocation 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
  (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
  (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 
Disbursement Procedures 
 
5.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Schedule 2 

 
 

 

15 

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account 
 
6.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals 
shall be made from the Loan Account to the Special Account of a Participating Bank until 
MOF and such Participating Bank shall have duly entered into an Onlending Agreement 
which shall include the terms and conditions set forth in paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to the 
Special Operations Loan Agreement and such Onlending Agreement shall have become 
legally binding upon the Borrower and such Participating Bank in accordance with its terms.  

 
 



16 

Attachment to Schedule 2 
 
 

 

TABLE 
 

 
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project – Additional Financing) 
 

 
Number 

 
Item 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 

Account 
($) 

Category 

1 Value Chain Investment
a
 32,950,000 100% of total expenditure 

2 
Interest and Commitment 
Charges 2,050,000 100% of amounts due 

 Total 35,000,000 
 

a
Subject to the conditions for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2.  
















__________________________________________________________________________
LOAN NUMBER 3267-SRI
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
between
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
and
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
DATED 17 SEPTEMBER 2015
SRI 47381
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
LOAN AGREEMENT dated 17 September 2015 between DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(“ADB”).
WHEREAS
(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Improvement
Program;
(B) by a periodic financing request dated 23 April 2015, the Borrower has
applied to ADB for a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources and a loan from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the
Special Operations Loan Agreement referred to in Recital (C) below;
(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Special Operations Loan
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a loan (“Special Operations Loan”) to the Borrower
from ADB’s Special Funds resources for an amount in various currencies equivalent to fifty
three million five hundred eighty eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR53,588,000) for
the purposes of the Project; and
(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;
NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Loan Regulations; Definitions
Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB's Ordinary Capital
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject,
however, to the following modifications:
(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium. (a)
The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge on the
unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the terms
specified in the Loan Agreement.
2
(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall
remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall apply the
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.
(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall
add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the
Borrower.
(d) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
(e) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
3
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Special Operations Loan Agreement and Loan Regulations have the
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise
requires.
ARTICLE II
The Loan
Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy six million Dollars ($76,000,000) as such
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.
(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.
(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:
4
(a) LIBOR;
(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations;
and
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan
Regulations.
Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15%
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.
Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to
this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:
(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
and
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.
5
ARTICLE III
Use of Proceeds of the Loan
Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions
of this Loan Agreement.
Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.
Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Special
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory
to ADB.
Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.
Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2020 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.
ARTICLE IV
Particular Covenants
Section 4.01. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, and development practices.
(b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities,
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 4.02. The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be
made available, promptly as needed, and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds
of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.
6
Section 4.03. (a) In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower
shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, acceptable to ADB, to be
employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.
(b) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable. The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards,
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.
Section 4.04. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.
Section 4.05. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.
Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial
statements, compliance with the financial covenants as well as on the use of the procedures
for imprest fund(s) and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out
the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of each related
fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter,
all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the
audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.
(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.
(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall
otherwise agree.
Section 4.07. The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices.
7
ARTICLE V
Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity
Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to
perform any of its obligations under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity of the Loan for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan
Regulations: the event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement has occurred.
ARTICLE VI
Effectiveness
Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan
Regulations: the Special Operations Loan Agreement shall have been duly authorized or
ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement, shall have been fulfilled.
Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of
the Loan Regulations.
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous
Section 7.01. Each of the Secretary of MOF, the Deputy Secretary to
the Treasury and the Director General of the Department of External Resources, MOF, of the
Borrower, is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02
of the Loan Regulations.
Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:
8
For the Borrower
Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka
cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources
Facsimile Number:
+94 11 248-4563.
For ADB
Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:
+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.

10
SCHEDULE 1
Amortization Schedule
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
Payment Due Installment Share
(Expressed as a %)

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:
(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule.
(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
Schedule 1
12
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.
5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
13
SCHEDULE 2
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds
General
1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table).
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account
2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.
Reallocation
3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,
(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and
(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.
Disbursement Procedures
4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.
Retroactive Financing
5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made for reimbursement of
eligible expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with consulting services and
procurement of goods, services and civil works, project management, and project
administration, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.
14
Attachment to Schedule 2
TABLE
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
Number Item
Total Amount Allocated
for ADB Financing Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
($) Account
Category
1 Civil Works $54,540,000 51% of total expenditure claimed
2
Mechanical and
Electrical Equipment
$2,090,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
3
Incremental PMU and
PIU Salaries
$450,000 8% of total expenditure claimed
4
Strategic
Communication Plan
$500,000 59% of total expenditure claimed*
5 Training $450,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
6 Unallocated $17,970,000
Total $76,000,000
*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.

