














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 
 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Jamaica P166279 Jamaica Rural Economic 
Development Initiative-
Second Phase 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 12-Nov-2018 26-Feb-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Jamaica Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF), Ministry of 
Finance and Public Sector 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Community Tourism Investment Subprojects for Rural Enterprises 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Public Sector Entities 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 42.00 

Total Financing 42.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 40.00 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 3 of 16  

 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Jamaican economy has historically been characterized by low growth and high public debt, but 
fiscal and structural reforms launched in 2013 are helping to reverse the trend. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) per capita grew by only 0.5 percent on average per year between 1990 and 2016. Fiscal restraints, higher 
tax revenue, and well-timed liability management operations have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 25 
percentage points. GDP growth has seen a modest acceleration since the start of reforms, rising to 1.4 percent 
in 2016. The informal sector continues to be large in relative terms, accounting for 43% of official GDP according 
to an ILO 2014 study. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks.  

2. Rural poverty has remained consistently higher than urban poverty, with an increasing urban-rural gap. 
The national incidence of poverty for 2015 was 21.2 percent, with an urban-rural gap of 14 percentage points 
(28.5 percent in rural areas1 compared to 14.3 percent in the Kingston Metropolitan Area). Socio-economic 
disparities for women and youth continue to contribute to the higher level of rural poverty. If Jamaica is to 
achieve “Developed World” status, as is the goal of the GOJ’s Vision 2030 plan, development of rural areas needs 
to keep pace with development in urban areas. The tourism and food/agriculture sectors hold significant 
potential for rural growth and development because of their importance to the economy overall as well as their 
potential reach into rural areas. 

3. Jamaica is highly vulnerable to climate change and faces significant environmental threats due to its 
geographical location. Between 2004 and 2008, five major storm events caused damages and losses estimated 
at US$1.2 billion. Evidence suggests that Jamaica will likely see increases in severe weather events, such as 
droughts, extreme precipitation, flooding, and increases in the intensity and frequency of hurricanes2. 
Additionally, Jamaica’s vulnerability to sea level rise is more pronounced than in other regions due to the 
potential impact of storm surges from tropical storms and hurricanes on the coast. 

                                                           
1 Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions 
2 Ivan, Dennis and Emily (2004-2005), Dean 2007, Sandy (2012), tropical storms Gustav (2008) and Nicole (2010)) and droughts (2005-2014). 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 4 of 16  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

Agricultural Sector 

4. The agricultural sector is an important contributor to the country’s economic development and is 
recognized as a priority in the GOJ’s mid-term plans. The agricultural sector accounts for 8.0 percent of Jamaica’s 
GDP, and employs 18.7 percent of the active population (of which 44.7 lives in rural areas). Agriculture and agro-
processing in Jamaica are characterized by a few sub-sectors with relatively tight value chains and high-quality 
standards serving export markets and the tourism industry, along with domestic production sub-sectors serving 
local parish markets and supermarkets. Traditional export crops (sugar, bananas, coffee, and citrus) are in 
decline. The “non-traditional” export sector showing strong growth and market potential includes agricultural 
products such as preserved fruits (e.g. ackee) and sauces, condiments, and mixed seasonings (e.g. jerk sauces). 
Jamaica is a net importer of livestock commodities (dairy and meat products). 

5. The small-scale agricultural and food products sector exhibits significant potential for growth, but 
significant challenges remain to be addressed.  Small-scale agriculture has ample potential for serving domestic 
markets but needs to become more competitive with respect to imports by increasing land and labor 
productivity, the quality and reliability of distribution, and climate resiliency.  Small-farmers and micro and small-
sized agri-businesses enterprises tend to be at a comparative disadvantage in accessing higher value markets due 
to lack of market information, inefficient production practice, outdated technologies, lack of value addition, 
diseconomies of scale, and high logistics costs. Limited access to financing is among the key challenges to 
agriculture competitiveness and related MSMEs. Weaknesses in the connectivity of rural areas is also limiting 
marketing opportunities and access to potentially attractive inland tourism sites.   

6. The natural environment exposes the agriculture and food sector to frequent weather shocks and high 
levels of climatic variability – further exacerbated by climate change.  Climate change has caused a trend of 
rising temperatures, worsening rainfall variability, and droughts, and here the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events is likely to rise in the future.  This will make soil and crop management more difficult, especially in coastal 
areas, which are threatened by a decline in fertility or being washed away. Crops need to be able to withstand a 
more extreme and diverse set of environmental challenges, including worsening of pests and disease occurrence. 
In the livestock sub-sector, these weather trends may put additional strains on cattle, adding to the vulnerability 
of livestock facilities.    

Tourism Sector 

7. Tourism is also a critical driver of the Jamaican economy.  The tourism sector accounted for 9.3 percent 
of the national GDP in 20163.  This sector is considered mature, with international arrivals still growing more 
rapidly than elsewhere in the region. Jamaica’s tourism strategy4 sets a target of 5 percent annual growth for the 
sector for the years 2017 to 2022, as well as 5 million visitors with US$3.5 billion in total earnings annually from 
visitor spending. The goal is also to reduce significantly the amount of leakage that results from the large amount 
of imports used in the sector. Jamaica retains about 30 percent of every dollar spent by tourists, while the target 
set by The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is 50 percent. As such, Tourism has the potential to be strongly linked to 
agriculture and small-scale production: Sandals Resorts in Jamaica reports that 90 percent of produce purchased 
in Jamaica annually are locally produced by a network of around 180 farmers5.   

                                                           
3 World Travel & Tourism Council (2017). Travel &Tourism: Economic Impact 2017 Jamaica  
4 The Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism Development and the National Development Plan – Vision 2030 are the main guides determining Jamaica’s 
tourism strategy. 
5 Jamaica Observer (2017) http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/business-report/sandals-consumes-whopping-5-million-pounds-of-local-farm-produce-
yearly-buy-local-first-before-looking-overseas-stewart-instructs-resorts_136430 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 5 of 16  

 

8. Jamaica’s tourism market has traditionally focused on the “sun, sea and sand” concept model but more 
diversification is being pursued. Attempts are being made by the GOJ and the private sector to provide a more 
diversified visitor experience through new product offerings targeted to wider groups of visitors.  The MOT 
intends to move towards a more inclusive tourism model to spread the benefits of tourism, provide more 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and deepen economic linkages in rural areas. This policy is laid out in the 
National Community Tourism Policy and Strategy, which was funded under the previous REDI project. Many 
challenges to the further development of community tourism in rural areas remains They include: (a) excessive 
licensing and standards that are too complex for small NGOs and Community Tourism Enterprises (CTEs) to 
manage; (b) low levels of available capacity and resources for expanding community tourism operations; and 
(c) poor marketing support and inadequate connections to the tourism supply chain, operators, and hotels.  

9. Climate resilience is also important for the tourism sector. More severe storms and hurricanes, rising sea 
levels, droughts, and heatwaves can degrade tourism assets such as coral reefs, shorelines, freshwater supply, 
and ecosystems, and can damage tourism infrastructure and destination communities with potentially 
significant losses to GDP and employment.  Changing weather conditions and milder winters in various parts of 
the world may also affect tourist demand, underscoring the need for sun, sea, and sand destinations to diversify 
their offerings.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 
 

Key Results 
10. The results of the proposed Project will be measured through the following set of outcome indicators: 

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises that have accessed new markets;  

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises operating on or above the projections (gross sales value) 
of their corresponding business plan; and 

• Number of targeted beneficiaries reached with climate resilient approaches supported by the project 
(of which number of rural enterprises and public institutions). 

 
D. Project Description  

 
11. Enhancement to the REDI I approaches. Building on the experience and results of REDI, the new Project 
will focus on strengthening value chains6  and tourism clusters development, placing emphasis on the linkages 
between producers/service providers and buyers, to improve economies of scale for small agricultural and 
tourism enterprises and to mainstream climate resilience.  

A. Project Components 

12. Component 1. Climate Resilient Agricultural and Community Tourism Investments Subprojects for Rural 
Enterprises (Total US$ 28.0 million, IBRD US$26.0 million).  The objective of this component is to promote the 
development of agricultural/community tourism enterprises that are better integrated in productive 

                                                           
6 Value chain is defined as interlinked value-adding activities that help competitive advantage. Typically, it includes: (a) procurement and input logistics; 
(b) operations that may include, in the case of this project, farming and agricultural research, basic tourism infrastructure such as eco-trails; (c) training 
and other form of human resource development activities; (d) transportation of outputs and any investment in infrastructure to decrease costs or 
improve quality of the outputs (such as cold storage); and (e) corporate activities including marketing and sales. 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 6 of 16  

 

partnerships or “alliances" and operate more competitively in selected value chains, with more reliable linkages 
with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks.  

13. This component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, good, works and operating costs 
(through matching grants) for demand-driven and competitively selected agriculture/fisheries or community 
tourism subprojects presented and implemented by participating rural enterprises to increase their production 
and to capture and/or increase their market share and level of profits.  Financed activities will support the 
promotion, identification, design, feasibility, and implementation of competitive and climate resilient 
investment subprojects for business ventures established by beneficiary enterprises (small farmer/fisher 
associations – cooperatives, friendly or benevolent societies, or any formal form of legally established 
associations – as well as, agribusinesses, community tourism operators, and related entrepreneurs such as craft 
makers).  

14. Investments proposals will be prepared in response to calls for proposal and submitted by the beneficiary 
rural enterprises. They will be appraised and competitively selected for project support and funding considering 
pre-established criteria assessing, inter-alia: market demand, product quality, technical and financial feasibility, 
environmental and social sustainability; approaches to enhance climate resiliency and the potential for local 
impact; and the level of participation by women and youth.  It is estimated that a total of 90 investment 
subprojects will be supported through this component, benefitting directly around 200 rural enterprises. As 
such, around 20,000 individual members of these rural enterprises will benefit directly from these investments 
(of which 40 percent will be females and 30 percent youth).  

15. Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Relevant Public Entities (IBRD 
US$8.0 million).  This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant public-sector institutions (MICAF, 
MOT, and JSIF) and associated entities (RADA, TPDCo, and others) to provide public infrastructure and quality 
services needed to promote inclusive rural development (based on the agriculture and tourism nexus) and to 
ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises and productive partnerships supported by the project. It is 
organized in the following two subcomponents: (i) 2.1 –Public Infrastructure Investments (IBRD US$ 6,0 million) 
will finance civil works, goods, and consulting services for priority public infrastructure investments (new or 
rehabilitated) that are needed for improving the efficiency and climate resilience of targeted agri-food and 
tourism value chains; and (ii) 2.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IBRD US$2.0 million. will finance 
technical assistance (consultant and non-consultant services, goods, training, workshops, and study tours) to 
strengthen the capacity of relevant national organizations and other relevant partner entities responsible for 
assisting the agricultural and community tourism enterprises.  

16. Component 3. Project Management (IBRD US$6.0 million).  This component will finance incremental 
costs associated with the management, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
by JSIF and its technical Project Management Team (PMT) for REDI II. Cost to be financed include technical 
expertise (agriculture, tourism, business development, monitoring and evaluation, etc.), staff training, annual 
audits, vehicles, office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective 
safeguards, fiduciary, and M&E arrangements are in place during implementation.   

17. Component 4.  Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0).  This component will allow for a reallocation of 
loan proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an 
eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. Considering the Project design, the CERC is 
expected to be operationalized through a reallocation from component 1 to provide emergency recovery and 
reconstruction support.  To ensure that there is capacity, the Project Operations Manual includes a CERC annex 
applicable to eligible disasters, detailing fiduciary, safeguards, monitoring and reporting, and any other 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 7 of 16  

 

necessary implementation arrangements. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

18. Implementing Agency for REDI II.  Building on the REDI I experience, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund 
(JSIF) will be the lead implementing agency for REDI II and will work in close coordination and under the technical 
leadership of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF), ,the Ministry of Tourism 
(MOT), and their respective operational agencies RADA and TPDCo. JSIF will have overall responsibility for the 
coordination and management of project implementation. JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) 
that will be responsible for overall technical implementation and will coordinate with all relevant national 
institutions on component implementation. The implementation period is expected to be six years. 

19. Project Oversight: Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee. This committee will be responsible for 
ensuring that the Project is in line with national development priorities.  The Committee will be chaired by the 
Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) with membership to include representatives from MICAF and MOT and other 
relevant agencies i.e. Office of the Prime Minister, Rural Agricultural Development Authority (RADA), Tourism 
Product Development Company (TPDCo), JSIF, and Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOF&PS). 

20. Beneficiary Rural Enterprises in the agriculture and community tourism sectors will be eligible for 
subproject financing and responsible for the operating, maintenance, and sustainability of the corresponding 
investments. 

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will take place nationally in Jamaica and specifically in rural agricultural and tourism landscapes. 
Specific location details are unknown at this time because the sub-projects will be demand driven. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Gibwa A. Kajubi, Social Specialist 
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah, Environmental Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 
The project is rated as a Category B in terms of its 
risk profile.  
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 8 of 16  

 

Component 1 will finance rural agricultural and 
tourism subprojects that support revenue 
generating activities including support to rural 
producers (inputs, equipment, seeds, water access, 
drip irrigation, greenhouses etc.) as well as support 
to tourism operators and enterprises (marketing, 
small renovations such as painting and refurbishing 
guest housing, equipment for craft making, etc.). 
Component 2 finances small scale public 
investments aimed at improving the efficiency of 
priority value chains for selected products (e.g., 
storage facilities, cold chain supply infrastructure 
equipment at the regional level as well as at 
airports/ports, fresh products grading, clearing hubs, 
agricultural research and development, 
seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities}.    Most of the impacts related to the 
implementation of Component 1 and 2 are minor, 
short-term and highly localized and thus easily 
mitigated. No cumulative impacts are expected. Any 
impacts are therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures. .    
 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building will finance TA and capacity 
building for key organizations and agencies that 
deliver support services in agriculture and rural 
tourism at the local level. While the TA activities 
themselves do not have direct adverse 
environmental or social impacts, the Bank team will 
integrate environmental and social principles and 
objectives as an integral part of the terms of 
reference and supervision of the TA.   
 
JSIF has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines 
potential risks and guidelines to mitigate potential 
impacts, outlines roles and responsibilities of key 
actors, provides budget and costs for mitigation and 
training (where needed) and gives guidance to 
contractors and PIU environmental specialists in 
terms of managing contracts with firms.  The ESMF 
also serves as the guiding document for any site-
specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMPs).  This document has been reviewed 
and cleared by the bank and was recently disclosed 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 9 of 16  

 

to stakeholders in Jamaica and on the Bank's 
website. A separate integrated pest management 
plan was prepared and also disclosed similarly under 
the project. Institutional arrangements outlined 
within the document will guide the use of pesticides 
according to OP 4:09.  During implementation, each 
subproject will be screened to determine its risk 
profile and, accordingly, it will be determined 
whether further documents (ESMPs) will need to be 
developed to manage these risks.  Any activity that is 
rated Category A will be screened out.  
The ESMF points to additional guidance, as 
applicable, in the General EHS Guidelines and the 
Industry Sector Guidelines specifically guidelines for 
AGRIBUSINESS/FOOD PRODUCTION and FORESTRY 
http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This is not a private sector activity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Given the scale of the activities, it is unlikely that 
natural habitats will be impacted.  However, the 
locations are unknown and are in the rural areas of 
Jamaica, which has significant natural resources. For 
this reason, the OP is triggered as a precaution.  
However, every effort will be made to avoid working 
in or impacting critical natural habitats. The ESMF  
includes measures to avoid/mitigate the alteration 
of critical or sensitive areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project activities are highly localized and are 
unlikely to impact forests but the project will 
operate in a rural landscape and therefore it is 
possible that some activities may impact tree 
clusters. For this reason, OP 4.36 is triggered as a 
precaution.  All subprojects will  be screened and 
any impacts on forests, or tree clusters, quantified.  
Alternatives will be considered as a means to avoid 
negative impacts on any forests or significant tree 
clusters. The ESMF includes specific screening tools 
to identify any potential negative impacts on forests 
or tree clusters. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that support is provided to producer 
organizers, pesticides may be supported.  However, 
World Bank guidance regarding the use of pesticides 
and  IPM will be observed, and a pesticide 
management plan has been prepared. 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 10 of 16  

 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

This OP is not triggered because the project will not 
operate in culturally sensitive areas.  However, 
during implementation, small rehabilitation works 
and minor mitigation works may result in the chance 
find of culturally significant objects. The ESMF 
includes procedures to address chance findings of 
archeological and cultural resources during 
construction works. 
  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
groups in Jamaica who meet the definition of IPs 
under OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy will be triggered for activities under 
Component 2. The activities under Component 1 are 
small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to 
have long-term or cumulative impacts. The JSIF 
evaluation found no sub-project activity financed 
under the REDI I that required physical involuntary 
resettlement. The CDD-type of activities/sub-
projects proposed under Component 1 will exclude 
Involuntary Resettlement as a result of land take 
and/or the physical relocation of households as the 
costs and complexity could easily outweigh the 
benefits and costs of the sub-projects project.  
Under Component 1 a negative list will be developed 
in the ESMF including clear criteria for excluding 
Category A high-risk activities. 
 
While OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was not 
triggered for REDI I there may be investments under 
REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public 
Infrastructure that could result in involuntary 
resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 
finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for 
selected products. There is scope within the project 
to also finance other public investments that are 
outside the scope of agriculture or tourism yet are 
needed to improve competitiveness and enhance 
access to markets in the two sectors.  Specific 
location details are unknown at this time and sub-
projects will be demand driven. As a result, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared to guide the selection and compensation 
aspects under Component 2 which will be disclosed 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 11 of 16  

 

prior to appraisal. The project has also prepared 
guidelines for Voluntary Land Donation.  Upon 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, 
consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the 
policy. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not support the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams nor will it support other investments which 
rely on the services of existing dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not affect international waterways as defined 
under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy will not be triggered because the 
proposed project will not intervene in disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The possible activities to be financed are small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to have long-term or 
cumulative impacts. Any impacts would be short-term, highly localized, and therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures.  The ESMF prepared by the Government has been reviewed by the Bank and has been 
found satisfactory.  That document outlines the procedure for minimizing risks within the project.  For Component 1 
which has many subprojects (e.g. greenhouses, water harvesting, expansion of efficient irrigation methods, integrated 
pest management, introduction of new crop varieties, development of integrated landscape models, improvement in 
stock breeding, and small group marketing infrastructure) the ESMF outlines a screening mechanism to categorize 
each subproject according to its risk profile.  ESMPs will also be developed for certain higher risk subprojects (cleared 
by the Bank and disclosed publicly) prior to implementation of the subcomponent.  For Component 2 which supports 
critical public infrastructure negative impacts will include construction related impacts such as   noise, occupational 
health and safety risks, waste management issues and so on.  In terms of safeguard however, these impacts are all 
small scale and reversible.  None of the project's activities in Component 1 are likely to result in large scale, significant 
or irreversible  impacts. 
 
There may be investments under REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public Infrastructure that could result in 
involuntary resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for selected products. These could include building storage facilities, 
processing areas, cold chain supply infrastructure equipment at the regional level as well as at airports/ports, fresh 
products grading, clearing hubs, agricultural research and development, seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities. There is scope within the project to also finance other public investments that are outside the scope of 
agriculture or tourism yet are needed to improve competitiveness and enhance access to markets in the two sectors.  



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 12 of 16  

 

Specific location details are unknown at this time and sub-projects will be demand driven. As a result, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the selection and compensation aspects under Component 2 and 
has been consulted upon and disclosed. Upon identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the policy. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Most of the impacts related to the implementation of the project are anticipated to be minor, short-term and highly 
localized and thus easily mitigated through standard mitigation measures.    
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project has already been able to examine alternatives through lessons learnt from REDI which was the previous 
project that supported similar activities.  The successful aspects of the first project have become a core aspect of the 
current project. Safeguard implementation under the first project was deemed very successful due, in part, to a 
trained PIU- the same PIU that will manage this current project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity is relatively high.  The JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) that will be responsible 
for overall implementation and will coordinate all the actors involved in the Project’s execution. The JSIF will be 
responsible for financial management, procurement and compliance with safeguards. The JSIF managed the recently 
closed project (Jamaica REDI (P10522)) and the ICR noted that its management of safeguards was highly satisfactory.  
In terms of social implementation, some activities may be undertaken on land that has been donated voluntarily from 
the state (through a lease and nominal peppercorn rent) or though private individual (s). Voluntary Land Donation 
(VLD) will be applied according to good global practice and in line with the World  Bank guidelines on VLD including 
that VLD applies directly to project beneficiaries and that impacts are minor.  The protocols and guidelines to be 
applied to the Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) are included in the RPF. The project has also prepared a Worker's Code 
of Conduct for all workers and contractors working on the project and a Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF has been completed, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in Jamaica (November 12th, 2018) and on the 
Bank's website (November 15th, 2018).  Consultations were held with the relevant Government officials and Ministries 
and a with a subset of the project's estimated 50,000 beneficiaries.  Disclosures in Jamaica have occurred on relevant 
websites including JSIFs and further disclosures will occur through discussions during the launch meetings and follow 
up meetings with project beneficiaries. The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) and TPDCo will be a lead partner with JSIF.  
The RPF has been completed, consulted upon and disclosed in country on November 12, 2018 and on the Bank's 
website on November 20, 2018. 
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 13 of 16  

 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

02-Oct-2018 15-Nov-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

12-Nov-2018 20-Nov-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Jamaica 
  12-Nov-2018 

Comments 
 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 12-Nov-2018 15-Nov-2018 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Jamaica 
 12-Nov-2018 
 

Comments 
 

  
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 14 of 16  

 

The ESMFand RPF have been completed and have been disclosed November 15, 2018 and November 20, 2018 
respectively. 

 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
No   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes     

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 
 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 15 of 16  

 

  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
No   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Garry Charlier 
Lead Agriculture Specialist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Jamaica 

 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 16 of 16  

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF) 

Omar Sweeney 

Managing Director 

Omar.Sweeney@jsif.org 
 
 

 

Loy Malcom 

General Manager - Project Management 

Loy.Malcolm@jsif.org 
 
 

Ministry of Finance and Public Sector 

Audley Shaw 

Minister of Finance and the Public Service 

info@mof.gov.jm 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Garry Charlier 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Preeti S. Ahuja 29-Nov-2018 

Country Director: Yelena Fadeyeva 30-Nov-2018 
 

    
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects




















































   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 1 of 24 

 
 

Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 

Nickerie, Suriname 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTERMEDIATE REPORT 
 
 
  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Prepared by:  Ravindra Patandin 

Date:  May 28th, 2018 
Version: 2 

 

  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 2 of 24 

 
 

Table of Contents 
1 Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 3 

1.1 General .................................................................................................................................... 3 

1.2 This study ................................................................................................................................ 3 

1.3 Objective and approach of this Study ....................................................................................... 3 

2 Background .................................................................................................................................. 4 

3 Review studies and available information ...................................................................................... 5 

3.1 General .................................................................................................................................... 5 

3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions .............................................................................................. 6 

4 Assessment of Existing structures ................................................................................................. 8 

4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH ..................................................................... 8 

4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam ...................................................................................... 8 

4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway ................................................................................................. 9 

5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal ..............................................................10 

6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway .......................................................................13 

7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates .........................................................................................15 

 

Appendices: 
 
I Overview map (Source: EU Masterplan OWMCP, 2010) 
II Proposed Infrastructure (Source: EU Masterplan OWMCP, 2010) 
III Assessment of existing structures: Nanni weir, Van Wouw Inlet, HA Intake and IKUGH inlet and 

survey results 
IV Survey results Maratakka Spillway area 
V Overview Option 1 and 2 for Corantijn Canal supply 
VI Schematic Designs Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 3 of 24 

1 Introduction 
 

1.1 General 
The Government of Suriname has requested the Bank’s technical support in the preparation of an 
investment loan to finance a Sustainable Agricultural Productivity Program (SU-L1052). The goal of SU-
L1052 is to increase agricultural productivity in Surinam through investments in infrastructure and 
management of irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems; and by improving the quality of available 
agriculture statistics. The expected results of the I&D component of the Program are: (i) increased 
agricultural productivity in I&D areas; (ii) improved water management within I&D areas; (iii) operating 
WB effectively contributing to the operation and management (O&M) of I&D infrastructure.  
 
The objective of the Irrigation and Drainage component is to improve the functioning and management of 
I&D systems in Suriname, particularly in Nickerie District, by addressing current failings in infrastructure 
and transferring key management and maintenance responsibilities to Water Boards (WB). The program 
will finance: (i) rehabilitation/modernization of primary and secondary I&D infrastructure selected to 
benefit small- and medium-size farmers; (ii) support for developing and strengthening WB capacity to 
take over the O&M of I&D systems; (iii) capacity building of government bodies in charge of water 
resource administration for irrigation; and (iv) design and implementation of one-time incentives 
mechanisms limited in time and scope and aimed at improving efficiency in farmers’ water use and 
increasing their willingness to cover O&M costs. This component will include measures to improve the 
water resource sustainable management for its different uses, particularly by taking into account climate 
change impacts (i.e., in regard to water supply and demand) and considering adaptation measures. 
 
During the first stage of the project preparation activities, the Irrigation and Drainage consultancy and the 
Government indicated during the IDB mission that took place in November 2017 that, to improve the 
efficiency of the Nickerie I&D system and to reduce the likelihood of flooding in irrigated areas two 
structures needed to be built: Nanni Weir and the Maratakka Spillway. These structures need to be 
analyzed as part of project preparation. 
 
 
 

1.2 This study 
 
The concerned study is to review existing information and prepare preliminary designs and cost estimates 
of the two structures as well as the additional works required in the restructuring of the inlets to the main 
irrigation canals (Van Wouw, Stondansi, HA and Lateral canal). 
 
This study is part of a series of consultancies that will take place simultaneously as part of the SU-L1052 
Program preparation plan agreed between the government and the IDB, which includes: economic 
analysis, institutional capacity analysis, environmental and social analysis and a study on the hydrology 
of the Nickerie water resource base. 
 
This document presents the Intermediate Report, for the consultancy assignment to address the activities 
and planning for the feasibility assessment of the Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway. 
 

1.3 Objective and approach of this Study 
 
The specific objective of this consultancy is to carry out a:(i) feasibility study of the Nanni Weir and 
related structures, including preliminary or basic design and estimates of the investment costs required; 
and (ii) feasibility study of the Maratakka spillway and link canal to the Maratakka River, including 
preliminary or basic design and estimates of the investment costs required. 
 
The following approach is used to achieve this objective: 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 4 of 24 

- Conduct site visits and review existing data/reports on the structures 
- Consult with relevant stakeholders, including the OWMCP, LVV, OWT&C and others 
- Conduct field surveys and inspections  
- Review and propose solutions and alternative options 
- Discuss and agree on selected infrastructure works 
- Prepare preliminary designs and cost estimates 
- Assess technical and financial feasibility 
- Propose implementation schemes and procurement procedures 

 
It is noted that the Inter-Ministerial Irrigation and Drainage Coordination Working Group (IMIDCWG) 
consists of members of amongst others LVV, OWT&C and OWMCP. They are regularly consulted 
during the course of this assignment. 
 
Furthermore, discussions are held with the IDB team and other consultants participating in this project. 
This ensures that relevant available information and data is shared and cross-checked. 

2 Background 
 
Appendix I presents an overview map of existing infrastructure and (inlet and outlet) structures. Appendix 
II presents proposed improvement and new infrastructure in the EU OWMCP Masterplan (2010). 
 
The Nanni Weir 

The Multipurpose Corantijn Project initiated in 1981 was never completed due to shortage of funds.  
The construction of the Nanni Weir and related structures was the major and essential hydraulic structure 
never completed, resulting in considerable losses of expensive pumped water. 
 
The absence of a weir at the outflow of the Corantijn canal causes the water from the Corantijn canal to 
spill directly into the Nanni swamp. As a result the water level in the whole Nanni swamp needs to be 
raised before irrigation water can flow into the irrigation canals. Substantial losses in evaporation occur in 
the large Nanni swamp estimated at 30% and the whole irrigation supply becomes very inefficient and 
difficult to manage, in particular when irrigation supply is interrupted.  
 
The construction of the Nanni weir at the outlet of the Corantijn canal requires a regulating structure in 
the weir that will allow the inflow of irrigation water from the Nanni swamp into the irrigation system as 
well the outflow of excess water of the Nanni swamp into the Nanni creek through the existing Nanni 
spillway. 
 
Additional structures need to be considered and include the reconstruction of the Nanni Inlet structure 
into the Van Wouw and the Stondansi canals, the extension of the Stondansi canal, reconstruction of two 
intakes from the Stondansi canal into the HA and Lateral canals and strengthening of the swamp retention 
embankment and deepening of the Suriname canal. 
 
The master plan of the EU-financed study on the Irrigation supply of the Nickerie system identified the 
Nanni weir and related structures (estimated at 10 million USD in 2009) as the first priority for an 
improved and efficient irrigation supply with a direct impact on the areas to be irrigated and a reduction 
of pumping costs. 
 
 
The Maratakka Spillway 

The Maratakka Spillway and related link canal to the Maratakka River was one of two major and essential 
water control structures that were never completed. Implementation of the Spillway will connect the 
Suriname canal and allow the evacuation of floodwaters from the Nanni swamp and alleviate importantly 
the present flood hazards and increase fresh water supply to the Nickerie River. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 5 of 24 

The main outflow of floodwaters from the Nanni swamp is presently through the Nanni spillway into the 
Nanni Creek on the west side of the swamp close to the outflow of the Corantijn canal. The outflow on 
the eastern side of the swamp retention dike was to be realized through the Maratakka spillway that was 
however never constructed. Excessive rainfall in the Nanni catchment area causes frequently serious 
flooding, as the capacity of the Nanni spillway is insufficient for the evacuation of floodwaters.  
 
Construction of the Maratakka spillway and related connection canal from the Suriname canal into the 
Maratakka River would importantly reduce flooding problems and loss of production due to inundations 
in several polders, while the inflow of fresh water from the Maratakka into the Nickerie River would 
make additional water available for irrigation and push back saltwater intrusion. Cost estimates of the 
Maratakka spillway from the EU Masterplan did amount in 2009 to USD 750,000. 

3 Review studies and available information 

3.1 General 
 
Key reports relevant to this study are: 

• Irrigation Master Plan OWMCP (EU funded, 2010). 
• Designs of the “DOL” structures (original and “reduced” version) (Sunecon/ILACO, 1989) 

 
Abovementioned and other available literature were reviewed to understand the overall set up of the 
proposed MCP works and the hydraulic/water management aspects of the concerned Nanni Weir and 
Maratakka Spillway. 
 
The following sources / stakeholders have been contacted to obtain available data: 

• Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries (LVV) (head office and District 
Nickerie office) 

• Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communication (OWT&C) (Drainage 
department as well as District Nickerie office) 

• (Overlaying) Water board MCP (OWMCP) 
• District agencies (District Commissioner, and others) 
• Anton de Kom University (Adek) 
• Contractors, consultants and others who have worked in the MCP area. 

 
The discussions have provided valuable data to understand the recent changes and current status of the 
structures in the Project area. 
 
The table below presents an overview of key meetings and activities until date. 

Date Meeting with/ activity Subject/ Topic 

March 4th 2018 Mr. G. Van Der Kooye (Min. LVV 
Nickerie) 

Overall project, key issues and objectives 

March 9th 2018 Mr. August Lila (Director OWMCP) Overall project, key issues and objectives, available 
data, status of infrastructure 

March 9th 2018 Mr. Sanjay Triloki (OWT&C 
department Nickerie) 

Site visit Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH area, 
status of infrastructure 

March 14th 2018 Mr. Martin Smith (consultant) Discussion about the overall objectives and set up, 
involvement on different parts of project 

March 30th 2018 Field Survey Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH 
area, status of structures, measurements 

April 9th – 13th  IDB Analysis Mission IDB Mission team, Ministry LVV, IMIDCWG , Dr 
Sieuw Naipal,   

April 19-20th  Field Survey Maratakka Spillway area, measurements 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 6 of 24 

3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions 
 
A meeting was held with Mr. Van der Kooye (LVV Nickerie) on 4th March 2018. He explained the 
reasons behind the several proposed Nanni Weir and Maratakka 
Spillway including related structures and works. The key points 
are listed as: 

- Nanni Weir is needed to allow more intake of water 
from the Nanni Swamp and divert this water towards the 
north/east via the Suriname Canal. This is to feed the 
northern agricultural areas, including the remote 
Autonoom area, with sufficient fresh water. 

- There is a need for other structures to be taken into 
account for rehabilitation and construction. This 
includes Van Wouw Intake, which is in poor condition (see picture) and experience substantial 
water losses. Furthermore, some other structures need rehabilitation such as Nanni Spillway, 
IKUGH Intake (see picture) and Swamp Retention dam 
along the Suriname Canal. 

- An alternative may be considered by abandoning the Van 
Wouw Intake and making a new intake in the Suriname 
Canal close to the new Nanni Weir. 

- The Nanni Weir is needed to reduce losses from Corantijn 
Canal through flowing back into the Nanni swamp. 

- Maratakka Spillway is to have a controlled discharge of 
water during high water levels in the swamp, as the existing 
Nanni spillway does not have sufficient capacity. As such, flooding occurs regularly after heavy 
rainfall periods. 

- The Maratakka Spillway is also to discharge about 5 m3/s of fresh water during dry seasons into 
the Maratakka River. This is to push back and control the salt intrusion in the Nickerie River. 

  
An initial site visit was conducted on 9th March 2018 to the Van Wouw Intake area and IKUGH area. The 
site visit provided valuable information about the status of the several existing infrastructure and 
structures. It further provided a good overview of the possible interventions proposed in the 1977 and 
2010 studies. The visit to the proposed Maratakka Spillway location could not be undertaken during this 
visit due to unavailability of airboats. The Suriname Canal, between IKUGH and Maratakka, is not 
accessible by normal boat due to floating grass/weed. 

 
Van Wouw intake and Nanni spillway   IKUGH and HA intake 
 
 
A meeting was held with Mr. August Lila, Director of OWMCP on 9th March at his office. He confirmed 
more or less the same as Mr. Van der Kooye. In addition, it was discussed that the need for alternatives to 
supply more water is direly needed for the northern/Autonoom Area. The operation of the Wakay pumps 
is affected due to insufficient available fuel. The use of larger storage volumes of fresh water from the 
Nanni Swamp should be considered as much as possible. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 7 of 24 

Mr. Lila also indicated that there were alternatives designed for the Nanni Weir in the so called “DOL 
Werken (klein)” from 1989. These were the simplified works for Distribution, intake and retention as 
compared to the original DOL works.  
Furthermore, discussions in the past were also to increase the pump capacity at Wakay from 30 to 50 
m3/s. 
 
It was discussed with Mr Lila to provide the following data (if possible within 2 weeks): Historical (long 
range) water levels (swamp, rivers, canals), rain fall data, flow discharge measurements, levels of dams 
and canals (measured in the recent past) and copies / scans of relevant reports.  
OWMCP is in charge and maintains the Corantijn Canal, Wakay pumps and inlet/outlet structures along 
the Corantijn Canal.  They furthermore conduct water level measurements and other management tasks as 
provided in the state decree for OWMCP. All levels (divers) are regularly checked to see if the NSP 
levels are correct. 
 
Mr. Sanjay Triloki, from OWT&C drainage department in Nickerie, joined the site visit and provided 
valuable information about the operation of the several structures. OWT&C is in charge of operating and 
maintaining all main inlets and outlets, such as Van Wouw, Nanni and IKUGH. The swamp retention 
dam was rehabilitated in 2016/2017 and is now in most sections at sufficient height. Only smaller parts, 
e.g. along Corantijn Canal, may not be at sufficient height (info from Mr. Lila).  
Mr. Tiloki emphasized to look at structures that would be able to work under different water level 
conditions. The current inlet and outlet main structures are more than 40 years old and need some proper 
rehabilitation.  
His view is that it may be cheaper to construct an inlet 
near halfway Suriname Canal (after the Lateral Canal) 
than to reinforce the Swamp Retention Dam over a 
length of over 30 km. He noted that the Suriname Canal 
is linked with Nanni Swamp through several 
channels/drains. This was confirmed during the site 
visit (see picture). 
Also the Nanni Swamp has always water, but due to 
low water levels during dry seasons, intake for 
irrigation can not be done under gravity. Farmers in the 
north of the swamp often use their own pumps to take water from the Suriname Canal for irrigation. 
 
Mr. Triloki mentioned that it takes lots of efforts to keep the lengthy canals clean. The Suriname Canal 
between IKUGH and Maratakka is only partially clean.  
He also indicated that regular maintenance in the far past was conducted by a pontoon with an excavator 
or draglines on it. This pontoon was operated continuously for all canals, including Nanni Creek up to the 
Nanni lake/reservoir further south. This way sufficient water was released through the Nanni Creek, even 
in dry periods. At the moment, the Nanni Creek is not maintained due to lack of accessibility and high 
costs for special swamp excavator equipment. The creek has a reduced discharge capacity. 
 
A meeting was held on 14th March 2018 with Mr. Martin Smith, another consultant in this project. The 
site visit data and initial findings until date were exchanged with him. Furthermore, the overall objectives 
and base set up of this project were discussed. It was understood that Mr. Smith would focus on the Water 
Board rehabilitation works and other related activities to improve the efficiency of water use and 
management. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 8 of 24 

4 Assessment of Existing structures 
 
The following existing structures or areas have been visited for inspection and assessment of current 
condition.  

1) Nanni Spillway 
2) Van Wouw Intake structure 
3) HA Intake Structure 
4) IKUGH Inlet structure 
5) Swamp Retention dam (Stondansi canal, Lateral canal) 
6) Surinam Canal 
7) Corantijn Canal/dam (only section near Nanni Weir location) 
8) Maratakka Spillway area (end of Surinam  Canal/link to Maratakka River) 

 
Field topographic surveys and measurements have been conducted as and where possible. 
 

4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH 
 
The existing structures: Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw Intake, HA Inlet and IKUGH inlet have been 
inspected and their conditions have been checked. This general assessment was to understand if the 
existing structures would fit within the main infrastructure system for water supply and if rehabilitation 
would suffice to be included in the main system or new structures would be needed. The results are 
presented in a separate report in Appendix III.  
 
Note: the further detailed investigation and related rehabilitation works and costs are conducted through a 
separate consultancy activity of the IDB and are not part of the scope of this Report. 
 
Also, the report includes some cross sections of the Swamp Retention dam (between Stondansi and 
Surinam Canal) and Surinam Canal with levels. It appears that the Swamp Retention dam has an average 
crest level of about NSP +4.0 m. This implies that the further increase to the required NSP +4.45 m would 
only need a clay backfill of average 55-60 cm (considering some settlements) and hence would probably 
not involve a major risk of instability (sliding of slopes) of the dam. Also the dam has already been 
constructed for over 30 years, so the sub-soil is most probably stabilized over time. 
 
The Swamp Retention dam along Lateral Canal could not be measured due to inaccessibility (canal was 
overgrown).  However, from field check near IKUGH it was observed that the crest level of this dam is 
more or less at similar elevation as the dam along Stondansi Canal. 
 
The embankment dam between the Surinam Canal and Nanni Swamp is at approx. NSP +2.20 m in the 
section along the Stondansi Canal. It is assumed that the level of the swamp embankment in the section 
along the Lateral Canal is more or less the same. This embankment would be prone to instability if the 
dam needs to be raised with 1 to 2 meters. 
 

4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam 
The Corantijn Canal, including side embankments, has been rehabilitated about 10 years ago. The crest 
level of the swamp retention dam is reportedly at sufficient elevation. Some spots show settlements and 
may require some maintenance. OWMCP carries out regular inspections and repairs when possible. 
 
The Corantijn Canal flows uncontrolled into the swamp area and Surinam Canal near the Nanni Spillway. 
This open section is about 350 m long. The swamp retention dam needs to be continued along this section 
with a crest level at NSP +4.45 m, in order to have a controlled conveyance of water from the Corantijn 
Canal to the agricultural areas. The existing open water area near Nanni Spillway and the future Nanni 
Weir can be further excavated to create a pond area from where water can be distributed to different 
directions.  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 9 of 24 

The dam can be constructed on the existing embankment with the Nanni Swamp using clay from the 
canal and pond. 
 

4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway 
 
The proposed Maratakka Spillway location was difficult to access. It is located at the end of Surinam 
Canal and the beginning of the linkage to the Maratakka River and the access from the Surinam Canal 
was practically impossible due to the heavy overgrown canal. The linkage canal was partially (1.5 km) 
accessible by boat. Further travel had to be by walking on the old northern dam along this canal. 
There are no known benchmark levels nearby, so the water level at IKUGH (30 km distance) was used to 
estimate the approximate levels in NSP (National chart datum) in the Surinam Canal at Maratakka. The 
elevation levels at this location may therefore have a +/- 15 to 20% deviation.  
 
The cross section measurements are shown in Appendix IV. 

Surinam Canal end part near Maratakka  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Link canal to Maratakka River (overgrown)  View from end dam Surinam Canal 
 
The crest level of the Swamp Retention dam (north) along Surinam Canal and at the end is about NSP 
+4.0 m. This means that the spillway structure will require some excavation of the end dam to lower the 
level. 
It is expected that a sand ridge (also referred to as Cupido ridge) goes further to the south and parallel to 
the Surinam Canal. The top of this sand ridge is unknown, but from previous estimates (Environmental 
studies 2007 and hydrological studies 1977) it is assumed that the top varies between NSP +3 and +4 m. 
It is likely that the end dam at Surinam Canal is connected to the sand ridge, and thus blocking or 
reducing free flows from the swamp to the link canal (towards Maratakka River). 
  

Maratakka Spillway location. End dam 
Surinam Canal, connecting to sand ridge 

Link canal (4 km) to 
Maratakka River 

Possible sand ridge in swamp 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 10 of 24 

5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal 
 
This section contains an assessment of two alternatives to distribute the water from Corantijn Canal to the 
agricultural areas. During dry seasons water levels in the Nanni Swamp gets below the required level of 
NSP + 2.50 m to distribute water under gravity into the agricultural areas. At this level, the pumps at 
Wakay start operating and fill up the Corantijn Canal (source: OWMCP). 
 
There are two options to distribute the Corantijn Canal water to the agricultural areas in Eastern and 
Western polders (up to Lateral Canal 1). See Appendix V. 

1) Option 1: the water is distributed through the Stondansi Canal (about 3.75 km) and via a new 
connection (850 m) to the Lateral Canal 1 (about 7 km). 

2) Option 2: the water is distributed through the Surinam Canal (total 11.5 km) 
 

 
In both options it is assumed that the distribution of water will primarily focus on supply to the Eastern 
and Western Polders. The Autonomous Area will only receive water from Corantijn Canal if there is 
sufficient available. That means that a hydraulic structure (end control gate) is required in both options. 
 
Both options also require that the new Swamp Retention dam (approx. 350 m) between the existing dam 
of Corantijn Canal and the existing Swamp Retention dam at Stondansi / Surinam Canal.  
 
The Swamp Retention dam between Stondansi and Surinam Canal is about 4.5 km long and the Swamp 
Retention dam between Lateral and Surinam Canal has a length of about 7 km. 
 

Cross section 1-1 (Stondansi and Surinam Canal) for Option 1 and Option 2. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 11 of 24 

Cross section 2-2 (Lateral and Surinam Canal) for Option 1 and Option 2. 
 
The table below contains an overview of the assessment of both options. 
 
Overview of details and assessment of Option 1 and 2 

Works/items Option 1 Option 2 
Closing dam between Corantijn 
Canal dam and Stondansi 
Swamp Retention dam 

Closing dam with crest level at NSP 
+4.45 m, approx. 350 m long. 

Required, same as Option 1. 

Increase of Swamp Retention 
dam crest level. Total length 
about 11.6 km (Stondansi 4.6 
km and Lateral 7 km). 

Increase from NSP +4.0 m to NSP 4.45 
m. About 60 cm (incl settlement) 
increase over about 8 m wide crest. 

Required, same as Option 1 

Widen/re-profiling Stondansi 
Canal to allow more flow, less 
hydraulic losses 

Widen and re-profiling of Stondansi 
canal (about 2-3 m wider, with stable 
slopes both sides) 

Not applicable for Option 2. 

Increase swamp/Surinam canal 
embankment crest level and re-
profiling Surinam Canal.  
 
Total length about 11.5 km. 

Not applicable for Option 1. Raise crest level from NSP +2.20 m to 
about NSP +3.50 m to avoid Corantijn 
Canal water going into swamp. Close all 
open connections between swamp and 
Surinam Canal in this section. About 1.5 
m (incl settlement) higher over 5-6 m 
wide crest with shallow slopes (for 
stable dam). 
Re-profiling of Surinam Canal to convey 
water with less hydraulic losses. 
 
Note: raising the embankment further 
could impose higher risks of instable 
side slopes and slides. This would 
increase costs and time to allow for 
gradual settlement and water pressure 
dissipation in the underground. 
 

New Nanni Weir Needed at junction of Nanni Creek/ new 
swamp retention dam 

Required, same as Option1.  
(Note: swamp water will be conveyed to 
HA/IKUGH via new Nanni Weir and 
Surinam Canal) 

End control structure at end of 
Eastern Polders (start of 
Autonomous area) 

New outlet/end control structure at end 
of Lateral Canal 1. Discharge into 
Surinam Canal 

Same as Option 1. 
New outlet/end control structure at end 
of Surinam Canal. Discharge into 
Surinam Canal 

New Canal New Canal connection (850 m) between 
Stondansi and Lateral Canal 1. Including 
end check hydraulic structure at end of 
Stondansi Canal to control water levels. 

Not applicable for Option 2 

Rehabilitate existing hydraulic 
structures 

Rehabilitate Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw 
and IKUGH. 
Construct new HA Intake together with 
end check structure Stondansi 

Rehabilitate Nanni Spillway, Van Wouw 
and IKUGH, same as Option 1. 
Rehabilitate HA Intake structure. 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 12 of 24 

 
The cost comparison for both options is shown in the table below. Some works are the same for both 
options and have not been included for the comparison. Only the differences are shown. 
 
Cost comparison Option 1 and 2 (excluding structures applicable for both) 

Works/Item Cost Option 1 Cost Option 2 
Increase swamp embankment 
(along Surinam Canal) crest level.  

Not Needed. Approx. 15 m3/m, total 11.5 km is 
approx. 172,500 m3 excavation and 
backfilling and profiling of Surinam 
Canal. 
USD 1.3 M. 

Widening/re-profiling Stondansi 
Canal 

Approx. 18 m3/m excavation and 
backfilling, 3.75 km long. Combine with 
increase of dam (see next) 
USD 500,000 

Not needed. 

Increase of Swamp Retention dam 
crest level (along Stondansi 
Canal) (raise dam along Lateral 
canal is same for both options) 

Approx. 7 m3/m, total 3.75 km 
excavation, back filling and profiling.  
USD 200,000 

Approx. 7 m3/m, total 4.5 km 
excavation, back filling and profiling. 
USD 240,000 

Excavate new canal to connect 
Stondansi with Lateral Canal and 
construct Swamp Retention dam 
alongside 

Approx. 60 m3/m, total 850 m long is 
51,000 m3 excavation, backfilling and 
profiling. This is also part of Swamp 
Retention dam crest level increase.  
USD 380,000 

Not needed.  

HA Intake structure New HA Intake, combined with new end 
check control structure Stondansi Canal. 
USD 800,000 

Rehabilitate HA Intake structure. 
USD 50,000 

End control structure End control structure at end of Lateral 1 
Canal to discharge to Surinam Canal 
USD 300,000 

End control structure at end of 
Surinam Canal (parallel at Lateral 1 
Canal) to discharge to Surinam Canal. 
Capacity is bit larger then for Option 1 
to allow discharges both from 
Corantijn Canal as well as from 
Swamp. 
USD 500,000 

Total extra costs per option USD 2.13 M USD 2.09 M 
 
The costs for extra works in Option 1 are slightly higher than in Option 2. Given the level of costs 
assessment, this difference is considered negligible. 
 
However, Option 2 carries more risks than Option 1. In particular, the risks lie with the instable soil that 
is expected in the swamp area. The embankment between Surinam Canal and the Nanni Swamp will 
require a balanced work method to increase the crest level in small steps. Also, special swamp equipment 
will need to be used, as access over land is very limited. With the longer expected execution of works and 
input of special equipment, extra costs are likely to be faced.  
 
Another advantage of Option 1 is that all water flows (pumped and gravity) will be conveyed and 
controlled through one main supply canal. This may have benefits when measuring and control devices 
will be linked together for improved and efficient operation. 
 
 
It is recommended to continue with Option 1 for further implementation. This option is also the same as 
recommended in previous studies. 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 13 of 24 

6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
 
 
Improved main infrastructure for Irrigation: the Nanni Weir 

The Multipurpose Corantijn Project (MCP) initiated in 1981 was never completed due to shortage of 
funds. The construction of the Nanni Weir and related structures was the major and essential hydraulic 
structure never completed. 
 
The proposed Nanni Weir structure consists of several works combined: 

1) Construction of the Nanni Sluice/weir structure: this is a sluice concrete structure with 2 gates, 
adjacent steel sheet piles as retaining structures, inlet weed control mechanism and mechanical 
hinges to lift the doors. 

2) Embankment Swamp retention dam between Corantijn Canal and Stondansi Canal. This is to 
close the gap between Corantijn Canal and Nanni Swamp, and at the same time create a basin to 
distribute the water from Nanni swamp properly. 

3) Connect Stondansi Canal to Lateral Canal (Eastern area) and construction of an end/control 
structure. 

 
The Nanni Weir including closing dam and structure is primarily meant to ensure sufficient water supply 
to the polders during dry seasons, when the water level in the Nanni Swamp gets lower than NSP +2.5 m 
and gravity supply is not possible anymore. 
 
In addition to these works, other related works are required: increase crest level (to NSP +4.45 m) of the 
Swamp Retention dam along Stondansi and Lateral Canal, rehabilitation of the Nanni Spill Way, 
rehabilitation of Nanni Creek, rehabilitation of the Van Wouw Intake, construction of a new Intake at HA 
and rehabilitation of IKUGH inlet. 
 
It is noted that more structures have been proposed in the original MCP, but these aimed at full water 
supply for a larger projected irrigation area. These other structures will be needed when those areas are to 
be developed for rice cultivation in the future. 
 
The key advantages for the Nanni Weir structure are: 

1) The pumped water from Wakay through Corantijn Canal will be conveyed directly to the Western 
and Eastern Polders. Having such a closed circuit of transport of pumped irrigation water is much 
better to control and to avoid waste of water resources. The flows and water levels can be 
controlled for all agricultural areas linked to the main system, i.e. MCP, Western Polder, Easter 
Polder and Autonomous Area. 

2) Currently, the pumped water is dispersed into the Nanni Swamp through the open connection at 
the proposed Nanni Weir. This means that the pumped water first fills up the swamp area along 
the Surinam Canal, and only is usable when the level reaches to a sufficient level (NSP +2.50 m) 
for gravity supply into the irrigation canals of the Western and Easter Polder areas and 
Autonomous area. The small scale farmers do not have own pumping systems, and need to wait 
some time before they are supplied with water. During this delayed availability of water, they are 
faced with the risks of loss of crops and income: too long time waiting or weed on field, getting 
less water due to forced abstraction by large farmers (e.g. Autonomous area) and less yield/ha. 

3) The pumped water from Corantijn River (Wakay) is expensive as compared to the water in the 
Nanni Swamp. It requires fuel and expensive annual maintenance of pumps. Furthermore, at the 
current stage pumping has to be continued until sufficient water level is reached in Nanni to 
ensure gravity flow. That means often more pumping then strictly is needed for the irrigation 
capacity. Surplus of pumped water not used for irrigation is then discharged through the Nanni 
Spillway to the Corantijn River. This means relative expensive water (per m3 or per ha) is 
wasted.  

4) It is expected that less pumped water will be needed to supply the area with the required amount 
under the current demand. The areas with less than 2 crops per years may be able to increase their 
crops and yields as well. 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 14 of 24 

5) A controlled distribution of water will also enable the OWMCP to release water as needed in 
each section/area. They intend to introduce a “water calendar” to distribute water as scheduled. 
This will minimize the pumping requirements due to much lesser losses. 

6) The controlled discharge or release of water per section will also make it easier to introduce 
properly measured water fees for each area separately. At this moment, it is understood that 
payment of fees for O&M of the main structure is not introduced due to lack of trust by the 
farmers that they get what they pay for. 

 
The Maratakka Spillway 
 
The Maratakka Spillway and related link canal to the Maratakka River was one of two major and essential 
water control structures that were never completed. Currently, the emergency spills are only located in the 
western part of the Nanni Swamp, with Nanni Spillway (about 25 m3/s) as the main release structure. The 
capacity of the Nanni Spillway is often reduced to about 11 m3/s due to small discharge capacity of the 
Nanni Creek, encroachment on the creek banks with low dam level and high tide in Corantijn River. 
Two small (inlet) structures are located in the southern parts of the Corantijn Canal and can function also 
as spill. 
 
The Maratakka Spillway is located in the north-eastern part of the Swamp at the end of the Suriname 
canal and will allow the accelerated evacuation of floodwaters (during rainy seasons) from the northern 
part of the Nanni swamp. 
The proposed structure is a concrete broad crested weir at fixed top level (NSP +3.65 m), with an 
estimated capacity of at least 15 m3/s. At this stage, it is recommended to only construct the emergency 
spillway. In the future, the spillway structure may be extended with a sluice to release a minimum of 5 
m3/s during dry weather conditions. 
 
The key advantages for the Maratakka Spillway structure are: 

1) The Maratakka Spillway alleviates greatly the present potential flood hazards during rainy 
seasons. Any flooding of the agricultural areas will directly result in loss of crops and income. 

2) The risks are reduced not due to extra spill capacity but also by locating the spillway at the 
opposite site of the Nanni spillway. Both structures can work independently, just in case of non-
functioning of either structure. 

3) The costs for the Maratakka Spillway are much less then to improve the Nanni Creek to its full 
capacity (if deemed feasible under the current conditions). The measures for Nanni Creek 
upgrading may be costly or not be feasible to the full extend, e.g. due to land ownership issues 
and regular siltation of the creek bottom and outflow area at the river. 

4) The Maratakka Spillway will increase fresh water supply to the Nickerie River through the 
Maratakka River, and contribute to pushing back the salt water intrusion. This will enable more 
production due to increased irrigation at the right bank of the Nickerie River. It is noted that the 
pumping station at Wageningen is currently under rehabilitation. This will allow pumping more 
fresh water during high tide (when salt water intrusion is expected to reach furthest in the river). 
However, further studies for the salt water intrusion assessment, including hydrologic modeling, 
is required to justify large investments in just adding extra fresh water flows into the Nickerie 
River. 

5) The extra spill way, together with the new Nanni Weir and dam, will enable OWMCP to keep the 
water levels in the northern part of the swamp more controlled and evenly distributed over the 
east-west section. This is expected to be better for the flora and fauna. 

 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 15 of 24 

 

7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates 
 
This section contains the schematic designs and cost estimates for the Nanni Weir and related structures, 
as well as the Maratakka Spillway. It is noted that the designs are at schematic/ preliminary level, which 
entails certain margins for unknown conditions such as geotechnical properties of the soil and 
topographic levels. Further assessments are being conducted to fine tune the designs and costs where 
possible. 
It is noted that detailed designs and engineers cost estimate are to be carried out during the 
implementation of the Program. 
 
The following key data for designs have been abstracted from the previous studies and reports. No major 
changes are foreseen at this stage, as most of the starting points used in the earlier designs are still 
applicable. Some of the capacities are higher than actually required at this stage of development in the 
polders. However, the structures are for a design life of at least 30-35 years and may need the capacity in 
the near future. 
It is noted that certain water use efficiency is envisaged at the individual farmers. This can be by grading 
the terrains, using different crop techniques using less water and re-using water where possible.  
 
Water supply: 
Wakay pump:   30 m3/s. 
Capacity Nanni Weir: 17 m3/s, between NSP +2.5 and NSP +3.30 m. Concrete wall and crest level at 

sides at NSP +4.45 m. 
Stondansi Canal: 31 m3/s (increase capacity, reduce hydraulic losses) 
Van Wouw Intake: maintain capacity; Crest of concrete walls and side dams to be increased to NSP 

+4.45 m. 
Optional: demolish existing intake and build new inlet (12.5 m3/s) further 
upstream in Van Wouw Canal. This option is  

IKUGH Intake: maintain capacity. Crest of concrete walls and side dams to be increased to NSP 
+4.45 m.  

HA Inlet:  new inlet with 2.5 m3/s capacity. 
 
 
Spillways and flood control: 
Swamp Retention dam: raise to NSP +4.45 m (along Stondansi and Lateral 1 Canal) 
Nanni Spillway:  maintain at 20-25 m3/s. Increase crest level at sides to NSP +4.45 m. 
Maratakka Spillway: 15 m3/s. Crest level at NSP +3.65 m.  Crest level at side dams to NSP +4.45 m. 
 
 
Schematic designs for the key structures have been presented in the EU OWMCP Masterplan. See 
Appendix VI for overview of the schematic designs. 
 
In principle these designs can be maintained. For these structures some recommend improvements have 
been included in this report. Reference is made to the Appendix III.  
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 16 of 24 

 
Cost estimates: 
 
Cost estimates for the works have been prepared using Bills of Quantities and unit rates of existing 
similar infrastructure works or prices from other sources (like contractors, suppliers, etc). An attempt has 
been made to determine costs within a margin of 10-15%.  
It is noted that the cost estimates depends on assumptions of soil/geotechnical conditions, availability of 
source of material and accessibility for equipment. Furthermore, it is assumed that works will be 
combined as much as practically possible in one contract, so that contractor’s overhead and other costs 
can be minimized. 
 
The total estimated costs for the new main infrastructure works are about USD 5.1 Million, excluding 
turn over taxes. 

 
 
In addition to the costs of the Works, 10-15% has to be added for Project/Contract Management, detailed 
topographic surveys, soil investigations, detailed designs and Construction supervision. 
 
It is noted that rehabilitation of important existing main structures, Nanni Spillway, Nanni Creek, Van 
Wouw Intake and IKUGH Intake, are direly needed for an improved overall main water supply 
infrastructure. The costs for rehabilitation of these structures are not part of this document, and are 
assumed to be covered by other means. 
 
  

New Main Infrastructure Works OWMCP Option 1: Use Stondansi Canal to convey to IKUGH
Cost USD

No Component Description 25-May-18

1 Nanni Weir New intake structure from Nanni Swamp, including closing dam (ca. 350 m) 2,000,000.00            
2 Stondansi Canal/Swamp Retention dam Widening Stondansi Canal and raising retention dam level to +4.45 m,  3,75 km 703,125.00               
3 HA Intake New intake (1 x 5 m wide), combine with regulator, demolish existing, close dam 250,000.00               
4 Regulator/end check Structure Stondansi Regulator structure (2x 5 m) at end Stondansi to connect with canal to Lateral 1 550,000.00               
5 Diversion canal Stondansi to Lateral Canal 1 New canal (850 m) with Swamp Embankment dam 382,500.00               
6 Lateral Canal 1/ Swamp Retention dam Profiling canal and raising dam level (to +4.45 m) 7 km long 630,000.00               
7 End check/regulator outlet Regulator structure at end Lateral Canal 1 (2x 2.5 m) to discharge in Sur Canal 350,000.00               
8 Maratakka Spillway- only Part 1: Weir Spillway weir end Surinam Canal/Nanni swamp north to Maratakka 225,000.00               

Note: Only new main infrastructure. Total Works Main Infra for Option 1 5,090,625.00            
Cost of rehabilitation of exisiting main structures (Excluding 10-15% surveys, design, tender, supervision)
are not included



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 17 of 24 

 
 
 
Appendices: 
 
 
 
 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 18 of 24 

Appendix I: Overview map (Source: EU Masterplan 2010) 
 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 19 of 24 

Appendix II: Proposed Infrastructure (Source: EU Masterplan 2010) 
 

 
 
 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 20 of 24 

 
Appendix III: Assessment of existing structures: Nanni weir, Van Wouw Inlet, HA Intake and 
IKUGH inlet and survey results 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   1 

MEMO 
 
Project : Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
Subject : Assessment Existing Hydraulic Works Nickerie OWMCP  
Date : April 2018 
 
 

Contents 
1.  General/ Project area ................................................................................................................. 2 

2. Van Wouw Intake Structure ...................................................................................................... 3 

2.1 Structure assessment ................................................................................................................ 3 

Steel sheet piles ......................................................................................................................... 3 

Concrete ................................................................................................................................... 3 

Wooden sheet piles ................................................................................................................... 3 

Trash racks................................................................................................................................ 4 

Steel gates ................................................................................................................................. 4 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 4 

3. Nanni Spillway ......................................................................................................................... 5 

3.1 Structure assessment ................................................................................................................ 5 

Inflow/outflow side ................................................................................................................... 5 

Sliding gates ............................................................................................................................. 5 

Erosion ..................................................................................................................................... 5 

Concrete structure ..................................................................................................................... 5 

4.  IKUGH .................................................................................................................................... 7 

4.1. Structure assessment ............................................................................................................... 7 

Steel gates ................................................................................................................................. 7 

Trashracks ................................................................................................................................ 7 

Inflow/Outflow side .................................................................................................................. 8 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 8 

5. HA Inlet Structure ..................................................................................................................... 9 

5.1. Assessment structure .............................................................................................................. 9 

Gate inflow ............................................................................................................................... 9 

Hoisting mechanism .................................................................................................................. 9 

Concrete culvert ...................................................................................................................... 10 

7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal ...................................................................................... 11 

8.  Schematic drawings ................................................................................................................ 13 

 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   2 

1.  General/ Project area 

The project area consists of four hydraulic structures, namely the Van Wouw Intake, Nani Spillway, 
IKUGH (Integraal Kunstwerk Groot Henar) and HA Inlet Structure.  Field survey occurred in March 
and April 2018.  The structures have been assessed if they could be rehabilitated and used again as 
main structure. In addition some surveys and cross-sections have been carried out to assess the main 
dam and canal levels. 
 

 
 
  

 
 
  

Nani Spillway 
   Van Wouw Intake 

Corantijn Canal 

Van Wouw Canal 

Stondansie Canal 

Surinam Canal 

Surinam Canal 

HA Inlet Structure. 

IKUGH 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   3 

 

2. Van Wouw Intake Structure 

2.1 Structure assessment 
 
The Van Wouw Intake Structure consists of two gates of steel with a lifting tower and two hinged 
trash racks. The inflow side is at the Corantijn Canal whereas the outflow side of this structure is at 
the Van Wouw Canal.  

Steel sheet piles 
 
Several steel sheet piles at both the inflow and outflow side 
of the Van Wouw Intake Structure are heavily corroded.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace only steel sheet piles that are corroded, and give 
the piles the necessary coating 
- Replace all steel sheet piles, and give the piles the 
necessary coating 
 

Concrete 
 
At several locations both on the inflow and outflow side of the structure, steel reinforcement is shown 
due to concrete decay. 
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace pile cap at the inflow side 

 

Wooden sheet piles 
 
At the outflow side of the structure wooden sheet piles are anchored to land. Several of these piles are 
rotten and broken. There is also heavy erosion seen. Geo-textile is placed between wooden piles and 
land to prevent further erosion.   
Proposed works: 
- Replace wooden piles with new one 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   4 

 

Trash racks 
 
There are two trash racks. At some sections the racks are also 
corroded. The racks are hinged, but there is no control system.   
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current trash racks with new ones of aluminum  
- New control system for trash racks 
- Equipment to clean racks 
 

Steel gates 
 
There are two sliding gates that show corrosion at several locations. Both of the gates are being 
operated manually with a hoisting system. Each gate has two pulley systems, yet only one gate has a 
hoisting system that is connected.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel gates with new ones made of lighter material (e.g. aluminum)   
- Give the gates the necessary coating  
- Replacing current rebates (grooves) with new ones including Teflon 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
There are currently 4 systems with a maximum of 5 ton. Only 1 mechanism is connected to a gate, 
two of the mechanisms are not connected and 1 hoisting system has no mechanism. 
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace the complete hoisting system with new system  
- Give the gates the necessary coating 
 
The structure should be adapted to the reservoir level of NSP 4.45 
 
The structure should be passable for floating maintenance equipment and boats.  
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   5 

3. Nanni Spillway 
 
The main function of this structure is the need to regulate the water level in the Nani-reservoir.  

3.1 Structure assessment 
 
Inflow/outflow side 
 
At both outflow and inflow side of the spillway steel sheet piles show heavily corrosion.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel piles with new ones (Incl. necessary coating) 
- Instead of replacing the steel sheet piles, fill the area with rip rap  
 

 
 

Sliding gates 
 
The Nani Spillway consists of three wooden gates. These gates are manually opened without any 
hoisting mechanism. Steel profiles are used to keep the gates open. The gates are in rabbets made of 
steel.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current sliding gates with aluminum doors 
- Control mechanism with complete new pulley system  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Erosion 
 
At some locations there is also erosion seen.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Fill erosion areas with ripe clay 

 Concrete structure 
This structure has minimal concrete decay.  
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Proposed works: 
- Applying concrete spray techniques to rectify concrete elements 
 
The spillway has to be adapted to embankment levels of NSP 4.45 and width of 4 m to allow 
equipment to drive up to the structure by the Corantijn Canal embankments. 
 
Currently there are no trash racks, these should be implemented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   7 

 

4.  IKUGH 
 
IKUGH structure has three inflow and outflow sections, each with a gate of steel.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4.1. Structure assessment 

Steel gates 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of three gates of steel. At several locations the gates show corrosion. 
The gates are in chamfers, also made of steel. Some gates are not in chamfers anymore. The gates are 
manually operated with wooden planks.  

 
Proposed works:  
- New aluminum gates 
- New rabbets with Teflon  
 
 
Trashracks 
 
The structure used to have three trash racks at the inflow side. Currently these racks are unconfined.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   8 

 

Inflow/Outflow side 
 
The steel sheet piles and its anchoring show corrosion. At several locations at both inflow and outflow 
side concrete decay is shown. There is also erosion seen at the inflow side near the steel sheet piles.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
As mentioned above the gates are manually operated. There are no lifting mechanisms presents.  
 
 

 
 
 
The structure has to be adapted to embankment levels of NSP 4.45 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   9 

 

5. HA Inlet Structure 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of one gate of steel and one outflow section with a valve culvert. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5.1. Assessment structure 

Gate inflow 
 
This hydraulic structure consists of one gate of steel at the inflow side. At several locations it is 
corroded. The gate is placed into rabbets, that also show corrosion. The gate has a whirl control 
system.  
 
Proposed works: 
- Replace current steel gate with a new one made of a lighter material (e.g. aluminum)  
- Rabbets need to be renewed, with new profiles and rubber 
- Trash racks need to be placed  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hoisting mechanism 
 
This structure has a whirl mechanism and is manually operated.  
 
Proposed works: 
- The whirl system needs to be inspected and renewed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   10 

 

Concrete culvert 
 
The concrete culvert shows some concrete decay 
 
Proposed works: 
- By using concrete spray techniques, the concrete decay can be repaired 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   11 

 

7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

GPS Location 
DP-01 Cross Section 1 Surinam Canal  
DP-02 Cross Section 2 Surinam Canal  
DP-03 Cross Section 3 Surinam Canal 
DP-04 Cross Section 4 Surinam Canal 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   12 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
  



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   13 

 

8.  Schematic drawings 
 
Van Wouw Inlet Structure 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 



 
Assessment Hydraulic Works OWMCP- April 2018   14 

 
 

 



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 21 of 24 

 
Appendix IV: Survey results Maratakka Spillway area 
 
  



W
L : +1.225 m

date 20-04-2018   D
rainage

-2 41

0.74
E

levation (N
S

P
)

1.06
1.40

2.06
2.48

2.76
2.58

2.66
2.04

1.51
1.46

-1.06
-1.06

0.04
0.08

1.46
0

D
istance

2.00
4.00

6.00
8.00

10.00
13.00

16.00
19.00

22.00
25.00

28.00
31.00

34.0035.00
38.00

(M
)(M

)

N
O

R
T

H
x: 529507.7025
y: 629412.8371

S
O

U
T

H
x: 529535.4330
y: 629386.8560

D
am

 height: 2.76 m Cross section_01
date: 20-04-2018

-1 62.5

1.11
1.43

1.29
1.33

-0.27
-0.27

-0.29
-0.27

-0.39
-0.39

-0.07
-0.10

0.49
1.40

1.61
1.85

2.23
3.09

4.01
3.90

3.43
2.76

2.21
1.91

1.29
0

3.00
6.00

8.00
12.00

16.00
20.00

22.00
24.00

26.00
28.00

30.00
32.00

34.00
36.00

38.00
40.00

42.00
44.00

46.00
48.00

50.00
53.00

55.00
57.00

W
E

S
T

x: 529463.1501
y: 629375.0191

E
A

S
T

x: 529505.6624
y: 629412.9889

1.6

W
L : +1.613 m

date 20-04-2018   S
urinam

 canal

C
ross section_02

date: 20-04-2018

E
levation (N

S
P

)
D

istance (M
)(M

)

D
am

 height: 4.01 m

N
ote:

- W
aterlevel in S

urinam
 canal

estim
ated from

 w
aterlevel

m
easured at IK

U
G

H
.

- W
L = W

aterlevel

* S
ituation cross section M

aratakka and S
urinam

 canal.



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 22 of 24 

 
 
 
Appendix V: Overview Option 1 and 2 for Corantijn Canal supply 
 
  



 
 
 



 



Opti
on 1

Cros
s Se

ction
 1-1

Ston
dans

ie Ca
nal

Suri
nam

 Can
al

Exca
vate

Fill

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+4.45 NSP

Earth

Nan
i Sw

amp

Leg
end

Existing Retention Dam



Opti
on 2

Cros
s Se

ction
 1-1

Ston
dans

ie Ca
nal

Suri
nam

 Can
al

Nan
i Sw

amp

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

(use excavation from Swamp)

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+3.50 NSP

Raise Level Retention Dam

+4.45 NSP

Approx. +2.2 NSP

Excavate

Exca
vate

Fill

Ear
th

Lege
nd



Option 1

Cross Section 2-2

Lateral Canal

Surinam Canal

Exist

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+4.45 NSP

Nani Swamp

+2.20 NSP

Exca
vate

Fill

Ear
th

Lege
nd



Option 2

Cross Section 2-2

Surinam Canal

Nani Swamp

Excavate

Raise Level Retention Dam

(use excavation from Swamp)

Approx. +4.0 NSP

+3.50 NSP

Raise Level Retention Dam

+4.45 NSP

Approx. +2.2 NSP

Excavate

Lateral Canal

Exca
vate

Fill

Earth

Leg
end



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 23 of 24 

 
Appendix VI: Schematic Designs Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway 
(Original source: OWMCP Masterplan, 2010) 
 
 
 
Note: 
The designs presented in this Appendix are taken from the OWMCP Masterplan. The designs are yet to 
be checked on some details such as location, position and dimensions. 
 
 
 
  



   

Intermediate Report- Feasibility Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway- v2- May 28th, 2018 Page 24 of 24 

Maratakka Spillway (at end dam of Surinam Canal near link to Maratakka River) 
 

 
 

 
 
 




	1 Introduction
	1.1 General
	1.2 This study
	1.3 Objective and approach of this Study

	2 Background
	3 Review studies and available information
	3.1 General
	3.2 Initial Site Visit and discussions

	4 Assessment of Existing structures
	4.1 Existing structures near Nanni Weir and IKUGH
	4.2 Corantijn Canal swamp retention dam
	4.3 Area near Maratakka Spillway

	5 Alternatives for water distribution from Corantijn Canal
	6 Rationale for Nanni Weir and Maratakka Spillway
	7 Preliminary designs and cost estimates
	20180528 MEMO Hydraulic Structure NICKERIE_FINAL.pdf
	1.  General/ Project area
	2. Van Wouw Intake Structure
	2.1 Structure assessment
	Steel sheet piles
	Concrete
	Wooden sheet piles
	/Trash racks
	Steel gates
	Hoisting mechanism


	3. Nanni Spillway
	3.1 Structure assessment
	Sliding gates
	/Erosion
	Concrete structure


	4.  IKUGH
	4.1. Structure assessment
	Steel gates
	Inflow/Outflow side
	Hoisting mechanism


	5. HA Inlet Structure
	5.1. Assessment structure
	Gate inflow
	Hoisting mechanism
	Concrete culvert


	7.  Cross section profiles Surinam Canal
	8.  Schematic drawings





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ana Ríos (CSD/RND), Project 
Team Leader; Luis Hernando Hintze (RND/CUR), Project Team Co-leader; Gonzalo Muñoz 
and Maja Schling (CSD/RND), Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Elizabeth Chávez and 
Rosario Frugone (CSD/RND); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); Alberto Villalba 
(VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Federico Bachino and Adriana Torres (CSC/CUR); 
Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR); and Catherine Meola (SCL/GDI). 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of execution arrangements ......................................................... 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 
C. Impact evaluation ....................................................................................... 15 

 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan (PEP) and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Bibliography 

2. Diagnostic assessment for capacity building in technology generation and transfer, technical 
assistance, and rural extension 

3. Impact evaluation of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) 

4. Beneficiaries of RPDP requests for proposals and the registry of family producers 

5. Survey of nonbeneficiary family producers in RPDP requests for proposals 

6. RPDP evaluation 

7. Climate change 

8. Technology evaluation 

9. Gender 

10. Program economic evaluation 

11. Rural Development Bureau - Organizational chart 

12. Draft program Operating Regulations 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-44
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ATDR Agente Territorial de Desarrollo Rural [Regional Rural Development 
Agent] 

DGDR Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
GHG Greenhouse gas 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICTs Information and communication technologies 
INIA Instituto National de Investigación Agropecuaria [National Agricultural 

Research Institute] 
IPNEs Institutos Públicos no Estatales [Nonstate Public Institutes] 
MGAP Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
PMU Project Management Unit 
RPDP Rural Productive Development Program 
RTAE Rural Technical Assistance and Extension 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 



Annex I - UR-L1147 

Page 1 of 1

Summary

1. IDB Development Objectives

Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2836

Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915-2

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

3.1 Program Diagnosis

3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

1.0

9.1

3.0

3.6

2.5

9.0

3.0

3.0

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting, External Control.

Procurement: Information System.

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

9.3

2.5

6.8

0.0

Yes

Boosting productivity and competitiveness by promoting 

innovation

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

The objective of the Program is to contribute to improving the sustainability of family, small and medium-sized agricultural production units. The specific objectives are the 
increase in the adoption of climate-smart technologies (CS), and the strengthening of capacities in the generation and transfer of technologies, technical assistance and rural 
extension. CS technologies are those that contribute to increasing climate resilience and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions while improving performance in terms of 
production or profitability. The diagnosis provided is solid and substantiated in evidence, evaluation and lessons learned from the first Rural Productive Development Program.

The results matrix exhibits a clear vertical logic and is anchored in the two main dimensions that the program addresses to achieve the sustainability of production units of 
smaller scale: productive and environmental. The indicators of impact, result and product in general are SMART, with baselines and defined targets and with the means to verify 
compliance.

The economic analysis is based on the estimation of the benefits of increased productivity in the farms that benefit from the Program. The assumptions are reasonable and are 
based on the findings of previous evaluations, including of the first program. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that even under more conservative assumptions 
(linked to the rate of adoption of technologies, higher costs, limitations in access to technical assistance after the end of the intervention), the return of the program remains at 
levels above 12%

The Monitoring Plan complies with the requirements of the DEM. The evaluation proposal is to carry out a quasi-experimental impact assessment that takes advantage of the 
voluntary registration of producers to the calls made by the Program, implementing a random promotion to increase the participation rate in a group of randomly selected 
producers. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable to evaluate the impact of the program on the productivity of the beneficiaries.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food

security  (#)*



Annex II 
Page 1 of 8 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final target 
Means of 

verification 
Comments 

IMPACT 1 Improved sustainability of agricultural production by small and medium-sized family producers in Uruguay 

Partial productivity 
increased 

meat, kg/ha; 
milk, l/ha 

Meat: 
88 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.632 l/ha 

2018 

Meat: 
96 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.995 l/ha 

Impact 
evaluation 

Production plans that have lasted at least 36 months are 
considered to be beneficiaries. 

Current values are based on the RPDP I evaluation (conducted 
in 2018) and will be updated once the baseline from the impact 
evaluation is available (expected in 2019). 

A 10% increase in productivity is expected based on the results 
of the RPDP I evaluation. 

Beef, mutton, lamb and wool and milk segmented. 

Meat equivalent = beef + mutton and lamb + wool. 

Emissions per unit of 
output reduced 

Kg CO2-
eq/kg 

18.6 2018 11.1 

Initial survey: 
2019 

Final survey: 
2024 

INIA methodology (See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan). Values will be updated once the baseline 
from the impact evaluation is available. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

OUTCOME 1: Climate-smart improvements in agricultural production units  

Increased rate of climate-
smart technology adoption 
by beneficiaries* 

%  8.4 2017 64 Impact evaluation 

Those participating for at least 36 months are considered to be 
beneficiaries. 

Provisional baseline: Livestock Survey 2016/2017; the adoption 
rate is based on the question on innovation, item 8: 

“Management of the production process:“ ”Have you adopted 
(for the first time) livestock management practices aimed at 

introducing changes or improvements in the establishment?” 
This was restricted to producers of less than 150 Livestock Units 
(the average for the two lowest strata). Value will be updated 
once the baseline from the impact evaluation is available 
(expected in 2019). 

The target is based on the implementation of RPDP II plans. 

Increased percentage of 
producers who manage 
their lands with a safe 
carrying capacity 

% 28.5 2018 37.05 Impact evaluation 

Definition of safe carrying capacity (INIA/IPA) - see annex to the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. Natural land systems are 
considered to exist where improved pastures are no more than 
5% of the total area. 

The current baseline value represents the probability of 
exceeding carrying capacity based on data from the Livestock 
Survey for producers using natural lands. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 

  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

Measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Comments 

OUTCOME 2: Inclusion of new beneficiaries in MGAP (DGDR) interventions  

Increased percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

%  30 2017 50 Monitoring system 

New beneficiaries, in this context, are producers that have 
never participated in a DGDR program (including the first 
phase of the RPDP). 

The indicator shows the outcome of targeting actions on 
groups that do not typically have access to the incentives due 
to communication limitations. 

OUTCOME 3: Increase in the ongoing use of technical assistance from the RTAE system by family producers 

Increased number of 
beneficiary producers that 
continue to receive 
comprehensive technical 
assistance once the plan has 
been completed* 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

Meat:  
81 

(4%) 

Milk:  
323 

(16%) 

2016/2017 
livestock 

2014 dairy 

Meat:  
243 

(12%) 

Milk:  
972 

(48%) 

Rate for beneficiaries 

drawn from the 

monitoring system. 

Impact evaluation 

The baseline and final target are based on the 2,025 
producers whose management plans will be approved and 
implemented.  

The benchmark for the baseline is the current percentage for 
each group. The target is expected to be three times the 
number of producers to continue with technical assistance. 

This refers to technical assistance that is not provided by the 
DGDR, and which entails regular visits from technical staff 
(not one-off assistance). For livestock, agronomic technical 
assistance; for dairy, agronomic and veterinary technical 
assistance. 

OUTCOME 4: Strengthening the collective activities of rural organizations 

Increase in the percentage of 
users of services provided by 
rural organizations* 

% 29 2018 38 

Monitoring system: 

application form and 

closing form (at the 

end of the project) 

Includes: 

Technical assistance; 

Sale of inputs; 

Machinery or equipment services; 

Use of production services; 

Marketing of products. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline is the percentage of nonbeneficiaries 
participating in one or more rural organizations. This indicative 
value will be adjusted based on information from the rural 
organizations' registration forms, which will include an 
information request regarding the number of users. 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Baseline 

OUTCOME 5: Improved availability of technologies for small and medium-sized family producers 

Increase in new technologies 
validated for family production 

Number 0 2018 5 

Monitoring system 

Final report on each 

technology validated 

by the INIA 

Validation of a technology includes four categories of 
indicators: sociocultural, productive/economic, environmental, 
and reapplication. See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan. 

OUTCOME 6: Increased participation in DGDR interventions by rural women and young people  

Number of female 
beneficiaries increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

775 

(25%) 
2018 

992 

(32%) 
Monitoring system 

2018 study of 

beneficiaries 

Baseline source: Percentages are drawn from the RPDP I 
study of beneficiaries.  

Target source: Monitoring system. 

Target values are representative of the Uruguayan Registry of 
Family Producers. 

Estimates of absolute values are calculated from the 
respective percentages, based on 3,100 beneficiaries. 

Young beneficiaries are those aged between 15 and 
29 years, according to INJU. 

Number of young beneficiaries 
increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

124 

(4%) 
2018 

341 

(11%) 

OUTCOME 7: Increase in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) 

Increased rate of ICT adoption 
in family production* 

% 7 2018 11 

Monitoring system 

Specific baseline 

survey 2019 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

Final survey 2024 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

The target is for a 70% increase with respect to the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Component I: Improved productivity through technology adoption and alliance-building 

Management plans 
implemented 

10,107,237 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 0 0 600 750 450 225 2,025 
Monitoring 
system 

“Implemented” 
indicates that 60% of 
the activities included 
in the approved plans 
have been fulfilled and 
that the technology 
adoption evaluation 
has been conducted. 

Milestone 1: 
Management 
plans approved 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 400 600 600 700 400 0 2,700 
Monitoring 
system 

Approved plans are 
those presented by 
eligible producers that 
have passed technical 
evaluation and for 
which the contract has 
been signed. 

Days of technical 
assistance provided 
to beneficiaries 

6,353,121 
Days of 
technical 

assistance 
0 2019 2,000 5,000 6,000 6,500 7,000 0 26,500 

Monitoring 
system 

8-hour day. 

Tools designed for 
promoting alliance-
building initiatives, 
with emphasis on 
integration into the 
chain  

106,955 Report 0 2019 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 

Promotion 
tools 
approved by 
DGDR 
management 

Supporting 
technical 
document 

 

Producers 
participating in new 
alliance-building 
initiatives  

898,421 
Number of 

beneficiaries 
0 2019 0 200 0 200 0 0 400 

Monitoring 
system 

Alliance-building 
initiatives to resolve 
limitations of scale: 
sales contracts for 
output, product 
differentiation. 



Annex II 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Number of women 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

women 
0 2019 0 100 0 100 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

 

Number of youth 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

young people 
0 2019 100 0 100 0 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

Youth beneficiaries 
are those between 15 
and 29 years old, 
according to INJU. 

Component II: Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension 

Projects supervised 
for validating 
technologies aimed 
at family producers 

560,603 Projects 0 2019 0 0 3 10 2 0 15 
Reports by 
project 

 

Number of rural 
organizations with a 

“comprehensive 
technical 

assistance” team 

4,270,304 
Rural 

organizations 
0 2019 20 10 10 0 0 0 40 

DGDR 
reports 

ATDR 

“Comprehensive” 
means that their 
function is to provide 
technical assistance 
to improve the 
productivity of 
medium-sized family 
producers. 

Specific 
agreements 
implemented with 
IPNEs to provide 
RTAE to 
beneficiaries 

819,508 
Number of 

agreements 
0 2019 2 1 1 0 0 0 4 

Agreements 
signed 

 

Proposal for 
evaluation system 
formulated 

25,000 Consultancy 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Consultant 
report 

 



Annex II 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Monitoring tool for 
the RTAE system 
developed 

59,769 System 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Confirmation 
that system 
is operating 

Conceptual definition, 
methodology defined, 
procedures 
established, and 
computer program 
developed. 

Private technical 
staff trained in 
providing 
comprehensive 
support to 
producers 

270,000 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 100 50 25 25 0 0 200 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 

Public sector 
technical staff 
trained in strategy 
and methods for 
providing 
assistance and 
consolidation of 
rural extension 
processes 

72,600 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 50 30 10 10 0 0 100 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 



Annex II 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Annual 
dissemination and 
awareness-building 
plans implemented 
and evaluated 

684,859 
Number of 

plans 
0 2019 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 

DGDR 
reports 

 

ICT projects 
developed for family 
production  

305,000 Projects 0 2019 0 0 5 5 5 0 15 
DGDR 
reports 

 

Tools implemented 
for supporting the 
use of ICTs in 
family agricultural 
production systems 
and RTAE services  

117,000 
Number of 

tools 
0 2019 2 1 1 2 1 2 9 

DGDR 
reports 

Guiding strategy, 
surveys (3), 
workshops, training, 
events to exchange 
experiences. 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Country: Uruguay 

Project: UR-L1147 - Rural Productive Development Program II 

Executing agencies: The Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
through the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 

Fiduciary team: Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This operation is for US$27,121,000, of which US$24,232,000 will be financed by 
the Bank. The borrower is the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and the executing 
agency is the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) with the 
support of the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its Project Management 
Unit. The MGAP’s execution of loans 1131/OC-UR (the Agricultural Services 
Program), 1643/OC-UR (Program to Support the Productivity and Development of 
New Livestock Products), and 2182/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural 
Public Management I) has been satisfactory. It is currently executing loan 
2595/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II), for which 
fiduciary risk has been measured as low based on the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) methodology.1 The Project Monitoring Report 
indicates a satisfactory level of execution. 

The objective of the new loan (UR-L1147) is to help improve the sustainability of 
small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. The specific 
objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and 
strengthen alliance-building among participating producers. The expected impacts 
are an increase in income and productivity. The fiduciary activities—both financial 
execution arrangements and the procurement contracts included in the 
Procurement Plan attached to the Proposal for Operation Development for this 
operation—were identified based on the aforementioned objectives. The following 
sections describe the fiduciary mechanisms identified during the analysis mission. 
It should be noted that no exceptions to Bank policies are envisaged with respect 
to either financial management or procurement. Likewise, no retroactive financing 
or advance procurement is expected, consistent with the definitions in Section 1.9 
of document GN-2349-9 (Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works 
Financed by the IDB) and section 1.12 of document GN-2350-9 (Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB). 

1 Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II, loan 3800/OC-UR, ICAS Analysis Report, May 2016. 



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

 As mentioned above, the MGAP will be the executing agency for this operation 
through the DGDR and its Project Management Unit (PMU). Accounting, financial 
management, and procurement activities, together with support for the planning 
and monitoring of all operations involving external borrowing, are centralized in the 
PMU. Based on the information gathered during the analysis mission, the 
executing agency will have the same staff as for execution of the Program to 
Support Agricultural Public Management II. It was established that the executing 
agency has satisfactory experience in executing Bank-financed operations. 

 As reflected in the 2016 ICAS assessment mentioned in the previous section, “the 
MGAP’s key functions have been clearly defined in the areas of administration and 
financial accounting, and in management of the procurement cycle, on the basis 
of prior experience [...].” As further detailed in this Annex, the MGAP has executed 
several Bank-financed projects with a satisfactory level of performance, leading to 
the conclusion that its institutional capacity, as evaluated, is high. 

 In addition, the Ministry will be supported by its DGDR and PMU, as indicated in 
the matrix that describes the execution arrangements (comparing, in particular, the 
arrangements for loan 3800/OC-UR and the structure envisaged for the execution 
of UR-L1147). The aforementioned tool provides information including the 
following: 

a. With respect to the fulfillment of conditions in the area of procurement, 
technical aspects will be the responsibility of the DGDR while the UGP will be 
responsible for fiduciary requirements. 

b. The PMU will be responsible for: managing financial and audit reports; 
reporting on expenditure and requesting advance disbursements from the IDB; 
making payments to providers; preparing the procurement plan and the 
financial plan; and the accounting system. 

c. The DGDR will be responsible for: coordinating, implementing, and monitoring 
activities; planning, preparing, and organizing work plans; human resources; 
and filing documentation relating to program activities with the aim of providing 
information to the IDB and ensuring that supporting documentation is kept. 

 As indicated, execution arrangements are well established. Bearing in mind also 
the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in the executing agency’s institutional capacity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 Fiduciary risk is considered to be low. This finding is based on the institutional 
capacity assessment carried out under UR-L1135. It was agreed during the 
orientation mission for this new loan that since: (i) the exercise had been 
completed within a reasonable period; (ii) the fundamental structure of the 
executing agency remained identical; (iii) the indicators for measuring execution 
and the fulfillment of Bank requirements were satisfactory; and (iv) the new 
operation would use the same team of qualified staff with experience in executing 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Bank-financed operations, the May 2016 ICAS assessment identifying a low level 
of risk remained valid. 

3.2 In addition, neither the fiduciary activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the 
financial management activities are regarded as complex, thus confirming the low 
level of risk for this new operation due to the executing agency’s track record of 
performance and compliance. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

 The following considerations will be included in the special provisions: 

a. The program Operating Regulations will be updated to identify the 
administrative and financial management arrangements for the component 
involving the distribution of support. The total value of support will be 
US$20,231,000, of which $19,631,000 will be financed with Bank loan 
proceeds and US$600,000 with local counterpart funds. 

b. Exchange rate: for financial reporting in U.S. dollars, the exchange rate used 
will be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

c. Audited financial statements: During the project disbursement period, audited 
project financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the end of each of the MGAP’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by 
the Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR), or by 
an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank based on terms of reference 
agreed with the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days after the date stipulated for the final disbursement under the loan. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements for Procurement establish the rules 
governing the execution of all procurement planned under the project. 

 Procurement execution 

 The Bank’s procurement policies—documents GN-2349-9 (Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development 
Bank) and GN-2350-9 (Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
financed by the Inter-American Development Bank)—will apply to all planned 
procurement activities under this operation. These will be included in the 
Procurement Plan, which will cover an initial minimum period of 18 months with 
annual updates thereafter. Before initiating procurement, this procurement plan will 
be registered, approved, and published in the Procurement Plan Execution System 
(SEPA, www.iniciativasepa.org). Once registered, the plan will be updated 
annually, or whenever required by substantial changes to the original plan. 

 The relevance of each expenditure (i.e. terms of reference, technical 
specifications, and budget) is the responsibility of the project’s sector specialist 
and always requires a no objection before the procurement process may begin, 
based on the operational criteria of the Project Team Leader. 

http://www.iniciativasepa.org/


Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Project-
related contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services2 subject to 
international competitive bidding will be carried out using the standard bidding 
documents issued by the Bank. Contracts subject to national competitive 
bidding will be carried out using national bidding documents satisfactory to the 
Bank. The review of technical specifications for procurement during 
preparation of the selection processes is the responsibility of the project sector 
specialist. 

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Contracts for consulting services 
under the project will be executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request 
for Proposals (in the case of all contracts above the applicable threshold for 
international shortlists) or one satisfactory to the Bank (in the case of bidding 
processes for amounts below the threshold applicable to international 
competitive bidding). The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing 
the terms of reference for consulting service contracts. 

c. Direct contracting: As set out in the table below, direct contracting for a total 
amount of US$6,048,153 is envisaged, of which US$2,022,190 will be financed 
with local counterpart funds and US$4,025,963 with Bank resources. Direct 
contracts financed with local funds will not be subject to Bank review.  

Table 1. Direct contracts (US$) 

 IDB Local counterpart Total 

Consulting services, RPDP 
team 3,885,736  1,211,681  5,097,417  

Fuel 140,227   -  140,227  

Training  -  444,100  444,100  

Travel expenses  -  101,350  101,350  

Vehicle maintenance  -  109,686  109,686  

Postage  -  54,843  54,843  

Bank fees  -  10,530  10,530  

Audit, TCR  -  90,000  90,000  

Total 4,025,963  2,022,190  6,048,153  

 

(i) The contracts of the consultants belonging to the RPDP team are 
expected to be renewed under the operation. The team is made up of 
advisors, assistants, and the rural development field teams that are 
currently working under loan 2595/OC-UR. Consequently, and in 
accordance with sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 of the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-9) 
(which establish the principle of continuity of service where such 
continuity is more efficient than a new competition), the executing 
agency’s request has been deemed consistent with Bank policies 
based on the following factors: (i) initial selection of the consultants was 
done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received the Bank’s prior no 
objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed are 

                                                
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: The treatment of nonconsulting services is similar to that of goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and 
alternative human resources will be sought through a competitive 
process. The value of this activity is expected to total US$5,097,417 
over the six-year loan execution cycle, with US$3,885,736 financed 
from Bank loan proceeds and US$1,211,681 from local counterpart 
funds. This amount is considered reasonable given that: (i) the team 
comprises a total of 28 people; and (ii) their monthly salaries average 
US$2,462, which is within the reference scale for the Office of the 
President of the Republic. 

(ii) A budget of US$140,227 is also envisaged over the loan execution 
period for the direct purchase of fuel from the Administración Nacional 
de Combustibles, Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and 
Cement Administration] (ANCAP). The fuel will be used for transporting 
field teams in the project’s area of influence. This line is consistent with 
the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the Procurement 
of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be 
obtained from one source. ANCAP is an energy company that manages 
all of the country’s fuel supply plants and has a monopoly over fuel 
imports and exports in Uruguay. It also proposes fuel prices, which are 
then approved by the Executive Branch. Lastly, section 33.C.1 of the 
Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad y Administración Financiera 
[Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration] 
(TOCAF) indicates that government bodies or departments may 
engage in direct contracting with each other. As ANCAP is a state-run 
company, direct contracts with it are aligned with national requirements 
and the Bank’s policies. 

(iii) Training: The program includes training activities for a total of 
US$444,100. These will be financed using local counterpart funds, 
meaning that no interventions are expected in relation to procurement 
contracts using either the ex ante or ex post modalities. 

d. Selection of individual consultants: Selection of individual consultants is 
anticipated for a total amount of US$162,770, in accordance with the 
provisions of Section V of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB, observing in particular the procedures 
envisaged for the competitive selection of these consultants. 

 

Table 2. Thresholds for international competitive bidding and shortlists with international 
participants (US$ thousands) 

Works Goods and services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 
International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 

International 
advertising 

for 
consultants  

Shortlist 

100% 

national 

≥3,000,000 
≤3,000,000 

≤100,000 ≥250,000 
≤250,000 

≤50,000 ≥200,000 ≤200,000 
≥250,000 ≥50,000 

 



Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 Main procurement processes 

 The procurement activities identified for this operation will be divided as set out in 
the following table: 

 
Table 3. Procurement activities 

Category Total, IDB 
Total, local 
counterpart 

Total US$ 

Goods 58,324 7,076 65,400 

Training -  444,100 444,100 

Consulting firms 204,918 135,082 340,000 

Individual consultants 3,992,282 1,267,905 5,260,187 

Nonconsulting services 205,115 24,885 230,000 

Total procurement 4,460,639 1,879,048 6,339,687 

*See Procurement Plan. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

 Given the experience and performance of the executing agency, procurement 
activities will be subject to ex post review, with the exception of those cases in 
which ex ante supervision is justified and explicitly specified in the Procurement 
Plan. The following table sets out the thresholds applicable to the foregoing:3 

 
Table 4. Thresholds for ex post review (US$) 

Works Goods Consulting services 

≥3,000,000 ≥250,000 ≥200,000 

 

 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan. 

 Records and files 

 The agreed formats or procedures set out in the program Operating Regulations 
will be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

 Programming and budget. For preparation of the Executive Branch’s (five-year) 
national budget, the agencies of the central government submit their proposals to 
the MEF before 31 July of the first year of the administration’s term in office. The 
MEF coordinates the budget preparation process with assistance from the 
Planning and Budget Office and the National Civil Service Office. It submits the 
national budget proposal to the Executive Branch, which approves it and forwards 
it to the Legislative Branch by 31 August of the same year. The Legislative Branch 
has 120 days to analyze, approve, and express its opinion on the amounts, and it 
may not make amendments that increase expenditure. Reallocations and any 
increases in the annual budget are prepared by the Executive Branch when it 
presents its annual accountability and budget execution statements. Within six 

                                                
3  Note: Ex post review thresholds are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary execution 

capacity. They may be modified by the Bank as a result of changes in that capacity. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43


Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

months after the end of the fiscal year, the Executive Branch presents these 
reports to the Legislative Branch and may propose amendments for duly justified 
reasons. 

 The local counterpart contribution for this program is US$2.89 million. The 
executing agency will provide evidence to the Bank that local counterpart funds 
have been allocated for the first year of execution, both at the time of fulfillment of 
the conditions precedent and annually thereafter (by the end of February). 

 Accounting and information systems. Project accounts will be maintained in the 
project’s own system and in the country’s Integrated Financial Information System 
(SIIF). Budget credits approved for the program under the five-year budget law are 
allocated and executed using the SIIF; as a result, the procedures established by 
the General Accounting Office (CGN) will be followed when processing project-
related commitments and payments. 

 Project financial statements will be issued periodically on a modified cash basis. 
Project financial statements will be audited annually, and comprise the following: 
(i) statement of cash received and disbursements made; and (ii) statement of 
cumulative investment. 

 Disbursements and cash flow (in coordination with the use or nonuse of the 
national treasury system). Project funds will be managed through a National Single 
Account (CUN), to which end the National Treasury, at the request of the PMU, 
will open a special account at the Central Bank of Uruguay. This account will 
receive the funds disbursed by the Bank, but as it is a registered account (which 
cannot be used to make payments), a specific bank account will be opened for the 
program at the state-owned commercial bank (Banco de la República Oriental del 
Uruguay) for purposes of making the corresponding payments. 

 Disbursements will be made in the form of advances, based on actual liquidity 
needs and supported by adequate financial and disbursement projections. These 
advances will preferably be made every six months, once reporting has been filed 
for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As documentary support, the accounting 
forms will need to be presented along with the financial planning spreadsheet. 
Expenditures involving transfers to Rural Development Field Agents (ATDRs) will 
be documented in two stages: first, once the advances are made, and second, 
once the expense reports are received, supported by an accounting report that 
includes the exact amount used by each ATDR. 

 The eDisbursements system will be used to process disbursement requests. The 
exchange rate for the conversion of local currency payments into the currency 
used for the loan shall be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

 Internal control and audit. The internal control system is based on the national 
system defined in the laws and regulations currently in force. As established in the 
Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration, the TCR will 
exercise preventive intervention in all expenditures related to program execution. 
The level of reliability for execution of this operation is high. 

 The MGAP will maintain the conditions established for the execution of loan 
2595/OC-UR, thus ensuring the continuity and participation of fiduciary staff 
assigned full-time to the program, although for this program they will constitute a 
unit within the PMU. This will strengthen the fiduciary function, as the PMU’s 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

structure includes an Executive Management Department and an Administrative 
and Financial Department. In light of the formal structure specified by the Ministry, 
it is anticipated that the human resources and defined processes necessary to 
meet the Bank’s requirements will be available.  

 External control and reporting. The national external control system is executed 
by the TCR. The previous MGAP operation (2595/OC-UR) was audited by the 
TCR, and the corresponding annual reports were delivered in a timely manner and 
with unqualified audit opinions. For this program, the executing agency’s intention 
is for the TCR to continue providing these services. The TCR’s eligibility level is 
consistent with the type of entity and risk associated with the operation. 

 Annual financial audit reports and the respective evaluation of internal controls will 
be submitted for each fiscal year during the disbursement period by 30 April of the 
following year. The auditing standards issued by the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions will be considered. The cost of the audits will be agreed 
upon in the TCR Service Agreement Letter and will be financed with local 
counterpart funds. 

VII. FINANCIAL SUPERVISION PLAN 

 The initial financial supervision plan is based on the following: 

a. Participation in the launch workshop organized by the project team, with a brief 
presentation on project financial management considerations. 

b. Review of the financial conditions precedent (chart of accounts, agreement 
with the TCR, evidence of budgetary allocation of resources).  

c. Review of the annual work plan and initial financial plan prepared by the PMU 
as support for the first advance of funds (to be requested once the program’s 
eligibility has been established). 

d. If necessary, one financial visit will be carried out each year during program 
execution. The following issues will be covered: reconciliation of the account for 
advances and investments; implementation of external audit recommendations; 
quality and timeliness of accounting records; and maintenance of archives. 

 Execution mechanism. The MGAP will be accountable to the Bank for project 
execution, and it will maintain a direct relationship with the Bank. A description of 
the processes involving the use of the funds will be included in the program 
Operating Regulations; approval and entry into force of the Operating Regulations 
will be a condition precedent to the project’s first disbursement. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/18 

Uruguay. Loan ____/OC-UR to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Rural Productive Development Program II 

The Board of Executive Directors 

RESOLVES: 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Rural Productive 
Development Program II. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$24,232,000 from the 
resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and 
Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan 
Proposal. 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2018) 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1028536987-9657 
Pipeline No. UR-L1147 


	ur-l1147_summary_validation_dem_opc_spd.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Alvaro García Negro 
(RND/CPR) Project Team Leader; Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND) Project Team Co-leader; 
Viviana Alva Hart (RND/CAR); Héctor Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Ana Rios Galvez 
(CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González (VPC/FMP); Milagros 
Aime (VPS/ESG); Carolina Vera (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty 
Bigara (CSD/CCS); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale ............................................................. 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 12 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 12 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED  

1. Multiyear Execution Plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL  

1. Bibliography 

2. Economic analysis of the project 

3. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS)  

4. Program Operating Regulations  

5. Contribution to actions against climate change 

6. SENACSA user survey and demand study 

7. Animal health diagnostic study for SENACSA  

8. Environmental and Social Analysis and Environmental and Social Management Plan 

9. Public consultation report  

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-20
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-19
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BCP Central Bank of Paraguay 
CSF Classical Swine Fever 
CVP Permanent Veterinary Committee of the Southern Cone 
DIGEAF Bureau of Administration and Finance 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
FMD Foot-and-Mouth Disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GEF Global Environmental Facility 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PEU Program Execution Unit 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PVS Performance of Veterinary Services 
QCBS Quality- and Cost-Based Selection 
SCSP Public Sector Procurement System 
SEAM Ministry of the Environment 
SENACSA National Service for Animal Health and Quality 
SENASICA National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality 
SIAF Integrated Financial Management System  
SIGOR Regional Office Computerized Management System 
SISA Animal Health System 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23


Annex I - PR-L1148 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable
8 326 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

     4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the 

public sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the 

project

Yes

1.0

8.0

1.8

4.0

2.2

9.0

3.0

3.0

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

8.0

2.5

5.5

0.0

The objective of the program is to contribute to improving the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to improve the effectiveness of animal health 

services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including minor species. The relative low productivity of the livestock sector is 

well articulated and supported, as well as its relationship with livestock health. However, little empirical evidence is presented about current weaknesses in managing health 

risks.

The results matrix exhibits vertical logic and presents medium-term impact indicators associated with productivity. Not all indicators classified as outcome indicators are 

outcome indicators, or have well-established baselines and goals.

The ex-ante economic analysis captures the benefits associated with the reduction of losses, improvements in access to markets and prices, and administrative efficiency. 

The key assumptions are mostly clearly presented and well supported. The sensitivity analysis includes the key assumptions. Although the economic analysis incorporates 

improvements in administrative efficiency, these indicators are not part of the results matrix.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and 

Evaluation National System, Environmental 

Assessment National System.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: nformation System, parison.

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and 

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of 

food security  (#)*

Yes

Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and 

services

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II 
Page 1 of 4 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: 
The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness 
of animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final target Means of verification Comments 

IMPACT: Increase in the beef cattle offtake rate and the volume of pork and poultry meat exports 

Slaughter rate1/Cattle 
population  

Percentage 13.8% 
2014-2016 

average 
18% SENACSA report 3-year average 

Number of export 
markets 

Number of 
countries for 
which meat 
exports are 
authorized 

13 
2014-2016 

average 
16 SENACSA report 

Export markets with SENACSA health 
agreements 

Volume of pork and 
poultry meat, offal, and 
giblets exports  

Tons 5,754 2016 7,500 
Volume of exports 

reported by SENACSA 

This indicator is used as a proxy for production 
due to the lack of statistics. Annual growth 
estimated at 5% 

 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target1 

Means of verification Comments2 

OUTCOME 1: More effective risk management and animal health services  

Response time to 
notifications of 
suspected vesicular 
diseases 

Hours 4 2017 3 
SENACSA report based on 
specific records 

Refers to the response time between the notification of 
and attention to the suspected case 

Rating in Chapter II of 
the PVS (OIE)  

Rating 32 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report Chapter II is “Technical Authority and Capability” 

PVS critical 
competencies rating 
(OIE) 

Rating 3 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report 
Average rating obtained for critical competencies II.1 
(laboratories), II.5 (epidemiological surveillance and 
early detection) and II.6 (emergency response) 

                                                           
1  Slaughter in meat packing facilities with veterinary inspection. This is a more reliable proxy for the offtake rate that refers to the population addressed by the project.  
2  To be confirmed. In November 2017 an OIE mission performed the fieldwork for a new evaluation that will serve as a baseline for the project. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 

OUTCOME 2: Reduced prevalence of brucellosis 

Reduced prevalence of 
bovine brucellosis 

% 6% 2017 4.5% SENACSA report 
Number of positive reactions divided by total number 
of tested animals 

OUTCOME 3: Health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock  

Health plans in 
operation  

Number of 
plans 

2 2017 4 SENACSA report 

Implies the existence of a registry of establishments, 
owners, and the movements of poultry, sheep, goat, 
and pigs, used as a basis for the health actions 
defined by SENACSA. 

 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Component I: Health risk management  

SISA’s functions 
expanded and SISA 
integrated into SIGOR  

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Health surveillance 
unit implemented 

Command 
unit 

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Entry point controls 
operating in 
accordance with 
international 
standards 

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017    1  1 

SENACSA report and 
OIE observations 
contained in the PVS.  
CVP project reports 
(ATN/OC-16011-RG)  

 

Simulations of foot-
and-mouth disease 
outbreaks performed 

Number of 
simulations 

0 2016  1 1  1 3 
Foot-and-mouth 
disease outbreak 
simulation reports 

 

Samples processed 
by laboratory 
networks 
 
 
 
New diagnostic 
techniques 
implemented 

Number of 
samples 

(thousands) 
 
 
 
Number of 
techniques  

120 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0 

2016   

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
 
 
 

2 

30 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

240 
 
 
 
 
 

4 

Report based on 
laboratory 
management system 

In addition to the 
number of samples, the 
following should be 
verified: (a) SENACSA 
laboratory network has 
been integrated with 
equipped private 
laboratories 
(10 laboratories in total) 
and (b) comprehensive 
laboratory management 
software is operational  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 4 

 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

SENACSA facilities in 
the field built or 
renovated 

Number of 
facilities  

0 2017   7 4 6 17 
SENACSA report 
based on inspection 
of works 

 

Computer system 
implemented for 
managing individual 
traceability 

Computer 
application 

0 0    1  1 SENACSA report 

 

Properties treated in 
the brucellosis 
eradication program  

Number of 
properties  

0 2017  100 200   300 SENACSA report 

In addition to the 
properties in the 
brucellosis eradication 
program, the disease 
protocol should be 
checked.  

Strategic staff 
members trained for 
SENACSA's new 
management model 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

0 2017  50 100 100  250 

SENACSA report 
specifying 
implementation of the 
new management 
model and the 
number of persons 
trained for it 

 

Component II: Expansion of services 

Records of sheep and 
goat stock counted 
and control of 
movements 
functioning  

Records 
system 

0 2017     2 2 
SIGOR-based 
SENACSA reports 
 

 

Health plans that 
include 
epidemiological 
surveillance 
implemented for 
sheep and goats 

Health plans 0 2017  1 1   2 

SENACSA reports on 
epidemiological 
surveillance results 
for the two species 

 

Poultry and pig farms 
under surveillance 
and certification 
programs 

Number of 
farms 

0 2017   5 10 10 25 

SENACSA report 
including updated 
self-declaration of 
status as free from 
Newcastle disease, 
avian influenza, and 
CSF 

 

Small livestock PPP 
operating  

Not 
operating=0 
Operating=1 

0 2017 1     1 

Acting coordinator 
and documentation of 
periodic meetings of 
the PPP’s governing 
body 

 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Technicians and 
producers trained on 
sheep, goat, and pig 
health 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

Government 
technicians. 

Private 
technicians. 
Producers 

 

0  
30 
30 
 

30 
30 

400 

30 
30 

600 

 
 

600 

90 
90 

1,600 

Training reports 
prepared by the PPP 

The training sessions 
include materials for 
mass distribution to 
participants  

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

Online 
proce-
dures 

and pay-
ments 

% of proce-
dures 

20 2017   20 20 20 80 

SENACSA report 
with list of procedures 
at the start and end 
of the program 

Volume of online 
procedures/total 
volume of procedures 
(in person + electronic) 

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

New 
modules 
in SIGOR 

Number of 
modules 

12 2017  1 1 1 1 16 

Report on 
incorporated modules 
Initial baseline report 
with the current 
number of modules 
(2017) and a 
description thereof 

 

 



Annex III  
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: Paraguay 

Project name:  Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay  

Project number: PR-L1148 

Executing agency: National Service for Animal Health and Quality (SENACSA) 

Prepared by:  Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(fiduciary specialists)  

  

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional assessment for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
evaluation and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System on the 
executing agency SENACSA. The fiduciary agreements applicable to project 
execution have been prepared as a result of this assessment.  

II. THE COUNTRY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development. Nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for 
the execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared 
through auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the 
Integrated Financial Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting 
Subsystem (SICO), and other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage 
payment transfers to vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central 
Bank of Paraguay. The integration of these tools will allow audited financial 
statements for a program or project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future. Until 
then, parallel systems are being used. External control is currently performed 
through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s public sector procurement system (SCSP), Bank 
operations make full use of the public procurement information system, as well as 
the country’s electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems, for 
the amounts and categories established in the agreements for the use thereof 
signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  

III. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

3.1 The executing agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) with the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance 
(DIGEAF). The PMU reports to the Office of the President of the institution, and will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met; the PMU 
will be the main contact between the IDB and the borrower during execution. In 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

turn, the DIGEAF will handle administrative and financial activities, as well as 
procurement and contracting.  

3.2 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were assessed during 
the preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; 
capacity for executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems 
for managing staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According 
to the assessment, SENACSA has overall technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters. However, its lack of prior experience in executing projects with multilateral 
financing, principally in the area of procurement, is considered a weakness. 
Consequently, although the consolidated result for the SENACSA capacities 
assessed using the ICAS shows a satisfactory level of development, the program 
has been assigned a medium level of risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of SENACSA, opportunities for improvement should 
focus on:  

a. Implementing a financial and accounting information system that makes it 
possible to record the transactions and issue information required by the 
Ministry of Finance, SENACSA, and the Bank; 

b. Designing and developing the profiles of the PEU positions; 

c. Strengthening accounting and internal control in Bank financial management 
policies.  

4.2 Procurement management. In the September 2017 ICAS report, SENACSA was 
considered to have a satisfactory overall level of development. However, the 
specific assessment of the goods and services administration system yielded 
medium levels of development and risk. Accordingly, as mitigation actions, the 
area responsible for procurement needs to be strengthened with competent staff 
knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as well as through 
specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for 
monitoring project-related activities. Therefore, SENACSA will draw up these 
procedures in a fiduciary manual for the PEU, contained in the Operating 
Regulations and to be approved by the competent authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be considered in the special 
provisions: for the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties 
agree that the exchange rate to be applied will be the one indicated in section 
(b)(ii) of that article. The agreed-upon exchange rate will be the exchange rate on 
the effective date on which the borrower, the executing agency, or any other 
person or legal entity given the power to incur expenses, makes the respective 
payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary. 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved (in document 
GN-2538-11) the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (Law 2051/03). The 
use of other country systems accepted subsequent to approval of the project will 
be implemented automatically, and so stated in the Procurement Plan. 

 Procurement execution 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. In turn, the bidding procedures subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) 
will be executed using national competitive bidding documents agreed upon with 
the Bank. The project’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the 
technical specifications of procurement items during the preparation of selection 
processes. Initially, there are no plans for selection processes involving single-
source selection.  

6.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
arising under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals 
issued by or agreed upon with the Bank. The project’s sector specialist is 
responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. Procurement workshops will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of October 
2013, the use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the 
use of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000);  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the shopping method for complex 
works (for reference, US$250,000), and to contracts for goods and 
nonconsulting services up to the amount established by the Bank for 
the use of the shopping method for complex goods and services (for 
reference, US$50,000); 

(iii) Contracts for amounts greater than or equal to the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.4 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any 
system or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. 

                                                
1  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

The operation’s Procurement Plan and updates thereto will indicate which 
contracts are to be executed through the approved country systems.2 

6.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None foreseen for this operation. 

6.6 Domestic preference. None foreseen for this operation.  

Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and international shortlist (US$)  

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist in 

consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

Table 2. Main procurement items 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 

Estimated 
amount 
(US$) 

Works 

Contracting of construction firm for the construction of works for 
SENACSA 

ICB Year 3 3,380,000 

Goods 

Procurement of equipment for DIGELAB. 57 items ICB Year 1 2,307,500 

Procurement of equipment ICB Year 2 330,000 

Mobile inspections ICB Year 2 300,000 

Nonconsulting services     

Contracting of treatment services for infected establishments ICB Year 2 540,000 

Contracting of logistical support services for training sessions, 
workshops, and seminars 
 

ICB Year 1 285,000 

Consulting firms    

Development of software for traceability 
 

QCBS Year 1 1,830,000 

Design and development of new SIGOR features, systems 
security plan, and electronic signature functionality 

QCBS Year 1 705,000 

 

Table 3. Total amounts by category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 3,380,500 

Goods 3,862,500 

Nonconsulting services  895,000 

Consulting firms 4,535,500 

Individual consultants  1,256,500 

Training sessions 670,000 

Total, Procurement Plan 14,600,000 

 

6.7 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by procurement 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by 
the Bank. Supervision of all procurement processes governed by the SCSP 

                                                
2  If another system or subsystem is approved by the Bank, it will be applicable to the operation, in 

accordance with the loan contract. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) will be conducted through the country system.3 

6.8 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.9 Records and files. The systems, formats, and procedures available to or agreed 
upon with the Bank should be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL EXECUTION  

 Financial Management 

7.1 Programming and budget 

a. The PEU, reporting to the Office of the President of SENACSA and in 
coordination with the DIGEAF, will centralize the coordination of execution, 
supported by other departments and units of SENACSA, as necessary. 

b. SENACSA will be responsible for budget programming, administration, and 
execution, under the zero-based budget system.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses modified cash basis 
accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through the 
DIGEAF. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the 
Bank. These reports are prepared using different systems, which entails 
additional work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will typically be 
made through advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the 
monthly submission of one detailed financial plan for up to six months, and 
one for a longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual 
needs based on the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and 
procurement plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject 
to justification of at least 80% of the previous advance. If requested, 
disbursements may also be made as direct vendor payments or 
reimbursements for payments made. 

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency 
for accountability will be the monetization rate.  

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes that there is an 
advanced level of internal control. However, the SENACSA internal audit 
office does not include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency will deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, in accordance with the terms of reference previously approved by the 
Bank. The project’s financial statements include a cash flow statement, 
statement of accrued investments, notes to these financial statements, and 
the statement from the project management team. The audit report will 

                                                
3  Depending on the scope of the use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If 

so, it should be mentioned in this Annex. 



Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

include an evaluation of the internal control system. The project will require 
the selection of an eligible independent audit firm. External audits will be 
covered by the loan proceeds, estimated at US$200,000 over the planned 
five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based 
on project execution and audit reports. 

Table 4. Financial supervision plan 

Nature/scope Frequency   

 
Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

 
Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

 
Review of disbursement requests and attached 
reports 

2/3 per year 
 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 
 

7.3 Execution arrangements. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 

7.4 Other financial management agreements and requirements, as set forth in 
paragraph 3.11 of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/18 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA) 
Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in Paraguay 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA), as Borrower, and with 
the Republic of Paraguay, as Guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing to 
cooperate in the execution of the Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ____________ 2018) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-7480 
Pipeline No.: PR-L1148 

 


	DEM pr-l1148_spd_validation_opc.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 



















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND) and Sybille 
Nuenninghoff (RND/CBL), Project Co-Team Leaders; Onil Banerjee (CSD/RND); Jamie Cotta (CSD/RND); 
Alan Mentis (CCB/CGY); Paula Louis–Grant (FMP/CGY); Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CGY); María Camila Padilla 
(FMP/CBA); Graham Watkins (CSD/CCS); Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Claudia Stevenson (IFD/CTI); 
Escarlata Baza (LEG/SGO); David Cotacachi (SCL/GDI); Maja Schling (SPD/SDV); and Lisa Restrepo 
(CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 
made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.

 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ I 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification .............................................. 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost .................................................................. 8 
C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ..................................................................11 

A. Financing Instruments...................................................................................11 
B. Economic viability .........................................................................................12 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks .................................................12 
D. Fiduciary Risk ...............................................................................................13 
E. Other Risks ...................................................................................................14 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ..............................................................14 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ..................................................14 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................17 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP) 

2. Annual Operational Plan (AOP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL 

1. Technical design Component 1 

2. Diagnostic of the Agricultural Information System 

3. Technical design Component 2 

4. Institutional Capacity Assessment (ICAS) 

5. Technical design Component 3 

6. Analysis of gender and diversity inclusion  

7. Review of infrastructure proposals and ToR for design and supervision 

8. Impact evaluation proposal 

9. Ex ante economic analysis 

10. Environmental and Social Analysis and Management Plan  

11. Agricultural household survey in Regions 5, 9 and 10 

12. Draft Program Operating Manual 

13. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40586954
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564750
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40647394
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588762
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663628
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663634
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588559
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40589854
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587422
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590131
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590454
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588248
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40280490


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AIS Agricultural Information System 

ASDU Agricultural Sector Development Unit 

EPA Environment and Protection Agency 

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

GBS Guyana Bureau of Statistics 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GMC Guyana Marketing Corporation 

GL&SC Guyana Land and Survey Commission 

GLDA Guyana Livestock Development Agency 

GoG Government of Guyana 

GRDB Guyana Rice Development Board 

GRIF Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 

GSA Guyana School of Agriculture 

GUYSUCO Guyana Sugar Corporation 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  

MIF Multilateral Investment Fund 

MoA Ministry of Agriculture 

MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 

NAREI National Agriculture Research and Extension Institute 

NDIA National Drainage and Irrigation Authority 

NSC National Steering Committee 

OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 

POM Program Operations Manual 

PS Permanent Secretary 

RLPA Rupununi Livestock Association  

RMC Regional Management Committee 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TFP Total Factor Productivity 

WBSGA West Berbice Sheep and Goat Association 

 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R


 Annex 1 - GY-L1060

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2690

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country 

program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.1 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.3

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 7.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 0.0

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 9.6 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.1

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector 

entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to 

approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector 

that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Poverty headcount ratio (US $4 per day PPP) (%)

-Global Innovation Index (LAC average)

-Research and development expenditure as a percentage of GDP (%)

-Greenhouse gas emissions (kg of CO2 e per $1 GDP (PPP))

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public 

service delivery (#)

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

Aligned

Support the development of productive use of the country's natural resources, 

while addressing the challenge of sustainable management of the natural 

resources at stake.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, External control.

 The objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural resources.  The Program will implement three components: Information for Policy making and 

natural resource management (including an agricultural census that has not been updated since 1952); Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension system; and Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards. 

  

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the problems faced by the sector in terms of major limitations in the Agricultural Information Systems, Research, Innovation & Technology Transfer System, the Animal Health 

and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Framework, and the effects of climate change, all of which contribute to low levels of productivity. 

The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified.  The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic for all components. The key outcome indicators have values 

that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the three components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact, outcomes (except for one) and outputs (except for two) with 

their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information. 

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a break-even and Cost-Benefit Analysis that uses data recently collected in the targeted areas.  The benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change and are derived from the 

expected gains in yields for two key crops and cattle and the expected rate of adoption by farmers.  The economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social perspective.  In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; 

however, the assumed absolute change in gains for yields is rather high and not supported by empirical evidence. The EA undertakes a sensitivity analysis based on key variables (gains in yields and adoption rates) under three scenarios: 

optimistic; average; and pessimistic.  The Internal Rate of Return is above 12% for the optimistic (31% IRR) and average (14% IRR) scenarios; however, the pessimistic scenario yields an IRR of -1%.  Importantly, the pessimistic scenario 

might not be that pessimistic in the sense that it assumes increases of 1,276% in yields for one of the crops evaluated, which is quite high. Importantly, given the lack of data, the EA was not able to include the potential benefits to the sector 

arising from a new agricultural census. In this sense, one might consider these results as conservative.   

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy based on a quasi-experimental design with random selection at the community level that aims to measure direct and indirect 

impacts of the program by measuring spill-over effects. Given the scant number of rigorous studies done in Guyana, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.    

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable, except for one that does not comply with DEM guidelines; five are classified as Medium and three are classified as Low. The risks include mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The Program will promote the participation of women in agricultural technical 

assistance and training, and the agricultural census will have a special focus on 

women for data collection.

An impact evaluation was prepareed during the design. A quasi - experimental 

analysis, based on the implementation strategy was agreed with the MoA. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 3 

 

Results Framework 

 

Objective:  To increase productivity of the agricultural sector and sustainable use of natural resources in Guyana. 

 

Expected Impact 

Indicators Units 
Baseline Target EOP* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
agricultural 
production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$582.39/farm  2016 US$848.20/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle

1
. 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
livestock production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$223.85/farm  2016 US$654.28/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle.

 1
 

Reduction on the 
pressure on fragile 
ecosystems by 
inefficient livestock 
production 
(inefficient use of 
pastures) 

Hectares 
removed 
from 
livestock 
production 

0 ha 2016 570 ha  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Suitable buffer zones 
around pasture areas 
established. 
Technology transfer will 
reduce use of pasture 
areas. Intensity 
(animals / ha) will 
increase.   

* EOP, End of Project 

 

Expected outcomes 

Indicator Unit 
Baseline Intermediate  EOP Target Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Private investment in 
agriculture (increase 
expected) 

USD per 
year 

5.72 million 2008 
 

2019 7 million 2022 
Go-Invest 
reports 

Related to the 
census. At the 
national level 

Regional development 
plans prepared based on 
the agricultural census 

Plan 0 2016 
 

 3 2022 
Ministry of 
Communitie
s 

Assuming the 
agricultural census 
is available in 2019 

Productivity at the farm 
level of select crops 
(increase expected) 

MT/Ha 

Cassava: 
2,220 kg/ha 

 
Bora bean: 
215 kg/ha 

2016 

 

2019 

Cassava: 
3,883 
kg/ha 

 
Bora 
bean: 
4,143 
kg/ha 

2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Selected crops, 
Baseline value from 
survey, EOP Target 
computed as 35% 
of yields reported by 
NAREI and FAO 

Adoption of sustainable 
agriculture practices by 
farmers (disaggregated by 
gender) 

Number of 
technologie
s 

3 Male 
1 Female 

2016 

 

 
6 Male 

4 Female 
2022 

Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Baseline values 
based on 
agricultural 
household survey 

Average price of meat 
processed by pilot facilities 
(increase expected) 

USD / Kg 
USD / Lt 

3 2016 
 

2019 5 2022 
ASDU 
reports 

Return to the 
producers (value of 
the animal) 

Use of practices that 
reduce pressure on 
ecosystems (increase 
expected) 

Number of 
practices 
per 
household 

1.43 2016 

 

2019 3 2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Based on the 
survey 

 

                                                           
1
  Assumptions follow the ex-ante economic analysis: Increases in gross production value at end of project are based on increases in 

cassava, bean, and cattle yields: Cassava and bean yields increase to 35% of benchmark yields provided by NAREI with a 10% 
adoption rate among farmers. Cattle yields increase by 70% with a full adoption rate. Current market prices from survey used to 
compute gross production value. Based on the survey, livestock production contributes around 40% to total gross value of 
household production. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 3 

 

Outputs 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

Component 1: Generating Information for evidence – based policy making and natural resource management 

Agricultural census 
completed 

4,00
0 

Census 0   1    1 Results published 

MoA and GSB staff 
trained in data 
management 

70 
Number 
of people 

0 20 50 50 20 20 20 150 
Training for the survey 
and census 

M&E Unit 
strengthened 

100 Unit 0  1      
Consultants and 
equipment for the 
M&E Unit 

Component 2: Strengthening of the agricultural innovation and extension system 

Agriculture centers 
built and refurbished 
in Regions 9 and 10 

3,61
0 

Agricultur
e center 

  1 1   2 
 

ASDU reports 

Design and 
construction of a 
water reservoir in 
Region 9 completed 

500 
Water 

reservoir 
   1     ASDU reports 

Soil laboratories 
constructed and 
implemented 

350 
Laborator

y 
0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Research programs 
implemented 

225 Program 0  1 2 3 2 2 10 ASDU reports 

Extension programs 
implemented 

417 Program 0   1 2   3 ASDU reports 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
that do not receive 
incentives  

928 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 300 1200 1000 500 5,000  3,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 216 864 720    2,160 

Female 0 84 336 280    840 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
the use and benefits 
of technologies 
promoted by AC - 
incentives 

238 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 500 800 700    2,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 360 576 504    1440 

Female 0 140 224 196    560 

NAREI and GLDA 
staff trained 

65 

Number 
of people 

(total) 
0 10 10 10 10 10  50 

ASDU reports 
Male 0 8 8 8 8 8   

Female 0 2 2 2 2 2   

Environmental 
supervision visits for 
agriculture research 
and extension 

65 Reports   2 2 2 2 2 10 
EPA with support from 
the MoA 

Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards 

Pilot facility to 
process meat 
implemented 

1,75
0 

Facility 0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Number of producers 
associations 
strengthened 

685 
Producer 
associatio

n 
0  1 1    1 ASDU reports 

Annual review of 
compliance with 
hygienic and 
environmental 
standards 

25 Report 0   1 1 1  3 
Technical audit and 
EPA 

Number of people 
trained in SPS and 

30 
Number 
of people 

0 20 20 30 30   100 ASDU reports 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 3 

 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

food safety standards Male 0 15 15 22 22   74 

Female 0 5 5 8 8   26 

Development and 
implementation of a 
simplified grading 
system for beef 

120 
Regulatio

n 
0 1      1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Update of abattoir 
standards and 
preparation of legal 
framework completed 

60 
Regulatio

n 
0  1     1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Adaptation of the 
International Codex 
Alimentarius to the 
Guyana context 
completed 

55 
Regulatio

n 
0   1    1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Support to the GLDA 
to enforce standards 
completed 

25 
Annual 
report 

0 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 
Annual reports of 
compliance 

* Thousand dollars 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 8 

 

Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

COUNTRY: Guyana 

PROJECT Nº: GY-L1060 

NAME: Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objective of the program is to increase the productivity of the 
agricultural sector while maintaining sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The total estimated budget is US$15,000,000, all of which 
will be financed by the IDB from the OC/FSO resources. 

 
1.2 The Executing agency is the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). MoA executed two Bank 

financed Loans – Agricultural Support Services 1558/SF-GY and Agricultural 
Export Diversification Program 1929/BL-GY. The latter loan was executed by the 
Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU) of the MoA which was established in 
2007 to execute all foreign funded programs for the sector.  

 
1.3 An institutional capacity assessment of the ASDU of MoA was conducted in July 

2016 using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) methodology. 
The assessment combining previous experience and the findings from the ICAS 
conclude that the fiduciary risk is considered medium. A re-evaluation of the 
fiduciary risks will be conducted during execution as part of the regular fiduciary 
supervision to ensure efficient support to project execution. 

 
1.4 Fiduciary context of the country. An Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) was 

conducted in 2012/2013. It provided an update to the 2007 combined Public 
Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) performance measurement 
framework and OECD-DAC procurement assessment. The results of the 
2012/2013 IFA, like the 2007 PEFA, concluded that Guyana’s overall budget 
planning, accounting and reporting systems worked well; IFMAS (the financial and 
management accounting system used by the Government) operated consistently 
and reliably providing updated information about all elements of budget execution, 
and budget planning and reporting was being done in accordance with the cash 
basis of accounting and its standards. The Public Financial Management (PFM) 
indicator scores from the 2012/2013, indicate encouraging results with slight 
improvements in areas such as Strengthened External Audit Function, Budget 
Preparation Process, Revenue Administration etc. Notwithstanding, the IFA 
highlighted that attention needed to be paid to the internal control environment, 
Internal Audit, Payroll Control and Procurement Control among others. To date, 
confirmations from the Borrower on the results of the 2012/2013 IFA as well as 
2007 PEFA remain outstanding. The Bank’s Guide for the Use of Country Systems 
(GUS) Assessment was also conducted in 2013; this also has not been accepted 
by the Government. The Auditor General’s Office (AOG) is currently eligible to 
audit all Bank-financed TCs and loan operations deemed to be of low or medium 
complexity and risk. This was based on an assessment of the capacity of the AOG 
undertaken by the Bank in 2011 and the continued institutional strengthening 
support given by the Bank to the AOG. For this operation, the Bank is 
recommending: (i) the use of the national accounting system, Integrated Financial 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 8 

 

Management Accounting System – IFMAS, or any other system acceptable to the 
Bank, for the financial administration of the project; and (ii) for external control, a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank or the Auditor 
General of Guyana. 

 
1.5 With regards to procurement, assessments of the national system (MAPS) have 

been performed in 2007 and 2013. The results are not yet endorsed by the 
Government of Guyana (GoG). Guyana has a dedicated legislation that governs 
public procurement, namely the Procurement Act of 2003 and its associated 
regulations. The National Procurement and Tender Administration Board (NPTAB) 
was established in the same Procurement Act of 2003. It is responsible for 
exercising jurisdiction over the country’s tender processes, reporting to the Ministry 
of Finance with policy making, advisory oversight, and monitoring and information 
functions. In accordance with the existing legal framework, the NPTAB is a 
temporary entity while awaiting the creation of the Public Procurement Commission 
(PPC). The PPC is a Constitutional body with responsibility for overseeing that the 
purchasing of goods and services and the execution of works by public institutions 
is carried out in a fair, equitable, transparent, and competitive manner; its members 
are appointed by the President and approved by the National Assembly. 
The country is in the process of strengthening its centralized website for publication 
of opportunities for requests for proposals, but to date, it is not regularly used 
across procurement entities or by the independent public corporations. 
Additionally, efforts are being deployed to also strengthen capacity to retain 
records of procurement processes and related information, as well as a registry for 
protests, suspension and debarment and contractors’ performance. Statistics on 
public procurement awards is also an area of focus for GoG. Notwithstanding, to 
date, the Country Procurement System has not been approved and hence will not 
be used under the present Loan. Consequently, the Bank requires the use of its 
Procurement Policies GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for all projects approved starting 
April 19, 2011. In the meantime, the Bank will bring adequate support to the 
procurement function to ensure that procurement activities are carried out in a way 
that support the prompt execution of the operation and in accordance with the 
Bank’s rules and procedures. 

 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1. The ASDU of the MOA will be responsible for the execution of the Loan and for 
carrying out all related fiduciary activities.  In accordance with the existing structure 
at the MoA, the ASDU will discharge its duties coordinating with the Office of the 
Permanent Secretary. As per ICAS findings, the ASDU was established in 2007 as 
the sole “coordinating unit within MoA for the administration of international agency 
funded projects/programs. To strengthen the execution capacity of the ASDU Unit, 
a Financial Officer and a Procurement Officer will be recruited to discharge the 
expected fiduciary duties for the duration of the Loan.  

2.2. MoA, as a budget agency, uses the Integrated Financial Management Accounting 
System (IFMAS) of the country. ASDU uses IFMAS for the financial management 
and an off the shelf accounting system for detailed reporting. IFMAS was 
successfully piloted on previous IDB-financed loans. It is recommended that this 
program use IFMAS along with the off the shelf accounting package for the 
financial management and accounting of the program. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 8 

 

2.3. As far as the procurement function is concerned, findings of the ICAS indicate that 
the procurement activities that will be conducted by the ASDU under this Loan will 
be placed under the responsibility of a procurement officer who is presently 
discharging procurement duties under a Loan financed by the World Bank. The 
procurement officer is one constituent of what is referred to as the Procurement 
Department in the current ASDU’s organizational structure. The position for the 
procurement manager is presently vacant. However, in accordance with the 
findings of the ICAS, it appears that, for in as much as the Procurement 
Department is placed under the Project Coordinator (currently, a vacant position as 
per findings of the ICAS), the Procurement Officer reports directly to the 
Permanent Secretary while coordinating activities with the Director of the ASDU. 
Most importantly however, the ASDU is presently operating in accordance with 
approved internal control mechanisms guaranteeing “the presence of internal 
controls throughout the Ministry’s governance, planning, administration, 
procurement and financial management, including support documentation for all 
commitment and payment transactions, authorizing signatories following GoG 
procedures and segregation of authority for most of its internal processes, among 
others”. In addition, an operation’s manual will be tailored and implemented to 
increase the ASDU’s capacity to implement the present Loan. Given the above, it 
is expected that the Procurement Function as structured for the present Loan will 
have the expected capacities to perform its fiduciary duties.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1. The Project Team in consultation with the MoA and other stakeholders developed 
a preliminary Risk Mitigation Matrix included in the package of project documents 
to be approved for the present Loan Agreement. The Bank and the MoA will 
undertake joint reviews of the Matrix on a yearly basis, and introduce necessary 
additional mitigating actions as a result of such reviews and as deemed necessary. 

3.2. Taking into consideration the current ASDU organizational structure where a 
vacancy exists in the Accounting section, the capacity of the existing accounting 
staff to undertake the financial management for a new operation, the ICAS 
Assessment and the experience of the Bank with the previous loan, the financial 
management risk has been classified as medium. The recruitment of a financial 
officer to ensure adequate segregation of duties coupled with the provision of 
training on Bank policies and procedures should mitigate the existing risk and 
strengthen the control environment. 

3.3. With regards to the procurement activities, it is estimated that the overall level of 
risk is medium. The existing structure as described in Section 2.3 above is 
identified in the ICAS as presenting a low level of risk. In practice however, the 
current ASDU organizational structure indicates that the Procurement Department 
counts with 2 (two) positions and that only that of the Procurement Officer is filled 
to date. As indicated in the ICAS, the procurement officer is presently responsible 
for the procurement activities under a World Bank Loan. Given that the 
Procurement rules and procedures between the World Bank and the IDB are 
harmonized, it is expected that the experience acquired during the execution of the 
WB Loan will constitute a mitigation factor in itself. However, to avoid potential 
bottlenecks tied to an increased workload as indicated above, recruiting a 
procurement assistant appears to be a necessary additional mitigation measure to 
avoid potential bottlenecks in the execution of the procurement activities under the 
IDB financed Loan. Indeed, once the present Loan enters in execution, the 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 4 of 8 

 

Procurement Officer currently on duty would be responsible for several Loans 
above US$10M.This adapted structure should be reflected and catered for in the 
operation’s manual as approved under the conditions of Section 4.1 below. 

IV. SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT TO BE ADHERED TO 

4.1. Conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the presentation of evidence that the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a Program Coordinator, a Financial 
Specialist and a Procurement Specialist according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.1 of the POD); (ii) approval and entry into 
effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.4 of the POD), and (iii) presentation 
by the Borrower of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution 
Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.12 of the 
POD). 

4.2. Type of exchange rate to be used by EA. The type of funds to be used are 
established in the following manner: (i) Reimbursement of actual expenses: the 
effective rate of exchange on the date of payment of each expenditure, as 
published by the Central Bank of Guyana; (ii) Reporting on accounts (Advance of 
Funds): the effective rate of exchange used in the conversion of the currency of the 
operation to the local currency. In cases of reimbursement of a guarantee of letter 
of credit, the equivalent of the currency of the operation will be fixed in accordance 
with the amount effectively disbursed by the IDB. 

V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

5.1 Financial Statements and Reports, audited or unaudited. (i) semi-annual 
financial reports of the program are to be included in the semi-annual progress 
report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank; (ii) annual financial 
statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of Guyana are to be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal year, beginning 
with the fiscal year in which the first project expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a 
final financial audit report of the program is to be submitted by MoPH within 120 
days after the date of the last disbursement. 

5.2 Programming and Budget: The Borrower has committed to allocate, for each 
fiscal year of project execution, adequate fiscal space to guarantee the unfettered 
execution of the project; as determined by normal operative instruments such as 
the Annual Operating Plan and the PP. 

5.3 Accounting and Information Systems. It is expected that IFMAS accounting 
system will facilitate the recording and classification of all financial transactions, 
supported by an off-shelf accounting system. 

5.4 Disbursements and Cash Flow. The Bank will supervise the creation of an 
Advance of Funds, using the Advance of Funds methodology. Whenever resources 
from the financing are requested through an Advance of Funds, it will be deposited 
into a Special Account, denominated in US$, established exclusively for the Project 
at the Central Bank of Guyana. Required resources from this Special Account will 
be transferred to another bank account, denominated in Guyana Dollars to be 
utilized for payment of expenditures in local currency. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 5 of 8 

 

5.5 The project will provide adequate justification of the existing Advance of Funds 
balance, whenever 80% of said balance has been spent. Advances will normally 
cover a period not exceeding 180 days and no less than 90 days. In order to 
request disbursements from the Bank, the EA will present the following forms and 
supporting documents: 

Type of 
Disbursement 

Mandatory Forms 
Optional forms/ information that 

can be requested by the IDB 

Advance Disbursement Request/ Financial 
Plan 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Reimbursements of 
Payments Made 

Disbursement Request/ Project 
Execution Status/ Statement of 
Expenses 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Direct Payment to 
Supplier 

Disbursement Request/ Statement of 
Expenses/Acceptable Supporting 
Documentation 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

 

5.6 Generally, supporting documentation for Justification of Advances and 
Reimbursement of Payments Made will be kept at the office of the EA. 
Disbursements’ supporting documents may be reviewed by the Bank on an ex-post 
basis.  

5.7 Internal Control and Internal Audit: The management of the project will assume 
the responsibility for designing and implementing a sound system of internal 
controls for the project. 

5.8 External Control and Reports. For each fiscal year during project execution, MoA 
will be responsible to produce semi-annual financial reports for the project, annual 
Audited Financial Reports of the Program and one final Audited Financial Report at 
the end of the Program, audited either by the Auditor General of Guyana or by a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank. 

5.9 Financial Supervision Plan. Financial Supervision will be developed based on the 
initial and subsequent risk assessments carried out for the project. Inspection visits 
will be performed based on the risk assessed, covering the following: (i) review of 
the bank reconciliation and supporting documentation for Advances and 
Justifications; (ii) compliance with procedures; (iii) review of compliance with the 
lending criteria; and (iv) ex-post review of disbursements. 

5.10 Execution Mechanism. MoA will be the EA and will be responsible for the 
financial administration of the program. MoA’s responsibility will include:                
(i) preparation of required project reports; (ii) monitoring product, output and 
outcomes achievement using established indicators; (iii) preparation and 
submission of disbursement requests to the Bank and justification of expenses;   
(iv) preparation of financial reports; (v) ensure compliance with all aspects of the 
Operating Manual; and (vi) maintain adequate documentation filing system. 

VI. REQUIREMENTS AND AGREEMENTS FOR EXECUTION OF PROCUREMENT 

6.1 Procurement Execution. Procurement activities for the proposed project will be 
carried out in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and 
Goods Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9), of March 
2011, and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed 
by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9), of March 2011. They will 
also be subject to the provisions established in the Loan contract. In addition, for all 
projects, the Borrower is required to prepare and submit to the Bank, a draft 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 6 of 8 

 

General Procurement Notice as well as an initial procurement plan which will be 
updated in accordance with the applicable sections of the Policies and the Loan 
Agreement. 

6.2 Exception to Bank Procurement Policies. The operation does not foresee any 
exception to the Bank’s procurement policies. 

6.3 Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services. In accordance 
with Section 1.2 of GN-2349-9, “the responsibility for the implementation of the 
project, and therefore for the award and administration of contracts under the 
project, rests with the Borrower”. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for 
this Loan and given the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities 
will be carried out under ex-ante supervision.  

6.4 Procurement of Consulting Services. In accordance with Section 1.4 of         
GN-2350-9, “The Borrower is responsible for preparing and implementing the 
project, and therefore for selecting the consultant, and awarding and subsequently 
administering the contract.” As such, the Borrower is responsible for preparing and 
implementing the scheduled activities, and therefore for preparing the TORs, short 
lists, selecting the consultants, awarding the contract and subsequently 
administering it. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for this Loan and given 
the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities will be carried out 
under ex-ante supervision as described in the following section of the present 
Annex III.  

6.5 Sole Source Selection and/or Direct Contracting. The Program is currently 
looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of US$4 million. This Direct 
Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in carrying out Agricultural 
Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan and hence, the request 
for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of GN-2350-9 which foresees that 
“Single-source selection may be appropriate only if it presents a clear advantage 
over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is qualified or has experience of 
exceptional worth for the assignment”. The FAO would be recruited by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and it is expected that the request for no-objection for the said 
contract will be submitted to the Bank for no-objection prior in accordance with the 
applicable rules and procedures governing Direct Contracting of Consulting 
Services. This does not constitute a request for approval/no-objection to the Direct 
Contract in question which, as mentioned above, will be processed in accordance 
with the applicable rules during execution. 

6.6 Selection of Individual Consultants. Individual consultants will be selected and 
recruited in accordance with Section V of GN-2350-9. 

6.7 Recurring Expenses. Include payment of utilities and other office operating 
expenses of the Executing Unit, if any. 

6.8 Advance Contracting/Retroactive Financing. The Bank may finance 
retroactively under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the 
date of loan approval to: (i) design, environmental and impact evaluation, and 
supervision of the infrastructure included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract 
specialized personnel of the ASDU dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the 
travel, per diem expenses and office supplies, up to the amount US$350,000 
(2.33% of the proposed loan amount), provided that all the requirements 
substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement requirements are 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 7 of 8 

 

adhered to. These expenses must have been incurred on or after June 16
th
, 2016 

(PP approval date), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more 
than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included.  

6.9 Domestic Preference. Domestic Preference is not requested under this Loan. 

6.10 Country Threshold. Table (US$ thousands) www.iadb.org/procurement  

International Competitive 
Bidding Threshold* 

 

National Competitive Bidding Range 
** (complex works and non-common 

goods)  

Consulting Services 

Works Goods Works Goods International Short List 

>1,000,000 >100,000 <1,000,000 <100,000 > 100,000 

* When procuring simple works and common goods and their amount is under the International 
Competitive Bidding thresholds, Shopping may be used. 
** When procuring non-complex works or common goods with amounts under the NCB range, 
Shopping shall be used. 

 

6.11 Procurement Plan. The Procurement Plan for the operation covering the first 18 
months of project execution can be accessed through the following electronic link. 
The on-line Electronic Procurement Execution System (known by its Spanish 
acronym as SEPA) will be used for the publication and updates of the Procurement 
Plan during project execution. It is expected that the EA will use the SEPA program 
for management of its procurement activities. The Procurement Plan will be 
updated annually or whenever necessary, or as required by the Bank 
(www.iadb.org/procurement; http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index-
_ing.htm). The initial procurement plan for the operation lists all procurement 
activities foreseen under this operation. The table below includes the list of the 
main procurement activities for this Loan. 

Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Add’l Info. 
Procurement 

Method 
 

Estimated 
Amount 
 in US$: 

Estimated 
Amount  
BID %: 

Review 
Method 

 

Specific 
Procurement 

notice 

Contract 
Signature 

Buildings, 
Laboratories, 
Water Reservoir, 
and civil works in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 3,100,000 100 Ex-ante Q3 2017 Q4 2017 

Construction of 
abattoir and 
associated waste 
management 
facilities in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 1,200,000 100 Ex-ante Q4 2017 Q1 2018 

Laboratory 
equipment 
(autoclave; soil 
grinder; 
incubator; 
moisture content 
analyzer) 

Goods ICB 120,000 100 Ex-ante Q2 2018 Q2 2018 

Agricultural 
Census 

Consulting 
Services 

SSS 4,000,000 100 Ex-ante N/A Q1 2017 

Design & 
supervision Agri. 
Construction 
Infrastructure 

Consulting 
services 

QCBS 680,000 100 Ex-ante Q1 2017 Q2 2017 

http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/WSdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38332109
http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm


Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 8 of 8 

 

 

6.12 Supervision. Under the present Loan, procurement activities (i) are not expected 
to be complex in nature, nor will they involve the acquisition of medical of 
therapeutic equipment; (ii) will be subject to ex-ante review given the level of risk 
as identified above; (iii) will be explicitly listed in the approved and updated 
procurement plan in SEPA; (iv) will be launched once all technical specifications 
and/or terms of reference are validated by the Bank’s Sector Specialist; and (v) will 
be documented in accordance with the general filing guidelines that will be 
provided as part of the inception training of the fiduciary staff and in accordance 
with the applicable Bank Policies. 

6.13 All modifications to the present arrangement are subject to a prior written 
agreement between the EA and the Bank. The evaluation of capacity and the level 
of risk may vary during the project’s execution depending on the findings of the 
regular supervision activities that will be conducted during the project’s lifespan. As 
such, supervision modalities may vary as capacity increases. 

6.14 Records and Files. All records and files will be maintained by the EA, according to 
accepted best practices and to the general guidelines that will be provided by the 
Bank at the initial training of the fiduciary staff. All records must be kept for seven 
(7) years beyond the end of the operation’s execution period. It is also 
recommended that the Executing Agencies develop electronic filing to avoid losing 
all paper files. 



